AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesWith the Greek “no” vote on the economic demands of its creditors on Sunday, attention now turns to the European Central Bank. The central bank has been propping up Greece’s banks, though just barely in the week since the Greek prime minister called for the referendum. On Monday, the central bank’s policy makers plan to meet to determine their next step, though they may wait to see what eurozone heads of state decide at an emergency summit meeting on Tuesday. —Phyllis MessingerThiInvestors will be closely watching the Chinese stock market this week, with the Shanghai market having plunged 28.6 percent since June 12. A series of government initiatives, including an interest-rate cut on June 27, failed to stop the slide. Over the weekend, the government took stronger measures. On Saturday, the country’s biggest brokerage firms unveiled a government-endorsed plan to buy shares starting on Monday, and both of the country’s stock exchanges suspended all further initial public offerings of stock. On Sunday, the central bank, the People’s Bank of China, and an investment arm of the country’s sovereign wealth fund also joined the effort. —Keith BradsherOn Tuesday, the Department of Commerce will release the latest data on the nation’s trade balance in May. Trade figures have been volatile in recent months, after a work slowdown at West Coast ports early in the year. The labor fight was settled in late February, but figures for imports and exports swung sharply as the backlog was gradually cleared. May’s data should be more reliable. Wall Street will be looking for a slight widening in the nation’s trade gap to about $44 billion, driven by higher imports. —Nelson D. SchwartzLeaders from the worlds of technology and media are again set to descend — many on their private jets — on the resort town of Sun Valley, Idaho, for the annual conference run by the boutique investment bank Allen & Company. The gathering has birthed deals like the sales of NBCUniversal and The Washington Post, and this year, the focus is expected to include the flurry of consolidation among telecommunications and media companies. Also likely on the agenda is the continued flood of money into privately held technology start-ups like Uber and Dropbox. —Michael J. de la MercedThe Federal Reserve’s June policy-making meeting, once expected to be the moment the Fed began to raise interest rates, instead passed quietly. Officials said they still were not sure the economy would be ready for higher rates, though most said they did expect to move in the second half of the year. The Fed will publish an account of the meeting on Wednesday, which may clarify their hesitations. Then, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, is scheduled to speak about the economy in Cleveland on Friday, a chance to gauge how her thinking has evolved since the June meeting. —Binyamin AppelbaumLegislation that aims to quicken the pace that new drugs come to market in the United States is scheduled for a vote in the House this week. The bill, 21st Century Cures, sponsored by Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan, and Diana DeGette, Democrat of Colorado, has been scaled back from early versions. It requires the Food and Drug Administration to take patient views into account in the drug approval process and to allow smaller clinical trials in the development of new antibiotics to spur innovation in that sector. It also orders the agency to study ways to make the clinical trial process more flexible. The bill is expected to pass and may become one of the few pieces of bipartisan legislation to clear the chamber this year. —Sabrina TaverniseOn Thursday, the Bank of England will announce its monthly decision on whether to raise a crucial interest rate. The Monetary Policy Committee is expected to leave the benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. At its June meeting, two members of the committee said they believed that the decision on whether to hold rates where they were or to raise them “remained finely balanced,” according to the committee’s minutes. That said, an increase in rates does not appear likely in the near term. Beginning in August, the central bank will publish the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee’s meeting simultaneously with the rate decision in an effort to give the market more information on the decision-making process. —Chad BrayFandoms will converge on San Diego again, beginning with preview events on Wednesday evening at the Comic-Con International pop culture convention. In its 46th year, the convention draws about 130,000 admirers of superheroes, swordsmen, sorcerers and other assorted staples of fantasy films, television, games and comics. Operators of the convention on Thursday reached an agreement that will keep it in San Diego through 2018. This year’s programming focuses heavily on the “Star Wars” film series, as the Walt Disney Company and its Lucasfilm unit prepare to promote their coming film, “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” at a presentation on Friday. —Michael CieplyAdvertisement