AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.10 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $300 million of debt securities. Competitive.TUESDAYTampa, Fla., $88.9 million of water and sewer systems revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYCentral Florida Expressway Authority, $193.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Clark County, Nev., Water Reclamation District, $97.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hillsborough County, Fla. $140.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Metropolitan Council, Minn., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.San Francisco, $110.7 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.Willmar, Minn., Independent School District, $50 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAustin, Tex., $289.5 million of water and wastewater system revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Brownsburg 1999 School Building Corporation, Ind., $74.2 million of mortgage bonds. George K. Baum. California Educational Facilities Authority, $130 million of Chapman University revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Cleveland, $69 million of various purpose general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Dallas Independent School District, $75 million of multimodal limited maintenance tax notes. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Douglas County School District 0066 (Westside Community Schools), Neb., $57 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Florida State University Financial Assistance, $79.2 million of facilities improvement revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Hartford, Conn., $77.5 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Illinois State Toll Highway Authority, $400 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Kennewick, Wash., School District, $80 million of debt securities. Davidson Securities.LifeBridge Health, Md., $200 million of hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America.Manteca Unified School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Moon Area School District, Pa., $62 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.Murrieta Valley, Calif., Unified School District, $76 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. North Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1, $463.1 million of refinancing debt securities. Morgan Stanley.Oregon Health and Science University, $100 million of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital. Rhode Island Clean Water Finance Agency, $56.3 million of water pollution control revolving bonds. Morgan Stanley.Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation, $74.5 million of home opportunity bonds. Morgan Stanley.South Carolina Jobs-Economic Development Authority, $65.7 million of Furman University economic development and revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Unified School District No. 266 (Maize), Kan., $73.2 million of general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. George K. Baum.Vernon, Calif., $110 million of electric system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Advertisement