AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary M. ChapmanUnited Automobile Workers leaders from General Motors plants nationwide will gather Wednesday in Detroit to learn details of a tentative agreement reached with G.M. late Sunday that covers about 52,000 employees.If the union leaders approve, the deal would next be voted on by G.M.’s U.A.W. members. In a statement, the union president, Dennis Williams, praised the accord, saying, “We believe that this agreement will present stable long-term significant wage gains and job security commitments to U.A.W. members now and in the future.”No details were disclosed, but in its statement the union suggested that the tentative agreement used the wage-progression formula agreed to in the Fiat Chrysler contract that was ratified last week.In that agreement, entry-level workers eventually reach pay parity with more senior counterparts. But the wage-tier issue is not as prominent at G.M. because the carmaker employs less than half the number of entry-level employees that Fiat Chrysler does. Traditionally, the national labor agreements between the U.A.W. and automakers follow the fundamental pattern set by the company that the union chooses to bargain with first. Negotiators often have more leeway in areas like signing bonuses. The company can also offer the prospect of new jobs through enhanced product plans. Cathy Clegg, the General Motors vice president for North American manufacturing and labor relations, said in a statement about the agreement, “Working with our U.A.W. partners, we developed constructive solutions that benefit employees and provide flexibility for the company to respond to the needs of the marketplace.”David Cole, chairman emeritus of the Center for Automotive Research, an industry group in Ann Arbor, Mich., said workers should not expect too much, given the industry’s cyclical nature.“Just because this is a really good year, we don’t know what the next few years are going to be like,” he said. “I expect that the company is careful about incurring excessive fixed costs — wages and benefits and the like — when you get into a weak year.”  The industry’s workforce is aging. For skilled and unskilled workers combined, the average hourly G.M. employee is 48, compared with 45 at Fiat Chrysler. At Ford, the average non-skilled employee is 43; 52, for skilled workers.  “A lot of boomers will be retiring soon,” Mr. Cole said. “The company has an eye on that.” Before negotiations opened, national U.A.W. leaders told members that they intended to take back concessions made in 2007 and 2009 that helped G.M. complete a bankruptcy in a government-supported bailout. Since then, G.M. has rebounded nicely, reporting a pretax profit last week of $8.3 billion in North America in the first nine months of the year, and it is adding jobs at some factories. Ford and Fiat Chrysler will announce earnings this week.G.M. and Ford had each agreed to extend their U.A.W. contracts while Fiat Chrysler bargained with the union. If the contract with G.M. is ratified, union bargainers will turn to Ford, although all three automakers have been in lower-level negotiations with the union since July.Nick Waun, a senior G.M. worker at Lansing Delta assembly, said he could live with the contract as long as it is fair to entry-level workers.“That’s the No. 1 thing, getting everyone up to top tier,” he said. “I’d like to see them move up right away.”Under the pact with Fiat Chrysler, it would take some entry-level workers as long as eight years to make as much as their veteran co-workers. Advertisement