AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul MozurHONG KONG — Though it has lately shown signs of a turnaround, Samsung Electronics is once again struggling to impress with its earnings, missing analyst expectations in a preliminary report that suggested its operating profit had fallen for the seventh straight quarter.In a news release, Samsung said its operating profit probably fell 4 percent in the period from April to June compared with the same period a year earlier. Analysts had expected a slight increase in the figure, which would have ended the company’s almost two-year streak of shrinking profits.Samsung, based in South Korea, estimated its operating profit at 6.9 trillion won, or about $6.1 billion, in the second quarter, down from 7.1 trillion won a year earlier. Sales totaled 48 trillion won, down 8 percent from the 52.4 trillion won it posted a year earlier. The numbers are preliminary; Samsung is expected to post final earnings later this month.Despite missing expectations, the predicted second-quarter results represent an improvement from the first quarter, an indication that one of the two engines powering Samsung’s growth, its semiconductor division, is performing well.Still, the company’s huge chip and memory business failed to make up for the continued struggles of its once dominant mobile phone unit.Broadly, analysts said that Samsung’s smartphone sales suffered from slack demand because of weakening economies in Europe and China. In Europe, one of Samsung’s most profitable markets, the company was also hurt as the euro lost value against the won, analysts said.Still, there was plenty of blame for Samsung itself. Analysts said the company failed to capitalize on its newest high-end handset, the Galaxy S6. When introduced earlier this year, the S6 was popular, but sales were hurt when too few were available because of difficulties making the phone, especially the model that has a screen that curves around one side, according to analysts.C. W. Chung, an analyst at Nomura, said the production problems most likely resulted in a reduction in sales of one million to two million handsets during the quarter. He said the production problems and strong competition from Apple were the primary reasons S6 sales dropped to an estimated 18 million from the more than 21 million he originally forecast.But now that Apple has released an iPhone with a larger screen, Mr. Chung said, Apple may have less of an advantage in the next year.“The reason Samsung could gain market share from Apple originally was a bigger-screened phone,” he said. “Apple probably enjoyed that momentum last year and early this year with the iPhone 6, but whether that momentum will continue, we still need to see.”At the same time, Samsung continues to face intense competition from low-cost smartphone makers coming out of China and India. To do that, the company has introduced a new, streamlined set of phones, known as the A series.Initial results for the new line were positive. In the first quarter, the A series helped Samsung maintain its lead over Apple as the world’s largest vendor of smartphones by volume, according to a report by the research firm IDC.“Samsung’s shipments, given that the S6 was not launched into the market for the full quarter, were driven by large volumes into emerging markets and steady demand for its midrange and lower-priced smartphones,” Anthony Scarsella, a manager with IDC’s mobile phone team, wrote in the report.Samsung phones sold well in Southeast Asia, the Middle East and Africa, according to the report. But as demand for new smartphones in China begins to moderate because of market saturation, Samsung has looked to other large markets like India for growth.Though the conditions in India are in some ways similar to China, with many local competitors and a price-conscious consumer base, Samsung maintains a big lead over Chinese smartphone makers. Its international know-how and deep marketing experience could help it outmaneuver Chinese manufacturers as they try to sell outside their home markets for the first time.Advertisement