AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioIn the latest change to the rapidly evolving business of music publishing, Sesac, a boutique rights group backed by private equity, has agreed to buy the Harry Fox Agency, a major clearinghouse of songwriting rights, the two groups plan to announce on Tuesday.The deal, made with the National Music Publishers’ Association — a trade group that has owned Harry Fox since its creation in 1927 — would allow Sesac to combine two kinds of licensing that have long been separate in the fragmented world of music publishing, which centers on the copyrights for songwriting.Sesac, known as a performing rights organization, collects royalties whenever the 400,000 songs in its catalog — including works written by Bob Dylan, Neil Diamond and Kurt Cobain — are played on the radio, streamed online or even piped into shopping malls. The Harry Fox Agency handles the so-called mechanical licenses from song publishers that record companies need to sell CDs and downloads. Gaining the ability to issue both kinds of licenses would enable Sesac to handle digital rights more efficiently, said John Josephson, the company’s chairman and chief executive. It would also give Sesac control of the valuable data that is generated from digital outlets like Apple, Spotify and Pandora, giving it an advantage over Ascap and BMI, its much bigger rivals in the American performing-rights business. “There are so many overlapping kinds of licenses required for digital platforms that it is very hard for a composer or publisher to really understand how much value they are getting,” Mr. Josephson said on Monday. “Imagine a future where the licensing regime is simpler and more straightforward.”Terms of Sesac’s purchase, which still requires the approval of members of the publishers’ association, were not disclosed. The deal comes as the once rigidly defined roles in music publishing are beginning to shift with the rise of digital music. In the days when publishers’ income was dominated by record sales, the mechanical licenses handled by Harry Fox Agency were a lucrative business that largely financed the operations of the National Music Publishers’ Association, said that group’s chief executive, David Israelite. But with the decline in record sales and the rise of streaming services, performing rights have become dominant.Ascap and BMI, which handle only performing rights, have both asked the Justice Department for changes to their federal regulatory agreements that would, among other mitigations, let them also handle mechanical rights. (Sesac is not subject to the same regulation.) Recently, other publishing groups like Global Music Rights and Kobalt have also posed challenges to the traditional model of royalty collection from online services. Larry Miller, an associate professor of music business at the Steinhardt School at N.Y.U., said that the deal might set off more changes in the publishing business, particularly if Ascap and BMI gain the ability to license mechanical rights.“If the Sesac-H.F.A. deal goes through, it may signal the start of a new cycle of competition, consolidation and deal-making in the global music rights industry,” Mr. Miller said.Sesac, based in Nashville, was established in 1930 as the Society of European Stage Authors and Composers. It has long been a boutique alternative to Ascap and BMI, which together represent about 90 percent of the commercially available songs in the United States. But in recent years Sesac has grown more aggressive in building its catalog and expanding its services. Last year, it bought Rumblefish, a company that specializes in small licensing deals for YouTube videos and other digital outlets.In late 2012, the private equity firm Rizvi Traverse took control of 75 percent of Sesac in a deal that valued the company at about $600 million. Unlike Ascap and BMI, which operate as nonprofits, Sesac does not report its finances publicly, but recently Moody’s Investors Service estimated that the company had about $182 million in revenue last year. Advertisement