AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — The producers behind an effort to finish “The Other Side of the Wind,” the incomplete final film of Orson Welles, are moving on to Plan C after coming up short on an Indiegogo crowdfunding campaign.“We had the foresight to plan other options,” Filip Jan Rymsza, the project’s lead producer, said by telephone on Monday. “We’d still love to finish it by the end of the year, but if we flip into 2016, so be it. We’re not going to rush it.”“The Other Side of the Wind,” started in the 1970s by Welles, who died in 1985, currently exists as 1,083 reels of footage stored in a warehouse outside Paris. The film, a skewering of avant-garde directors, finally appeared to be speeding toward a release after a production team announced in October that it had untangled and secured the rights.Then the financing became complicated. Mr. Rymsza and his team had planned to raise the money for editing, music and other postproduction costs by preselling distribution rights, a common tactic in the independent film business. But potential distributors wanted to see an edited sequence.So the producers decided in May to raise postproduction funds by going to the public, unveiling a campaign to raise as much as $2 million on Indiegogo by June 14. They ultimately reduced the goal to $1 million and extended the deadline to July 5.In the end, “The Other Side of the Wind” raised $406,405 from 2,858 people, including a last-minute $50,000 from Dean DeBlois, director of the DreamWorks Animation movie “How to Train Your Dragon.”The good news: Unlike some other crowdsourcing platforms, which use an all-or-nothing approach to meeting goals, Indiegogo gives participants a flexible option where, if they come up short, they can keep what they raised. “We’re enormously grateful for the contributors, because we now have enough to at least start the next phase,” Mr. Rymsza said. “From that standpoint, we feel the Indiegogo campaign was a big success.”He said the reels would finally be shipped to California, where an editor, Affonso Gonçalves, would begin work on the footage “within the next two weeks.”As for the rest of the money, Mr. Rymsza said his team had an ace up its sleeve. “We identified a private investor — somebody has been in the wings,” he said, declining to provide more information.Advertisement