
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JULY 6, 2015
One of the challenges after the financial crisis has been figuring out how to hold corporate officials accountable when their companies engage in risky activities and even misconduct. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the Bank of England have taken steps to ratchet up the cost to executives by aiming at an area they are likely to notice: their wallets.Like most such efforts, however, the regulators’ new rules are at best only a small step, unlikely to change significantly how most executives operate. But, if nothing else, they will draw attention in the C-suite, so the benefit may be more in the perception of a potential threat through compensation clawbacks than the amount of any actual recoveries.The Bank of England, with the Financial Conduct Authority, issued rules in June that require banks and financial firms operating in Britain to adopt rules for recovering bonuses from an executive who “participated in, or was responsible for, conduct which resulted in significant losses to the firm.” The clawback period can be extended up to 10 years when a bank has been notified that it is under investigation. The New York Times reported that bankers will also have their bonuses deferred for a longer period, which makes it easier to hold back payments if misconduct comes to the attention of regulators.The British rules are far tougher than any in the United States. But they are limited to banks and financial firms and do not apply to other large companies that can engage in financial misconduct that could significantly affect investors and the markets. Although the banks were at the center of the 2008 financial crisis, threats to economic stability can come from other sectors, as was the case in the accounting scandals at companies like Enron and WorldCom.AdvertisementThe S.E.C.’s proposal for new corporate clawback rules, announced last week, will apply to almost every company that is traded on one of the stock exchanges, so the rules could affect executives of most large companies. The Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law requires the S.E.C. to adopt rules that require a company to establish a program to reclaim “incentive-based compensation” for up to three years if it ever restates its financial reports because of “material noncompliance” with accounting rules. After a comment period the S.E.C. will decide whether to adopt the rules.AdvertisementThe proposed rules provide for a much more aggressive approach to recovering corporate bonuses than the current rules adopted under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Those provisions were limited to one year of compensation received by the chief executive and chief financial officer when the accounting restatement was caused by misconduct at the company.The new rules would allow recovery from a much broader range of executives, including the chief accounting officer, any vice president in charge of a main operating unit and “any other officer who performs a policy-making function.” More important, the restatement need not result from corporate misconduct, and executives would be subject to recovery regardless of whether they were at fault. In other words, this is a strict liability regime: If a company issues a restatement involving material changes, a number of its officers are at risk of being forced to repay part of their bonuses.Still, the proposed rules are not draconian. The amount subject to the clawback is limited to compensation tied to a company’s financial performance, like its stock price or total shareholder return. Even then, only the amount by which the bonus was inflated by the accounting misstatement, not the total compensation, is subject to recovery from the executives.Companies would also have some discretion about whether to try to reclaim a bonus if the cost of pursuing the executive would exceed any amount it would be expected to recover. So not every restatement will initiate a clawback. Moreover, account restatements are not required for every type of financial issue, so risky behavior that may cause large losses will not allow for recovering bonuses unless it involved tinkering with the company’s books.An interesting feature of the S.E.C.’s proposed rules is a requirement that companies provide additional disclosure about the effect of a restatement on possible clawbacks. Companies must disclose how much executive compensation was subject to recovery, whether any amounts remain outstanding and the name of each executive whom it decided not to pursue, including a description of why it chose to let the person keep the money.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This type of information may have a greater effect than any recovery because investors and the media are sure to pounce on any disclosure that looks as if a company gave an executive a pass. Avoiding the harsh glare of the public spotlight may be reason enough for executives to repay money.Even though the S.E.C. proposal is unlikely to significantly influence executives’ behavior, in a sign of the divisions within the S.E.C., it still drew dissent from the two Republican commissioners. Daniel M. Gallagher described the proposal as “tortured and nightmarish,” while Michael S. Piwowar couched his criticisms in terms of the witticisms of Yogi Berra.Relying on Mr. Berra’s comment that “the future ain’t what it used to be,” Mr. Piwowar pointed to one potentially unintended side effect of the proposal: It may increase management compensation to cover the risk of a clawback.AdvertisementThe proposal covers only compensation based on a company’s financial reporting, so an executive’s base salary and bonus tied to nonfinancial measures would be safe. That could push corporations to shift more money away from the type of compensation that might be at risk of recovery.Bonuses based on corporate financial performance may also be pushed higher because only part would be subject to recovery. Thus, companies may give more so that any clawback resulting from a restatement would hurt less. Of course, companies are unlikely to cite the clawback program as a reason for higher pay, but executives will most likely pay attention to how much of their compensation may be taken away when negotiating their salaries and bonuses.Shareholders do have some small role in setting executive compensation under the S.E.C.’s say-on-pay rules, which require a vote at least every three years on how much corporate officials receive. But those votes are only advisory, and shareholders have approved executive pay programs more than 90 percent of the time.The seemingly relentless upward trend in executive compensation is not a new concern. That the clawback proposal might create an excuse to increase the pay of corporate officials reflects more about how companies try to evade government limitations on compensation than an inherent flaw in the rule.Will clawbacks have an effect on how executives manage companies? Any small step toward enhancing the incentives to provide proper financial reporting benefits the markets because it keeps companies honest when reporting about their business. The amounts actually recovered under the S.E.C. proposal are likely to be small, but changing the corporate mind-set when executive pockets are on the line can provide something beyond just dollars and cents.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenning We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »