AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedGoldman Sachs has reshaped its activism defense practice, days after the senior banker who led the team, William Anderson, defected to the boutique investment bank Evercore Partners.Wall Street of late has pressed to advise companies on defending themselves against dissident investors.As part of the shift, Goldman has expanded the team’s mission beyond helping companies defend themselves against activist hedge funds to a broader mission of helping them respond to investor reactions of all kinds.The M.&A. shareholder advisory team, as the new group will be called, will still reside within the mergers division of Goldman, according to an internal memorandum reviewed by DealBook.The investment bank has named Steven Barg, most recently the firm’s head of mergers and acquisitions capital markets, and Avinash Mehrotra, most recently the head of real estate mergers, to lead the group, according to the memo.Another banker, Muir Patterson, will become the group’s chief operating officer.A Goldman spokesman confirmed the contents of the memo, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.Following is the text of the memo:July 6, 2015Steven Barg and Avinash Mehrotra Named Co-Heads of M&A Shareholder AdvisoryWe are pleased to announce that Steven Barg and Avinash Mehrotra will become co-heads of M&A Shareholder Advisory. This newly created effort within the Mergers & Acquisitions Group will combine our existing Activist Defense and our M&A Capital Markets practices. This combination will enable the firm to continue building upon our industry-leading position.The M&A Shareholder Advisory team will work closely with IBD teams to advise our clients as they assess market sentiment regarding their existing strategy and performance, as well as prospective strategic actions. The advice and services provided by this group will continue to be a deeply integrated component of our broader M&A product capabilities.The firm’s Activist Defense practice has amassed deep experience as shareholder perspectives have evolved in recent years. The M&A Capital Markets effort has developed innovative analytics that provide sophisticated analyses of shareholder behavior, better enabling our clients to anticipate likely market reactions to their strategic initiatives. The sharing of disciplines developed in these two areas will help our clients understand and respond to the views of shareholders in the context of activism situations and M&A transactions.Steven was most recently head of M&A Capital Markets in New York. From 2012 to 2013, he was co-head of the Investment Banking Division in South East Asia and was based in Singapore. Prior to that, Steven was co-head of Asia Ex-Japan ECM and was based in Hong Kong. He joined the firm as a partner in 2010.Avi was most recently head of Real Estate Mergers & Acquisitions. He joined the firm in 1996 as an associate in the M&A Department and transferred to the Technology, Media and Telecommunications Group in 2002, where he continued to focus on mergers and acquisitions, and co-headed the Technology Mergers & Acquisitions business from 2006 to 2010. From 2010 to 2011, Avi led the firm’s Investment Banking business for the Middle East and North Africa and was based in Dubai. He was named managing director in 2004 and partner in 2010.Steven and Avi will work closely with Muir Paterson, who will become COO of M&A Shareholder Advisory, to integrate these efforts and provide the best advice and service to our clients.Please join us in congratulating Steven, Avi and Muir on their new roles and wishing them continued success in driving this critical effort for the firm.Michael CarrGregg LemkauGilberto PozziAdvertisement