By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJULY 6, 2015
Kevin H. Marino pumped his fist in the air in celebration. Then Mr. Marino, a New Jersey lawyer with a linebacker’s build, turned to his longtime client, Sergey Aleynikov, and gave Mr. Aleynikov, a former Goldman Sachs programmer, a bear hug and a hearty pat on the back.Just moments earlier, a clerk in State Supreme Court in Manhattan had given Mr. Marino a copy of the judicial ruling that overturned Mr. Aleynikov’s conviction on a charge that he stole confidential computer code for Goldman Sachs’s high-speed trading business.The clerk, saving Mr. Marino from having to thumb through the 72 pages to learn what Justice Daniel P. Conviser had ruled, simply whispered congratulations to the lawyer. For Mr. Aleynikov, 45, and Mr. Marino, it appeared to be the end of a six-year legal odyssey through the federal and state court systems in New York.But the celebration may not last long. State prosecutors in Manhattan have already indicated they may appeal the decision issued Monday, which threw out a jury’s verdict.AdvertisementOnce before, Mr. Aleynikov had believed he was in the clear, when a federal appeals court overturned his conviction under a federal corporate espionage law in 2012. The appellate court ruled that federal prosecutors in Manhattan had misapplied the law, and it ordered Mr. Aleynikov to be immediately released from a federal prison.AdvertisementLess than a year later, however, Mr. Aleynikov was back in court defending himself, after state prosecutors in Manhattan charged him with violating state computer-theft-related laws.Now Justice Conviser — much like the federal appellate court before him — ruled that the decades-old state law that Mr. Aleynikov was convicted of violating did not apply to the accusations against him.On Monday in court, Mr. Aleynikov, wearing a striped tie and white dress shirt but no jacket, simply said, “It feels great” to have the weight of a conviction lifted from him. Mr. Aleynikov, a Russian-born American citizen, has been free ever since he was ordered released from a federal prison.Justice Conviser said he did not find sufficient legal evidence to support the jury’s conviction in May, which came after eight days of deliberation and two dozen requests for testimony to be read back or the statute’s arcane terminology to be explained. He said the jury’s confusion had been understandable, given that the “unlawful use of secret scientific material” criminal statute that Mr. Aleynikov was charged with violating was enacted in 1967 and predates much of the digital age.The judge said the state law was out of step with modern electronic communications and needed to be amended. He said that if prosecutors wanted to criminalize the kind of conduct Mr. Aleynikov engaged in when he downloaded portions of Goldman’s source code onto his personal computer before leaving for a new job in June 2009, they should petition the Legislature to either amend the statute or pass a new law.“We update our criminal laws in this country, however, through the legislative process,” Justice Conviser said. “Defendants cannot be convicted of crimes because we believe as a matter of policy that their conduct warrants prosecution.”The conviction’s dismissal was not all that surprising, given the doubts the judge had expressed about the strength of the prosecution’s case during legal arguments that took place outside the presence of the jury. There was considerable debate during those arguments about whether Mr. Aleynikov made a “tangible” copy of Goldman’s high-frequency trading source code when he downloaded portions of it onto his computer before leaving the bank for a new job.AdvertisementA conviction on a charge of unlawful use of secret scientific material required prosecutors to prove that Mr. Aleynikov had made a “tangible” reproduction of the files he downloaded. But in his ruling on Monday, Justice Conviser said prosecutors had not submitted any evidence that the source code downloaded by Mr. Aleynikov “could be touched” or had “physical form,” which is the essence of something being tangible.“The court holds that viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the people, the prosecution did not prove the defendant made a ‘tangible reproduction or representation’ of secret scientific material,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge noted that prosecutors across New York had brought only a small number of cases under the statute since its adoption and that the 10-person jury that convicted Mr. Aleynikov had clearly struggled with its meaning. In the end, the jury’s verdict was seen as something of a compromise: convicting on one count of unlawful use of secret scientific material, acquitting on a charge of unlawful duplication of computer-related material, and finally deadlocking on a third count of unlawful use of secret scientific evidence.Two jurors were dismissed during deliberations because of a personal feud in which one juror accused the other of trying to tamper with her food.“The jury made a legally incorrect decision on one of the three counts it considered,” Justice Conviser said. “But the factors which led the jury to reach its conclusions are also easy to understand.”After the federal appeals court tossed out Mr. Aleynikov’s conviction in 2012, Congress responded by amending the Economic Espionage Act of 1996, the federal law that Mr. Aleynikov had been charged with violating. Justice Conviser ended his decision by essentially imploring Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, to make a similar appeal to New York legislators in regard to the state law under which Mr. Aleynikov was prosecuted.The judge noted that the District Attorneys Association of the State of New York supported several legislative proposals to “modernize” the state’s criminal laws with regard to computer crime.For now, it appears that Mr. Vance is more focused on preparing for a potential appeal. Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for Mr. Vance, said that Mr. Aleynikov had committed a crime and that the jury agreed.“If what Sergey Aleynikov did isn’t a crime, then every company that values its intellectual property should be concerned,” Ms. Vollero said. “We are in the process of considering our appellate options.”AdvertisementEarlier, speaking at the courthouse, Mr. Marino, the lawyer for Mr. Aleynikov, said he hoped that prosecutors would not appeal the ruling. He described the charges against his client as a “civil dispute masquerading as a criminal case.”After beating back attempts by both federal and state prosecutors to convict his client, Mr. Marino said he believed that he would compel Goldman Sachs to pay for most of Mr. Aleynikov’s legal expenses.Mr. Aleynikov is suing Goldman in federal court to force it to pay for his defense, which Mr. Marino estimated has cost as much as $7 million.A Goldman spokesman declined to comment on either Justice Conviser’s ruling or the dispute over whether the firm should cover legal fees.But Mr. Marino was at no loss for words in criticizing Goldman.“Goldman Sachs is powerful enough to provoke two failed criminal prosecutions to settle a private score,” Mr. Marino said. “Goldman Sachs has also spent millions in shareholder dollars to evade their obligation to pay Mr. Aleynikov’s legal fees for winning two criminal cases.”A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Goldman Programmer’s Conviction Is Overturned, Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.