AdvertisementSupported byBy Keith BradsherHONG KONG — Heavy government-coordinated purchases pushed up the value of large companies’ shares on mainland Chinese stock exchanges on Monday, interrupting at least temporarily a three-week downturn. But shares in smaller and midsize companies, which make up as much as two-thirds of the market by value, kept falling.A widening gap between the relative strength of large companies’ shares and the seemingly unending slide in the rest of the market threatens to widen social divisions in China. Millions of working- and middle-class families invested their life’s savings and borrowed heavily over the past year to buy shares in smaller companies, simply because the shares kept rising and almost regardless of the companies’ financial fundamentals.By contrast, Chinese and foreign institutional investors heavily favored the larger companies. Many of the large companies are partially owned by the state, and their executives are senior Communist Party officials who wield considerable political influence. Some large companies also have close ties to some of the country’s leading political families.With the Chinese government supporting the prices of many companies’ shares on mainland markets on Monday, particularly large companies, it was the turn of Hong Kong-listed shares to fall heavily.The Hong Kong stock market had previously been nearly immune to the sell-off on the mainland. It has tighter restrictions on trading with borrowed money and stronger corporate governance rules. So it did not rise nearly as fast as mainland indexes over the past year and until Monday had not fallen very far either.But the broad Hang Seng index of Hong Kong stocks slipped 3.2 percent on Monday, the Hang Seng index of 100 large mainland companies dropped 3.7 percent and the Growth Enterprise Market of mainly small mainland companies plummeted 14.4 percent.Andy Wong, a Hong Kong stockbroker, noted that it was much easier for foreigners to sell shares in Hong Kong in response to developments in mainland China than to sell shares on the Shanghai or Shenzhen stock markets.The falling Hong Kong market “is mainly the result of the overseas players’ offloading Hong Kong stocks in a big way — they appear angry at the Chinese government for coming out to interfere in the China stock markets,” he said. “Since they have no room to play up north, the overseas players have switched to playing the Hong Kong stock market today.”The Chinese stock market rout has prompted the country’s government to act aggressively to stop the slide.At a brokerage house in Hong Kong, investors were divided on how much to worry about the day’s setback.Some, like Wong Chun, a 72-year-old investor who has been trading stocks since the 1980s, were clearly worried. “It is hard to say whether the current market-support measures taken by the Chinese government will work in the long term,” she said. “Should the public truly have fear in their heart, then nothing will stop the slide.”But others were more blithe.“If the Chinese government has the will, it certainly has the ability to stop the slide in the Chinese stock market,” said Daisy Kong, a 52-year-old homemaker who was checking stock prices at the same brokerage house. “The Chinese government has so much money, they don’t need to borrow like Greece.”Acting at the Chinese government’s behest, 21 mainland brokerage firms set up a $19.4 billion fund over the weekend to buy large companies’ stocks. The central bank also provided money indirectly for the brokerage firms to provide to buyers who wanted to borrow money to invest — or who at least wanted to roll over their existing loans despite having lost heavily.That support produced a sharp rally in large-company stocks at the opening in Shanghai and Shenzhen. These shares gave up their gains by late morning, stayed largely flat into the afternoon and then surged in the final half-hour, with the CSI 300 index of large-capitalization shares closing with a gain of 2.9 percent.By contrast, shares in small and midsize companies kept falling. The ChiNext price index of small companies lost 4.3 percent on Monday.At a branch of the China Securities brokerage firm near the Dongzhimen neighborhood in Beijing, investors gossiped in front of nine large LED screens flashing stock prices. By midafternoon, the nearly uniformly falling prices on the screens only further dispirited the investors in the trading hall, mostly gray-haired retirees. As the afternoon trading started, those who sat in the back rows fished out their lunchboxes and started eating.Mr. Huang, with a receding hairline and wearing a faded yellow polo shirt and shorts, was the most talkative. “Sell off as soon as you can,” he exhorted his friends, women huddled silently in the last row, two of them with jade rosaries in their hands and another absent-mindedly knitting.“Hurry up! Trust me, it’s really hopeless,” continued Mr. Huang, who declined to provide his given name. “Just stop trading. Let it drop.”“What kind of bailout is this?” complained a woman sitting behind Mr. Huang.A voice came from the back of the hall: “This is strafing China’s middle class with a machine gun.” The agitated murmur in the room stopped momentarily at the comment, but soon resumed.Patrick Zuo contributed research from Beijing.Advertisement