By MICHAEL CIEPLYJULY 8, 2015
LOS ANGELES — “I think it’s an outrage,” Thomas Mesereau, a defense lawyer, told Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Stephen A. Marcus at a hearing here on Tuesday.“If I were driving the truck, I’d be awarded a medal.”Mr. Mesereau was referring to a red pickup truck driven by his client, Marion Knight, the rap mogul known as “Suge,” when he hit and killed Terry Carter and injured Cle Sloan last January, in a dispute that started on the set of a promotional shoot for Universal Pictures’ coming film “Straight Outta Compton.”Mr. Mesereau’s assertive posture may offer a preview of the strategy and rhetoric to be expected when Mr. Knight is finally tried for murder and attempted murder (and for robbery in an entirely separate case whose preliminary hearings have been held in tandem with the murder case).On Tuesday, Mr. Mesereau argued that Mr. Knight was under assault and acted in self-defense when he hit Mr. Carter and Mr. Sloan. Judge Marcus found those assertions “to be better suited to the trial” than a pretrial motion to dismiss the charges, which the judge said would stand.AdvertisementWhile much of the evidence remains under a protective order, Judge Marcus left little doubt that the murder trial — when it is finally scheduled — will brush up against those who made “Straight Outta Compton,” perhaps including the producers Ice Cube and Dr. Dre.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The judge spoke in court of “underlying” issues between Mr. Knight and the producers: Mr. Knight and others, in their witness interviews with sheriff’s investigators, said that he should have been paid by the producers for having portrayed him in the movie, and also that he believed Dr. Dre had promised him a $300 million share of the proceeds from the sale of the Beats company to Apple.AdvertisementFor now, the issues turn more tightly around issues like bail. Mr. Mesereau, known for his work for Michael Jackson and other celebrities, said he is filing a new bail request for Mr. Knight, and expects to do some deep investigating before the case is ready for trial.“Apparently, there’s an enormous amount of discovery we haven’t seen,” Mr. Mesereau told Judge Ronald S. Coen, who presided over part of the tandem hearings.The court set some future proceedings, including a status conference on Sept. 17. “Straight Outta Compton,” about the rap group N.W.A., is set for release on Aug. 14.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.