By BROOKS BARNESJULY 7, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  With an eye toward the mainstream success of gay-themed films like “Philadelphia,” 20th Century Fox has secured the rights to make a movie about the Supreme Court case that effectively legalized same-sex marriage.Fox said Tuesday that it had bought the life rights of Jim Obergefell, the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit that last month resulted in recognition of the right to same-sex marriage in the United States. His lawyer, Al Gerhardstein, sold his life rights as well.Additionally, the studio has secured screen rights to a still-unwritten book by Mr. Obergefell and the journalist Debbie Cenziper. A proposal for the book, to be titled “21 Years to Midnight,” has been submitted to publishers, with a deal expected as soon as this week.A Cincinnati real estate agent, his deceased husband's aunt and their funeral director found themselves at the center of Obergefell vs. Hodges, the biggest Supreme Court same-sex marriage case in U.S. history.Wyck Godfrey and Marty Bowen will produce the movie. The project will be handled by Fox 2000, a division known for literary adaptations like “Life of Pi” and “The Devil Wears Prada.”Advertisement“It’s a transcendent love story about someone who goes to such a length for love that he ends up changing the world,” Mr. Godfrey said in a phone interview. His producing credits include “The Fault in Our Stars,” which took in more than $307 million worldwide last year.AdvertisementMr. Obergefell, an Ohio real estate agent, married his longtime partner, John Arthur, in 2013 in Maryland. When Mr. Arthur died, Ohio refused to list Mr. Obergefell as his spouse on the death certificate, so Mr. Obergefell sued.A finished film is at least two years away. Fox 2000 will next work to find a screenwriter to collaborate with Mr. Obergefell and Ms. Cenziper.Ms. Cenziper received a Pulitzer Prize for 2006 articles on housing corruption in The Miami Herald. She said that she had known Mr. Obergefell for two decades — Mr. Arthur was a cousin of her first husband. “This is just an amazing story, and I feel privileged to have him trust me to help tell it in a narrative nonfiction book,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Is Planning to Make Movie About Historic Marriage Ruling .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.