
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JULY 7, 2015
Insider trading cases based on the passing of tips seemed endangered after a decision by the federal appeals court in Manhattan in December.The case, United States v. Newman, decided at the end of 2014, reversed the convictions of two hedge fund managers for insider trading. The ruling also troubled prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission, by making it more difficult to prove a violation by requiring proof that a tipper received a tangible benefit in exchange for providing inside information.It seemed as if all prominent defendants convicted of insider trading, like Raj Rajaratnam and Mathew Martoma, were asking to have their convictions overturned because of the Newman opinion.But a decision from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in California has taken some of the bite out of the Newman decision. That ruling adopts a more favorable standard for proving a violation when inside information is passed among family members.AdvertisementAnd in a fascinating twist, the author of the opinion is Jed S. Rakoff, a United States District Court judge in Manhattan, who had earlier expressed concern with the Newman decision.AdvertisementThe Newman case involved two hedge fund managers — Todd Newman and Anthony R. Chiasson — who were tried together. They were at the end of a chain of analysts who were passing along information about impending corporate earnings announcements, and earning handsome profits by trading ahead of the disclosures.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed their convictions, saying that the trial judge had not instructed the jury that it had to find that the defendants knew the original source of the information had received a benefit from tipping off others.The real problem for the government came in a short discussion about what evidence was needed to establish that the tipper had received an impermissible benefit. The Newman opinion asserted that it must involve something more than a casual friendship between the tipper and tippee.As the court wrote, there must be proof of a “meaningfully close personal relationship” in which there was “an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”The appeals court didn’t explain exactly what that meant, leaving an opening for defendants like Mr. Rajaratnam and Mr. Martoma to argue that the government’s proof was insufficient.The Justice Department asked the appeals court to reconsider, a request rejected in April. Prosecutors are considering whether to seek Supreme Court review.United States v. Salman, which was heard before the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, took a more favorable view of what the government has to prove in a tipping case.AdvertisementIn that case, Maher F. Kara, a former investment banker at Citigroup, provided information about health care deals to his older brother, Michael, who traded on it. The brothers were part of a very close family, speaking with each other nearly every day. Maher Kara testified that he gave his brother the information to “benefit him” and “fulfill whatever needs he had.”Bassam Yacoub Salman, in turn, started receiving the inside information through Michael (Mr. Salman knew the family because his sister had become Maher Kara’s fiancée). Mr. Salman was convicted of trading on the confidential information that Maher Kara took from Citigroup. No money ever changed hands, and the benefits Mr. Kara received from Michael were of the type usually exchanged between family members: love and affection.The Newman opinion came out while Mr. Salman’s case was before the Ninth Circuit. Mr. Salman argued that the Second Circuit’s decision should be applied to his case, asserting that the government did not introduce sufficient evidence that a tangible benefit had been received by Maher Kara.Judge Rakoff was assigned to the three-judge panel hearing Mr. Salman’s appeal under a statute that authorizes federal district judges to sit on an appeals court “whenever the business of that court so requires.” Judges are assigned randomly to cases, so it was the luck of the draw that put him on yet another closely watched insider trading case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This is not the first time Judge Rakoff has considered the scope of the Newman decision. In S.E.C. v. Payton, decided in April, he rejected the argument of two defendants who were friends and had sought to dismiss insider trading charges because the S.E.C. had not identified a sufficient benefit being given in exchange for the information.Judge Rakoff expressed some unease with the Newman opinion when he wrote that the appeals court’s conclusion about what constitutes a benefit “may not be obvious.” He added that the opinion’s interpretation of the law did not make it “easy for a lower court” to conform with the Supreme Court decision in Dirks v. S.E.C. that established the benefits test.In Dirks, decided in 1983, the Supreme Court said that the benefit to the tipper may be tangible, but can “also exist when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”Judge Rakoff found that the S.E.C. complaint included enough detail about potential benefits exchanged between the defendants, so the insider case could move forward.A federal district court must follow the dictates of the appellate court under which it sits, so Judge Rakoff has to follow the precedents of the Second Circuit, including the Newman decision. But once he was designated to sit on the Ninth Circuit, he had a freer hand to consider the proper analysis of what type of benefit to a tipper was sufficient for insider trading liability.AdvertisementIn the Salman opinion, Judge Rakoff pointed out that the Second Circuit’s decision is not binding on the Ninth Circuit, but noted that “we would not lightly ignore the most recent ruling of our sister circuit in an area of law that it has frequently encountered.” He wrote that if the Newman case meant that every benefit provided to a tipper had to be tangible, then “we decline to follow it” because it would “depart from the clear holding of Dirks” that recognized gifts as an acceptable benefit.Without saying he disagreed with the Newman approach, he pointed out that it could go too far in protecting tipping in certain situations. “A corporate insider or other person in possession of confidential and proprietary information would be free to disclose that information to her relatives, and they would be free to trade on it, provided only that she asked for no tangible compensation in return,” he wrote.In finding that passing along information among close family members was sufficient even without proof of a tangible benefit, Judge Rakoff emphasized what a narrower reading of the law might entail.Judge Rakoff’s opinion for the Ninth Circuit did not directly reject the Newman decision, which would have set up the type of disagreement among the appeals courts that the Supreme Court might step in to resolve.Instead, the decision views tipping information among family members as very different from the Newman case, in which the participants in the trading were casual social acquaintances with little continuing connection among them. Thus, in Judge Rakoff’s view, close family members like those in the Salman case do not need anything more than love and affection to establish that there was a benefit received for insider information.The Newman and Salman cases set very different limits for the benefit element of tipping. If the defendants are just friends, and perhaps not very good ones, then the benefit to the tipper must have a tangible value. When information passes between close family members, then the benefit is essentially presumed, and additional evidence beyond their relationship is unnecessary.As more tipping cases work through the system, the courts will have to figure out how they fit under the decisions of both the Second and Ninth Circuits. cases involving more distant relatives, or those who do not interact on a regular basis, may be murkier. Still, an especially close friendship might be enough to establish that giving the information was a gift sufficient to show the benefit.For prosecutors and the S.E.C., the Salman opinion gives them something to point to on what constitutes the requisite benefit in exchange for insider information that avoids the tougher test in the Newman decision.The Newman and Salman decisions are not taking opposite positions, but are not harmonious, either. Judge Rakoff’s opinion limits the effect of the Second Circuit’s decision on insider trading law by simply ignoring its benefit analysis for family members passing along inside information. It will be interesting to see whether other courts follow Judge Rakoff’s reasoning about the Newman decision.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »