AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberSubway suspended its relationship with its well-known spokesman, Jared Fogle, on Tuesday, hours after investigators in Indiana raided his suburban home. Mr. Fogle was not arrested during the raid on his house in Zionsville, Ind. Earlier this year, Russell Taylor, a former executive director of Mr. Fogle’s foundation, was arrested on charges related to child pornography. Mr. Taylor was charged in May with seven counts of production and one count of possession of child pornography. “Subway and Jared Fogle have mutually agreed to suspend their relationship due to the current investigation,” the company said in a statement. “Jared continues to cooperate with authorities and he expects no actions to be forthcoming. Both Jared and Subway agree that this was the appropriate step to take.” Earlier in the day, Subway sent a Twitter message that said in part, “We are shocked about the news and believe it is related to a former Jared Foundation employee.” Mr. Fogle had said after Mr. Taylor’s arrest that his foundation was cutting all ties with Mr. Taylor. Mr. Fogle gained fame after losing more than 200 pounds by eating Subway sandwiches and exercising. He first appeared in ads for Subway in 2000 and founded the Jared Foundation in 2004 to combat childhood obesity.In the wake of the police raid, Subway removed a section on its website, “Jared’s Journey,” devoted to Mr. Fogle’s weight-loss experience. “Jared has been cooperating, and continues to cooperate, with law enforcement in their investigation of unspecified charges and looks forward to its conclusion,” Ron Elberger, a lawyer for Mr. Fogle, said in a statement. “He has not been detained, arrested or charged with any crime or offense.” Tim Horty, a spokesman for the United States attorney’s office in the Southern District of Indiana, which is involved in the investigation, declined to comment on the reason for the raid and referred to Subway’s initial statement on Twitter. The F.B.I. is also involved in the investigation, and the Indiana State Police said that they were assisting the United States attorney’s office.Advertisement