By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 7, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The United States trade deficit widened slightly in May, the Commerce Department reported Tuesday, reflecting declines in sales of American-made aircraft and machinery as exports continued to suffer from a strong dollar.The deficit increased 2.9 percent to $41.9 billion in May, up from an April imbalance of $40.7 billion.Imports fell 0.1 percent to $230.5 billion. Exports slid at a faster pace of 0.8 percent to $188.6 billion. American producers have been hurt this year by the rising value of the dollar, which makes American goods less competitive in foreign markets.Even with the slight increase in May, the deficit in the last two months is averaging less than in the first quarter. That should help raise growth in the second quarter.AdvertisementTrade slashed nearly 2 percentage points off growth in the first three months of the year. The big drag from trade combined with a severe winter sent the economy into reverse, contracting at an annual rate of 0.2 percent in the January-March period.Analysts say that a narrowing of the trade deficit in the April-June period will be a major factor in reviving overall growth. They forecast a rebound to an annual growth rate of around 2.5 percent, as measured by the gross domestic product, in the second quarter.Analysts predict solid job gains will bolster economic growth even more in the second half of this year, to around 3 percent.
            The deficit is the excess of imports over exports for goods and services. Amounts are rounded, in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted.        May 2015ImportsExportsBalance$230.46 billion     188.59 –$ 41.87 billion$260 billion220Imports180Exports140’14’15 $  0– 20Tradedeficit– 40– 6012-month moving averageJULY 7, 2015
Paul Ashworth, chief United States economist at Capital Economics, said the dollar’s rise in value in the last 12 months would probably mean that trade would remain a small drag on the economy for the rest of 2015. But he added that with the dollar’s increase slowing in recent months, its drag on growth should fade in 2016.The deficit with China jumped 15 percent in May to $30.5 billion. This year, it is running 11.1 percent higher than the same period a year ago, putting the country on track for another annual record. The United States trade deficit with China is the largest with any country.AdvertisementIn May, the United States ran a rare trade surplus with its biggest trading partner, Canada. The $644 million surplus was the first monthly surplus with Canada since 1990.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Job openings stayed close to a 15-year high in May, a sign that companies are expecting continued economic growth, but that actual hiring has not matched the level of advertised jobs.The Labor Department said the number of open jobs rose 0.5 percent to 5.36 million in May. April’s total was revised down to 5.33 million from 5.38 million, which had been the highest total in the 15 years that the government has tracked the data.The stronger confidence among employers has yet to produce an even stronger level of hiring and pay raises that would fuel faster economic growth. The number of new hires slipped somewhat in May for the second straight month, while the number of workers who chose to leave jobs — a sign of strength since resignations are generally associated with people finding better jobs — was basically unchanged.The challenge may be that employers are struggling to find skilled workers at the salaries being offered. But they also may be reluctant to increase pay to attract more talented applicants.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Trade Deficit Grows, as Strong Dollar Hurts Exports .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.