AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumPLANO, Tex. — Lamesa White and her four children moved in February from the most dangerous public housing project in Dallas to a single-family home in this affluent suburb. On the day she left, one of her daughter’s old schoolmates was shot to death.Ms. White’s escape from the Estell Village housing project — better known as The Pinks because the buildings were once painted that color — was made possible by an experiment in housing policy the federal government began in Dallas in 2011 and is now proposing to expand to most other large metropolitan areas.Families in Dallas who qualify for housing subsidies are offered more money if they move to more expensive neighborhoods, allowing them to live in safe communities and enroll their children in schools that are otherwise beyond reach. To sharpen the prod, the government has also cut subsidies for those who do not go.The Obama administration has taken a deep interest in the research of the Harvard economist Raj Chetty, who has shown that where children grow up shapes their prospects as an adult, and the proposed expansion of the Dallas experiment is an early instance of the ways in which Mr. Chetty’s findings are changing public policy.Housing vouchers were created in the 1970s to help poor families and their children escape public housing, but they largely failed to improve the prospects for their recipients. Many of the 2.2 million households that are receiving them at any given moment, particularly minorities, remain clustered in low-income neighborhoods in what amount to virtual housing projects.Julián Castro, the secretary of housing and urban development, said it was past time to try a more daring approach, one that pushes harder against age-old residential patterns of class and racial segregation. Even so, he said, the measure of the new changes would not be how many people left those clusters but whether their lives were changed for the better.“How many more young people in these families cross the graduation stage?” he asked. “How many more parents are earning more money so they can get on the track to prosperity? That’s how we’re going to measure success.”Ms. White, 32, said she jumped at the chance to leave her old neighborhood.One of her children is thriving in a special education program where he gets one-to-one attention, and she is thrilled that the school provides regular updates on his progress. In Dallas, she did not learn that he had been attending the wrong class until she received a notice requiring her to appear at truancy court.Her eldest daughter, 14, has started to talk about going to college.“It’s so quiet out here,” Ms. White said as she sat in the living room of the first house she has lived in, the family’s new dog on her lap. “I love it.”An experimental federal program, begun in Dallas in 2011, encourages low-income families to move to neighborhoods with better schools and lower crime rates.The government has tried before to fix the rent subsidy program. In the early 1990s, an experiment called Moving to Opportunity required some families to use their vouchers in more expensive neighborhoods. In 2000, a broader initiative raised the value of all vouchers in 49 metropolitan areas. Officials hoped the change would make it possible for families to find rental apartments in a broader range of neighborhoods. Instead, a recent study by the economists Peter Ganong of Harvard and Robert Collinson of New York University found that most families ended up paying higher rents in the same neighborhoods — and often for the same units.“When you give somebody a voucher, it tends to be the case that they buy better-quality housing in the same neighborhood,” Mr. Ganong said. “That’s always been a disappointing fact within HUD.” He said it raised the question: “If they’re not finding better neighborhoods, why are we putting this money into housing?”The problem, officials have concluded, is that the subsidies were much too small. In 2011, HUD started the Dallas experiment as a part of a settlement with housing activists. It has since added five smaller regions to the program.In Dallas, the maximum subsidy for a three-bedroom apartment is now just $850 in the cheapest ZIP codes, but as much as $1,840 in the most expensive ZIP codes. In 33 of the 50 largest metropolitan areas, the subsidy for the wealthiest ZIP code would be more than twice as high as the subsidy in the poorest ZIP code. In New York, San Diego and Washington, it would be more than three times as high.MaryAnn Russ, chief executive of the Dallas Housing Authority, the agency that administers the experiment, said the changes had provided a “tremendous benefit” to thousands of families in the Dallas area. In 2011, Dallas voucher recipients lived in 129 ZIP codes. Four years later, recipients live in 163 ZIP codes.Also important was that the overall cost of the program did not increase.But Ms. Russ said there were some unexpected problems. Officials predicted that cutting subsidies would force landlords in lower-income areas to cut rents. Instead, many of those landlords required subsidized tenants to pay more out of their own pockets. And moving has proved difficult for many tenants. Some are elderly, disabled or so poor that they have no savings for a security deposit.“Many, many families here have benefited in important ways, and that’s a big deal,” Ms. Russ said. “But some people have fallen under the bus. That’s a reality too.”Many of those who tried to move have struggled to find landlords willing to accept vouchers. Only a handful of states, and some cities, prohibit landlords from discriminating against subsidized tenants. The Texas Legislature, by contrast, in May mandated that local governments must allow such discrimination.“If nobody will take it in the good areas, it’s not much of a benefit,” said Elizabeth K. Julian, the president of the Inclusive Communities Project, a Dallas nonprofit organization that helps voucher recipients find and move to housing in higher-price neighborhoods. “The highly distressed areas are like sponges because those landlords live off the subsidy programs, so it’s so much easier to go there.”(The Supreme Court just handed the Inclusive Communities Project an important victory in a lawsuit seeking to make more housing available. Landlords of properties built with low-income housing tax credits are required to accept vouchers. Inclusive Communities argues that Texas is allocating a disproportionate share of those credits to developers in minority neighborhoods. The Supreme Court ruling in June allows that lawsuit to move forward.)Four years ago, when Torey Moore first obtained one of the about 29,000 housing vouchers available to Dallas area residents, she stayed in the same South Dallas neighborhood. She had two young children, and she relied on her family to look after the children while she worked.Last year, however, she decided it was time to move. Her children were struggling at school, and when they were not at school, she worried about their safety.In February, after a lot of searching, she moved to a three-bedroom house in Frisco, a rapidly growing northern suburb.“It was one of the best things I’ve ever done,” she said.Her old house had burglar bars on the windows; her new house does not. And her son and daughter are thriving in Frisco schools. Her daughter, who was falling behind in reading and math, gets individual tutoring each morning before the school day. “In Dallas, I kept trying to get the school to put her in tutoring, and they kept saying she was doing fine,” she said. “These people care.”Ms. Moore now lives farther from her family, but she has found that she needs their help less often because she lives closer to her job in the mortgage department at Bank of America. Instead of traveling 90 minutes twice a day, she now commutes about 35 minutes each way. She can now spend two more hours with her children.Housing vouchers, like school vouchers, are sometimes criticized for helping a few while leaving many behind. “A child’s course in life should not be determined by the ZIP code she’s born in,” President Obama declared last year. The Dallas program accepts that it is, and then offers some families an upgrade.There is also evidence that older children, particularly boys, often struggle in new neighborhoods. The costs of the move can outweigh the benefits of the new place.Ms. White says those issues are real enough but nothing compared with the feeling that she and her family are now safe. She was tired of stepping over the dice players on her stoop, tired of guiding her children around the fragments of broken bottles at the old housing project, which Ms. Russ, the head of the Dallas Housing Authority, called the most dangerous in the city.When she moved, she changed her cellphone number, cutting off her old friends.She and her children have yet to build a new social network, save for another family who also took advantage of a voucher to move to a nearby home.But in her new neighborhood, she has never heard a gunshot.“I’m going to stay out here,” she said. “I’m not going back.”Advertisement