
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JULY 7, 2015
The latest pharmaceutical industry acquisition attempt leaves lots of room to grow. Horizon Pharma’s $1.75 billion unsolicited offer for its American rival Depomed continues the sector’s deal-making trend, fed by tax savings and cost cuts. Horizon is a relatively recent arrival on the scene, though, and its low debt load and small size mean it could easily expand.The market capitalization of Horizon is only $5 billion, so a Depomed acquisition would make a huge difference to its business. Larger rivals like Valeant Pharmaceuticals, which is worth $76 billion, and Allergan, worth $120 billion, would need many more deals or much bigger ones to match that level of growth.Horizon’s balance sheet is also fairly clean. The company has about $900 million in debt, excluding a bond that will probably be converted into equity. That makes growing by acquiring companies even more attractive. There’s a limit to leverage, though. Valeant is nearing it, with about $30 billion in debt, or about six times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as the management defines the term. Horizon’s corresponding multiple is about half that.No wonder Horizon is outperforming its bigger brethren. Its shares have increased in value about sevenfold since it began its deal binge in late 2013. The shares of Valeant and Allergan have roughly doubled in price during that period.AdvertisementThis deal is far from done, though. There’s plenty of potential for cost cuts, a lower tax rate and the refinancing of Depomed’s $575 million in debt paying a huge 10.75 percent interest rate, but the target is resisting. Depomed argues that its high growth rate means the acquisition price’s 42 percent premium is too low. And the company may see excessive risk in the bid, which is all in stock.The merger party may also be flagging. Horizon shares fell 4 percent on news of the offer before recovering somewhat, perhaps reflecting fears that the company would be overpaying. Last year, the majority of deal announcements lifted acquirers’ stocks.AdvertisementA cooling of investor enthusiasm could, of course, spell trouble for even small acquisition machines like Horizon. So far, though, it seems well positioned for even more transactions.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »