By GRAHAM BOWLEY and RAVI SOMAIYAJULY 7, 2015
She was 19 and visiting her mother when, Therese Serignese recounted later, she met Bill Cosby in the gift shop at the Las Vegas Hilton in 1976.Mr. Cosby invited her to his show, and then backstage afterward where he gave her some pills. Her next memory, she said, was of feeling drugged and being sexually assaulted.Last November, days after Ms. Serignese went public with that accusation, Mr. Cosby’s representative deplored the molestation claims that were spiraling against him as “unsubstantiated, fantastical stories.”But on Tuesday, Ms. Serignese and many of the women, speaking themselves or through representatives, said they felt vindicated by Mr. Cosby’s admission in a newly released court record that he had obtained quaaludes to give young women with whom he wanted to have sex.AdvertisementIt was an acknowledgment, the first to become public, that Mr. Cosby viewed powerful, sedating drugs as part of his sexual encounters with women.Advertisement“Mr. Cosby branded them a liar,” said Joseph Cammarata, who is representing Ms. Serignese and two other women in a defamation suit against the entertainer. “This testimony, at least as it relates to Therese Serignese, seems to tell a different story.”The disclosure was contained in a court record unsealed Monday by a federal judge in Philadelphia, part of a civil case brought in 2005 by Andrea Constand, who had been a staff member with the basketball program at Temple University, Mr. Cosby’s alma mater. Ms. Constand accused Mr. Cosby of drugging and molesting her in a case that was later settled.The unsealed document includes Mr. Cosby, under questioning, admitting to having obtained seven prescriptions for quaaludes in the 1970s. He testified under oath that he had given the sedative to at least one woman, who appears to be Ms. Serignese, and “other people.”“When you got the quaaludes,” asked Dolores M. Troiani, the lawyer for Ms. Constand, “was it in your mind that you were going to use these quaaludes for young women that you wanted to have sex with?”Mr. Cosby replied, “Yes.”In the records, Mr. Cosby, now 77, did not admit drugging unwitting women. When asked if the women had known they were taking the quaaludes, Mr. Cosby’s lawyer abruptly cut off the questioning. And Mr. Cosby suggested in his answers that the pill taking and sex had been consensual.“I meet Ms. (redacted) in Las Vegas,” said Mr. Cosby in the 2005 deposition cited in a memorandum of law filed in United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. “She meets me backstage. I give her quaaludes. We then have sex.”The name of the woman Mr. Cosby cited in his testimony was redacted. But the discussion in the court record closely tracks the encounter described by Ms. Serignese. She said Tuesday she could not comment because of her pending litigation. In the past she has said that nothing about the episode was consensual, that she only took the pills because Mr. Cosby was an authority figure and she felt frightened and compelled.AdvertisementUntil the accusations piled up last year, Mr. Cosby had been one of America’s most beloved comedians, after a long career that included stand-up, a hit NBC sitcom and commercials for Jell-O. In the twilight of his career, he was preparing a comedy special to be available on Netflix, and NBC was exploring a return to prime time for its former star. Both projects were canceled in the wake of the accusations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a further setback, Disney World said it would remove a bronze statue of Mr. Cosby, The Orlando Sentinel reported on Tuesday, citing a Walt Disney World spokeswoman.Gloria Allred, a lawyer who represents several of the women who say they were molested, said release of the testimony bolsters the position of the more than two dozen women who have come forward in the last year to accuse Mr. Cosby of raping or molesting them, beginning in the mid-1960s, some of them claiming that he drugged them first.“This admission is one that Mr. Cosby has attempted to hide from the public for many years, and we are very gratified that it is now being made public,” Ms. Allred said.Mr. Cosby has denied the assault accusations, and he has never faced criminal charges. His publicist, David Brokaw, had no comment on Tuesday night. Whoopi Goldberg was among those who stood by Mr. Cosby, saying during a broadcast of “The View” on Tuesday: “Save your texts, save your nasty comments. I don’t care. I say this because this is my opinion, and in America, still, I know it’s a shock, but you actually were still innocent until proven guilty.”Ms. Constand has not spoken about her case since it was settled in 2006. Ms. Troiani declined to comment, citing a confidentiality stipulation that she said was part of the settlement agreement in the case.Ms. Constand had accused Mr. Cosby of giving her what he described as an herbal medication before molesting her. In his deposition, Mr. Cosby said he gave her three half-pills of Benadryl, an allergy medication.But Ms. Constand’s lawyer appeared unsatisfied with his explanation during the questioning.The records from the Constand case were released following a request by The Associated Press. Mr. Cosby and his legal team had fought the request. “It would be terribly embarrassing for this material to come out,” his lawyer, George M. Gowen III, argued last month.But in deciding to release the documents, Judge Eduardo Robreno of United States District Court said he was guided by the sense that Mr. Cosby had fashioned himself as a moral guide with pronouncements that offered “his views on, among other things, child-rearing, family life, education and crime.”“The stark contrast between Bill Cosby, the public moralist, and Bill Cosby, the subject of serious allegations concerning improper (and perhaps criminal) conduct is a matter as to which The A.P. — and by extension the public — has a significant interest,” the judge wrote in a memorandum issued Monday.Serge F. Kovaleski contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Admission, Cosby Accusers See Vindication .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.