By RAVI SOMAIYAJULY 7, 2015
The New York Times announced on Tuesday a broad revamping of its video operation and said it would seek new leadership for what it described as an increasingly vital part of the newsroom.The video department’s current chief, Bruce Headlam, will take on another senior role in the newsroom, the newspaper’s executive editor, Dean Baquet, said in a memo to the staff. Rebecca Howard, who led the business side of the operation, will leave the company “to focus on emerging media platforms,” Kinsey Wilson, who leads The Times’s companywide digital product and technology operations, said in another memo.Under Mr. Headlam, Mr. Baquet said, the video unit became an integral component of the paper’s coverage on topics including the North Charleston, S.C., police shooting and the Ebola crisis. The latter was part of the coverage that earned The Times a Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting this year.That success, Mr. Baquet said, “has prompted us to become even more ambitious and undertake a broad rethinking of our video operation, including what we produce and how we distribute it.” The paper will search for “new leadership with deep experience in video, who can help us design a broad editorial and business strategy for a video operation that can be even bigger and richer,” he said.In the interim, Steve Duenes, a masthead editor who has overseen graphics, will run the video department. Zander Baron, director of video operations, will run the business side of the operation. At the same time, Alex MacCallum, an assistant editor for audience development, will examine the structure of the video organization.The video department at The Times has grown significantly in recent years, the company said, and now comprises about 75 people across the newsroom and business sides. The use of video is booming across the media industry. Publishers are following trends among viewers, who are watching more videos on their phones, and advertising dollars. Though many organizations have sought to increase their video inventories, few have been able to produce arresting shorter videos consistently.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Times Announces Revamping of Its Video Unit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.