AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Two theater chains will allow Paramount Pictures to make two low-budget horror movies available on digital services just 17 days after they leave most theaters in return for a cut of the studio’s digital revenue.The unusual deal, announced by Paramount on Wednesday, reflects an intense push by Hollywood to speed up the availability of wide-release movies on iTunes, Google Play and home video-on-demand services. Theaters have typically insisted on a 90-day exclusive window to play new films, on the theory that if consumers knew they could just wait a few weeks and see new movies at home, why would they buy tickets?But studios are desperate to shorten that 90-day period, in part because they want to reduce marketing costs. Under the current setup, studios advertise films when they arrive in theaters and again several months later, when they arrive in homes. Moreover, while moviegoing is troubled in the United States — Paramount’s “Terminator Genisys” flopped last weekend — digital sales are growing quickly.Last year, domestic ticket sales fell 5 percent from a year earlier, to $10.4 billion. But domestic digital download revenue climbed 30 percent, to $1.6 billion.The deal between Paramount, AMC Theatres and Cineplex Entertainment covers the sixth installment in the “Paranormal Activity” series and “Scout’s Guide to the Zombie Apocalypse.” They are minor releases set for the fall. The “Paranormal Activity” series has been in major decline (the fifth one took in 40 percent less than its predecessor), and “Zombie Apocalypse” will most likely appeal to a limited audience of young moviegoers.Under the deal, the movies will play in hundreds of theaters operated by AMC and Cineplex, a Canadian chain. As soon as interest begins to wane, which could be days or weeks, and the chains cut back availability to fewer than 300 theaters, a 17-day clock will begin to tick. After that, Paramount can release the films on digital platforms, with an undisclosed portion of the revenue going to AMC and Cineplex — up to 90 days.The deal was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.Rob Moore, Paramount’s vice chairman, said in an interview that the studio was not looking in the near term to extend the deal framework to its mass-appeal movies. “For movies aimed at millennials that make most of their money in theaters in the first few weeks, this makes sense,” he said.Other movie companies have been experimenting with theatrical window-shortening, including Universal Pictures, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and the Weinstein Company. Paramount, which releases by far the fewest movies of any major studio (only four so far this year), has a particular need to make its marketing dollars stretch further. In the first six months of this year, Paramount reported operating losses of $59 million.Viacom, which owns Paramount, has also pushed against convention in other areas. As its MTV Networks arm struggles with viewership declines, Viacom has been trying to make ad sales less dependent on Nielsen ratings. Advertisement