
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JULY 8, 2015
Microsoft just got a $7.6 billion rude awakening related to its purchase of Nokia. The software giant is writing off most of what it paid for a big piece of the Finnish mobile company in 2014.Microsoft’s total merger-related write-downs now tally about $14 billion over the last three years.The $9.5 billion Nokia deal was the last in a string of bad deals struck by the previous chief executive, Steven A. Ballmer. As part of the deal, Microsoft received $1.5 billion in cash and paid about $2 billion to license Nokia’s patents and maps. Essentially, the financial cost disclosed on Wednesday — and the accompanying round of 7,800 layoffs — means the handset business is almost worthless and that Microsoft overpaid for the intellectual property.Mr. Ballmer agreed to the deal as he was stepping down as chief. It was almost a fitting dud to end his tenure.AdvertisementUnder his watch, Microsoft repeatedly tried to move beyond its strength in business software through acquisitions. In 2012, it wrote off nearly all of the $6.3 billion it had paid for the digital advertising agency aQuantive. And there are few signs that the $8.5 billion Microsoft spent on Skype in 2011 is paying off yet.AdvertisementMicrosoft shareholders can be relieved at least that its new chief, Satya Nadella, has recognized the limits of ambition, even for Microsoft, a powerhouse with a market capitalization close to $360 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is one reason the company’s shares have outperformed the broader market since Mr. Nadella was appointed the new boss, after a long period of malaise under Mr. Ballmer. Microsoft may not be giving up on phones just yet, but the write-down suggests recognition that it won’t dominate in consumer hardware.Yet Mr. Nadella has shown some worrying Ballmer-like traits. He spent more than $2 billion on Mojang, the maker of Minecraft, last year. Given the checkered history of digital game makers, like Zynga and Rovio, it could be a challenge to sustain popularity or generate another hit.Worse, Mr. Nadella was showing interest in Salesforce.com this year. While the company is in Microsoft’s software and cloud wheelhouse, a $55 billion deal would have been a risky proposition, especially for a money-losing target.Given how much money Microsoft has incinerated on mergers and acquisitions, Mr. Nadella should probably be taking the hint.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »