AdvertisementSupported byBy Janet MorrisseyJennie Ripps and Maria Littlefield like to describe themselves as “tea-drinking boozers” — always in moderation, of course. And in 2012, they set out on a quest: They wanted to fuse their passion for tea with their thirst for premium cocktails.So they toiled in the kitchen for about 18 months, experimenting with high-end tea leaves and every spirit they could get their hands on.“We prefer our tea boozy and on the rocks,” Ms. Ripps said playfully. The result? Owl’s Brew, a line of tea-infused cocktail mixers that has attracted tea lovers, health food enthusiasts and cocktail aficionados alike since its introduction in late 2013. Sales of the mixers — which can be paired with vodka, beer and other alcoholic beverages — reached $400,000 in 2014 and are expected to more than quadruple to $1.7 million this year, according to Ms. Ripps. The two project annual sales of $11.2 million in 2018 and close to $18 million in 2020. Lofty goals? Perhaps. But they have already persuaded some prominent companies in the retail world, such as Whole Foods Market, Williams-Sonoma, Fairway Market and Bed Bath & Beyond, as well as liquor chains, including BevMo and Total Wine & More, to sell their bottles. They recently reached a deal for Loews Hotels & Resorts to put Owl’s Brew behind the bar at 22 of the chain’s 23 hotels, and they agreed to team up with Famous Grouse to create a limited-edition custom brew mix for its Scotch that will arrive on shelves this fall. A book of Owl’s Brew cocktail recipes is scheduled to be published this year. “We have been overwhelmed by the response,” Ms. Littlefield said. Owl’s Brew is sold in more than 1,200 retail outlets, up from 300 the first year. The founders expect to be in 6,500 outlets by 2020.But is this the start of a groundbreaking niche in the beverage world? Or is it a passing fad? And what’s to stop the myriad specialty-tea companies from jumping in with competing concoctions? Owl’s Brew, whose creators have backgrounds in marketing, is tapping both the popularity of healthy eating and of home cocktails. Its mixers are made with fresh spices, herbs, whole tea leaves and fruit. They are naturally sweetened with agave, offer one-third the calories of traditional mixers and contain all the benefits of tea, such as antioxidants.Tea is the second-most-consumed beverage in the world, after water, according to the Tea Association of the U.S.A. In 2014, four out of every five consumers drank tea, and millennials are the biggest fans — 87 percent say they drink tea. Mintel, a market research firm, said about 82 percent of United States consumers over the age of 18 drink tea. At the same time, demand for premium cocktail mixers, which contain natural ingredients, is surging. “Mixology is a trending category,” said Elly Truesdell, regional buyer for Whole Foods Market in the Northeast, which carries Owl’s Brew in 13 of its stores. In the last year, sales of so-called natural mixers in supermarkets, excluding Whole Foods, rose 43.7 percent, according to Spins, a retail consumer data firm. Owl’s Brew “hit the nail on the head,” said Mark Weiss, senior vice president of food and beverage for Loews Hotels. “It’s right on the money with this particular timeline of mixology and crafted drinks.” Darren Seifer, food and beverage analyst at the NPD Group, a market information and advisory services firm, was more cynical. “This is what marketers do all the time,” he said. When low carbohydrate levels in food were popular around 2003, he said, marketers would shamelessly point out the low carbohydrate level in beer. Likewise, with tea a big trend now, he views tea cocktails as simply riding that trend. “But I don’t know if it will be the biggest new way of mixing drinks,” he said. And competition is inevitable. As tea cocktails gain popularity at high-end bars, so do websites offering tea cocktail recipes. But the founders of Owl’s Brew say consumers want mixers that offer a simple, fast, reliable way to make high-quality cocktails at home — “You just add ice and your favorite liquor” — rather than making them from scratch. Can someone just add alcohol to their favorite iced tea to get the same result? Any liquid added to iced tea would dilute the mixture and taste, the creators say. Owl’s Brew is specifically concocted to work with one part alcohol and two parts mixer. Are the Owl’s Brew founders worried that other specialty-tea companies will introduce competing mixers? Bring it on, they said. They are confident their “first to market” position gives them an advantage, and any competitors will just give this new niche — and their product — better exposure in the supermarket aisle. Born in New York in 1980, Ms. Ripps grew up in Greenwich, Conn., where her father, Richard, worked as a real estate developer and her mother, Susan Shapiro Barash, wrote books. “Jennie was always interested in the business world,” Ms. Barash recalled. In her teens and 20s, Ms. Ripps socialized with the families of prominent businesspeople, such as Lacey Tisch, whose family founded the Loews hotel chain.After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania with a bachelor’s degree in English in 2003, Ms. Ripps dabbled in book publishing and real estate before taking a job at a celebrity marketing firm, Talent Resources, in 2008, where she honed her marketing skills. In 2009, she hired Ms. Littlefield to join her at Talent Resources, and the two hit it off immediately. Ms. Littlefield, born on Martha’s Vineyard in 1987, grew up in Litchfield, Conn., where her father, Ivory, owned a contracting business, and her mother, Deborah, was a school principal and is now a yoga instructor. She graduated from Skidmore College with a bachelor’s degree in psychology in 2009. At Talent Resources, Ms. Littlefield noticed Ms. Ripps’s fascination with tea and started joining her in experimenting with tea blends and tea cocktails. They served their tea-infused cocktails at weekly parties, New York Fashion Week soirees, Coachella and even the Sundance Film Festival, among other marketing events. By 2013, they had quit their marketing jobs to focus on building the tea cocktail company. They named it Owl’s Brew — with a message to “drink wise.”“We believe you should know what you are putting into your body, even if you’re adding a bucket of gin to it,” Ms. Littlefield said. Owl’s Brew comes in four flavors: Coca-Lada, Pink & Black, The Classic and White Vine. The mixers, which can be served hot or cold, retail for $10 for eight-ounce bottles and $17 for 32-ounce bottles. One of the company’s earliest investors and its first adviser was Michael Stillman, president of the Fourth Wall Restaurants group, which owns Smith & Wollensky and five other upscale restaurants. Mr. Stillman, a longtime family friend who went to high school with Ms. Ripps’s husband, Max Brockman, said Ms. Ripps’s drive and marketing skills clinched the deal. “She has a feel for how to market it, how to talk to people and how to get people engaged,” he said. Don Duberstein, an angel investor, echoed that view. Mr. Duberstein, whose son went to school with Ms. Ripps’s brother Michael, was initially reluctant to get involved.“I didn’t like mixing friends and business,” he said. But once Mr. Duberstein met Ms. Ripps, he was sold. “She’s bright. She’s driven. She’s committed,” he said. “It wasn’t the Warren Buffett way of discounted cash flow analysis, but I’ve always believed that you invest in the person rather than the thing.” Mr. Duberstein’s family is now Owl’s Brew’s largest shareholder. If Owl’s Brew continues on its current growth path, investors speculate that it could appear on the takeover radar of a beverage giant. In 2007, for example, Diageo took a 20 percent stake in a young start-up, Stirrings, which made premium cocktail mixers. Two years later, it bought the entire company. “A Diageo or Bacardi or Schweppes, Coke, Pepsi — any of them could knock this off — and they have the marketing muscle to do it,” Mr. Duberstein said. “But I think most of them would probably prefer to buy it than knock it off.” Ms. Littlefield shrugs off a takeover as far in the future. “We’re focused on growing our brand, hitting our sales number every year and growing smart — not too fast — but growing fast enough that we’re still the first movers in the tea cocktail set.”Advertisement