AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie RogersThis week, newly unsealed court documents from 2005 showed that the comedian Bill Cosby admitted he obtained seven prescriptions for quaaludes in the 1970s and that he gave the pills to women he wanted to have sex with.His lawyers barred questions about whether the women knew they were taking drugs.Still, for the dozens of women who have accused Mr. Cosby over the decades of drugging and raping them, the documents offered at least some sense of public vindication after years of being ignored, hushed or discredited by the comedian’s legal and public relations teams.Here is what we know:What do the documents show? The papers, which were unsealed by a federal court judge in Philadelphia on Monday, were part of a 2005 civil case brought against Mr. Cosby by a staff member at Temple University who accused him of drugging and molesting her. That case was later settled. The documents show that Mr. Cosby admitted to obtaining quaaludes and giving them to at least one woman he then had sex with, though he suggested in his answers that she was a willing participant.How did his accusers react to the revelations? “Eventually it was going to come to light,” said the model Beverly Johnson, during a “Today” show appearance. “I’m just very happy for the victims that they have some sense of peace and validation.”In an essay published in Vanity Fair last fall, Ms. Johnson said that in the mid-80s, she was reading for a part in “The Cosby Show” at Mr. Cosby’s New York home when he gave her what she quickly realized was a drug-laced cappuccino. She recalls insulting him enough to infuriate him, and Mr. Cosby dragging her into the street and putting her in a taxi.Another accuser, Barbara Bowman, wrote an essay in The Washington Post in November asserting that Mr. Cosby sexually assaulted her repeatedly in the 1980s, starting when she was a teenager. On Tuesday, she told CNN she felt vindicated after years of being ignored or called a liar.“I knew some way, some day, something would break and the truth would come out,” she said. “The thing is that it’s remarkable what he masterminded. It was decades of deceit and manipulation, and not just with his victims but with the people around him.”How are his supporters in the business world reacting? The documents also appeared to accelerate the decline of Mr. Cosby’s public image, one that began last fall when a series of public allegations coincided with a widely seen video of the comedian Hannibal Buress calling Mr. Cosby a rapist.On Tuesday, Bounce TV and BET’s Centric Network pulled reruns of two of his old shows. Months earlier, TV Land dropped his reruns.Mr. Cosby’s co-star, Phylicia Rashad, has not addressed the topic since the documents came to light, though she has defended him in the past, once telling an entertainment website to “forget these women.”Mr. Cosby’s likeness was also being scrubbed from tourist destinations. On Tuesday evening, Walt Disney World said that a bust of Mr. Cosby would be removed. An online petition had been circulating calling for the bronze statue’s removal, according to the local NBC affiliate, WESH Orlando.Ben’s Chili Bowl, a popular restaurant chain in Washington that has had a close relationship with Mr. Cosby, appeared to be distancing itself. The owners, who have showcased Mr. Cosby at ribbon-cuttings and in a mural along the side of its main restaurant, told The Washington Post that they are still trying to figure out what kind of presence he will have at their newest location.What are his defenders saying? Two hosts of the talk show “The View” continued to defend Mr. Cosby on Tuesday, saying they needed more facts before they would pass judgment.“He’s the reason I’m on this panel in the first place,” Raven-Symoné, a “Cosby Show” alumna, said. “But at the same time you know, you need the proof.”In November, she used her Instagram account to defend herself against those who said Mr. Cosby had abused her, calling the accusations “truly a disgusting rumor that I want no part of.”Whoopi Goldberg, who jokingly said she was a former quaalude user, alluded to the popularity of the drug during the 1980s.“I don’t like snap judgments ’cause I’ve had snap judgments made on me,” Ms. Goldberg said. “In America, still, I know it’s a shock, but we’re innocent until proven guilty.”Not all of Mr. Cosby’s previous defenders have stood by him. The singer Jill Scott, who along with Ms. Goldberg earned a gesture of public gratitude from Mr. Cosby last year, had changed her tone by Monday:Advertisement