AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — Two senior senators — one Republican, one Democrat — proposed on Wednesday that the government significantly reduce the tax rate on United States corporate profits overseas, but with a mandatory transition tax on such profits to pay for an expansive highway and infrastructure program.The plan, by Senators Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, and Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, is similar to earlier proposals from President Obama and former Representative Dave Camp, once the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. The current chairman, Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, greeted the proposal warmly as well.“What’s exciting to me is we now have a bipartisan road map on how to do international tax reform to make the American worker more competitive,” Mr. Portman said. “This is not about the boardroom. This is about the shop floor.”But it faces stiff opposition from Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, who wants any changes to the international tax system to be part of a comprehensive tax overhaul that also helps domestic small businesses.Mr. McConnell said on Wednesday that he expected to bring up a highway bill after the Senate finished its current work on education. But with the last stopgap law to keep the federal highway trust fund afloat set to expire at the end of July, he said he was “skeptical” any deal would involve changes to the tax code, adding that he thought a comprehensive overhaul was best.“We obviously can’t do that in two weeks, and even some component, some subset of that that might be included in a larger, comprehensive bill is pretty hard to put together to meet the time constraints that we have on the highway bill,” Mr. McConnell said. “So it may be a good idea, but I don’t think it applies to the current situation.”The Portman-Schumer plan is more a framework than a legislative proposal. Some of the toughest details might not be worked out until the fall. But it does represent a convergence of thinking in both parties.The current system taxes overseas profits at 35 percent — minus taxes paid to the host country — once a business brings its income back to the United States. That has prompted American-based multinational companies to, in effect, leave trillions of dollars abroad, either in cash or as investments in foreign operations.Senators Portman and Schumer would largely end the taxation of those repatriated profits, instead imposing a light annual tax on overseas income, whether it comes home or not. That, they said, would end the incentive to leave profits abroad or reinvest them in overseas operations. Mr. Obama’s international tax plan would set that minimum overseas profit tax at 14 percent. The new proposal does not set a rate, but Mr. Portman said the administration’s was far too high.As a bridge to that system, the senators — like the president — propose a one-time tax on overseas profits that would be “deemed” repatriated, whether or not they come home. “Deemed repatriation” in exchange for a “territorial” system that primarily taxes corporate income generated in the United States is a deal that big business is willing to accept, Mr. Portman said.It is also one that could produce hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes for public works to improve the nation’s aging infrastructure. That is an idea that has gained currency in Washington as both the White House and Republicans drop talk of an increase in the federal gasoline tax. With Democrats raising pressure on Republican leaders to produce a long-term infrastructure and highway bill, advocates of the tax proposal say it will gain more steam.“As we get closer to the deadline, people are going to realize this is the only alternative,” Mr. Schumer said on Wednesday.The proposal also embraces what European nations have called a “patent box” — a lower business tax rate for income derived from intellectual property patents.Much of the move to cut corporate taxes reflects scrambling to replicate actions by foreign trading partners that have eased business tax rates and sought to lure investment. For Democrats, the attraction of the plan will be infrastructure funding and the closing of loopholes that have encouraged business investment abroad, while even encouraging some companies based in the United States to reincorporate in lower-tax countries. For Republicans, the plan promises lower tax rates and a simplified system.Republican leaders, however, are divided on how to proceed. Mr. McConnell would like to cobble together funding for a two-year highway bill that would push the tax reform debate into the next presidency, when he hopes that a Republican will occupy the White House. Mr. Obama has said any broad overhaul of the tax code should raise revenue for the government and must maintain higher tax rates on the rich.Mr. Ryan, however, says an overhaul of the business tax code cannot wait that long. Companies are already moving operations overseas where tax rates are lower. “Patent boxes” are the latest threat, especially now that countries establishing lower tax rates on intellectual property income are insisting that companies taking advantage of such rates move some of their research and development operations abroad.“Our tax code is costing us jobs, depressing wages and chasing companies out of the United States,” Mr. Ryan said in a statement welcoming the Portman-Schumer proposal. “Unfortunately, comprehensive reform is not possible under a president who wants to raise taxes on families and job creators. That does not mean, however, we cannot work to find common ground as a first step toward tax reform.”Mr. Ryan is pressing House Republican leaders to accept a stopgap highway bill that extends only to the end of the year. That would keep the pressure on to reach consensus on a tax plan now.Mr. Portman agreed.“The bottom line is, we have a huge problem” that cannot wait, he said. “Our seed corn for the future is being invested somewhere else.”Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.Advertisement