AdvertisementSupported byBy Danielle Ivory and Hiroko TabuchiAs the recall of defective airbags made by the Japanese supplier Takata has mushroomed and the death and injury toll has mounted, the company has come under increasing pressure to take more responsibility for its faulty products.At a congressional hearing last month, Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, urged a Takata executive to create a compensation fund for victims similar to one established by General Motors after its ignition switch recall.This week, in a letter from the company, Mr. Blumenthal got his answer: No.“Takata believes that a national compensation fund is not currently required,” Kevin Kennedy, an executive vice president, wrote in the letter, which was provided by Mr. Blumenthal’s office. Mr. Kennedy said the company would give the matter further study and would let the senator know if it changed its mind.Mr. Blumenthal said he was astonished and disappointed by Takata’s response.Takata’s airbag defect has been blamed for eight deaths and more than 100 injuries worldwide. Mr. Blumenthal said a compensation fund could help uncover more victims.“Takata seems unwilling to acknowledge its responsibility to help the victims and loved ones of victims that have suffered as a result of its lapses and gaps in performance,” Mr. Blumenthal said in a telephone interview.Mr. Kennedy said in his letter that given the limited number of claims filed and consolidated litigation in Florida that is allowing “efficient coordination” of claims, the company had decided that a compensation fund would not be necessary.Jared Levy, a spokesman for Takata, said on Thursday that the company was “committed to treating fairly anyone injured as a result of an inflater rupture.”“For that reason,” he said, “Takata has settled a number of injury claims and will continue to do so based on the facts and circumstances of individual cases.”In the case of G.M.’s defective ignition, the company initially said that 13 deaths had been tied to the faulty switch. But since setting up its compensation fund in April, the number of deaths tied to the faulty switch has soared to 121. Dozens more people who were injured, some grievously, have also received compensation. Victims who accept an offer from G.M. must waive their right to sue the company.In all, G.M. has set aside $600 million to compensate victims of the ignition defect.Takata, in its letter, tried to wave off a comparison to G.M., alluding to the fact that the automaker’s fund provided particular benefits for people who could not sue G.M. because it went through bankruptcy in 2009 and was shielded from lawsuits for events that occurred before it reorganized.Takata, though, is on shakier financial ground than G.M., which in February had $25 billion in cash, thanks in part to a $49 billion taxpayer bailout in 2009.As the airbag recalls have grown into the largest automotive recall in American history, Takata’s share price has plunged almost 44 percent in the last year. In May, the company suspended dividend payments to investors.Analysts have warned that considerable uncertainty remains over Takata’s finances. The supplier has said that it is unable to estimate the penalties from lawsuits filed by victims, and has not put aside funds to cover them, though it has earmarked about $775 million to deal with recalls.Takata insists that the worst of the defect’s financial fallout is behind it. In May, it said that it expected to return to profit in its current fiscal year, after losing almost $250 million the previous year on the steep cost of recalls.But the recalls continue. On Thursday, Honda announced a recall of 4.5 million vehicles, including Fit compacts and CR-V crossovers, in Japan and other markets outside North America. The recall did not include any cars in the United States, where about 32 million cars made by 11 automakers contain the defective airbags.Mr. Blumenthal said he had not given up and vowed to keep pressing the company to set up a compensation fund. But some victims of the faulty airbags, and their advocates, were not as optimistic.“It doesn’t surprise me that Takata has refused to step up and provide justice for all the individuals that they have caused horrible injuries to,” said Ted Leopold, a lawyer at Cohen Milstein in Washington.Mr. Leopold represents Patricia Mincey, who was paralyzed from the neck down after the Takata airbag in her 2001 Honda Civic inflated forcefully following a low-speed collision in June 2014.“Although Takata have admitted that the airbags were defective, they’ve continued to fight personal injury litigation,” Mr. Leopold said. “And they take litigation as akin to gamesmanship. This is far from a game.”Still, Rich Newsome, who represents eight people who claim to have been injured by faulty Takata airbags, said he would prefer to work outside any compensation fund, because such funds can result in less-than-transparent allocation of damages to victims. He also said that legal action against Takata was necessary to force the supplier to disclose more details on its handling of the defect.“If you have a compensation fund, it’s not going to give you that opportunity to really understand what happened, and to really understand the scope of potential safety problems for the public,” Mr. Newsome said. “You need litigation for that. You need to be able to put people under oath.”Advertisement