
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
JULY 9, 2015
Outside of China, the consensus among economists is overwhelming: The country’s efforts to prop up its plunging stock markets are doomed, the financial equivalent of King Canute trying to halt the incoming tide. But this being China, the conventional wisdom may turn out to be wrong.Faced with an unnerving sell-off in its major markets that at one point had wiped out nearly $3 trillion in value, China has announced a series of measures to stabilize stock prices, including the establishment of a 120 billion renminbi ($19.4 billion) fund for the country’s largest brokerage firms to buy stocks.So far, it’s hard to tell whether the government’s intervention is having much impact. After modest gains on Monday on news of the government’s plans, Chinese shares resumed their decline, with losses on Wednesday spreading from more speculative issues (many of which have now halted trading) to investor favorites listed on United States exchanges, like the online retailer the Alibaba Group and the Internet search company Baidu. But Chinese stocks rebounded on Thursday.
                The Chinese stock market rout has prompted the country’s government to act aggressively to stop the slide.            “From a Western market perspective, what China is trying to do cuts against everything we know that will work,” said Tsuyoshi Jin Saito, a founder and managing director of the Observatory Group, an economic and political advisory firm based in Washington. “But they don’t see this the way we do. People in the Western democracies tolerate volatility. But the failure of equity markets in China could translate into social unrest, which is a horrifying prospect for the Chinese leadership.”AdvertisementFor all the recent talk of liberalizing Chinese markets and opening them to more foreign investment, they remain as much political institutions as financial ones. It was Chinese government-sanctioned talk about the high returns offered by stocks that helped stoke the rally that caused valuations to double in just four months earlier this year. Many Chinese investors are now looking to their president, Xi Jinping, to make good on that encouragement and the implicit guarantee that came with it.AdvertisementNo one doubts that China could step up the effort. “The truth is, they have the resources to pour into this if they want to,” said Robert F. Whitelaw, chairman of the finance department at New York University’s Stern School of Business and the co-author of several articles on valuations in China’s stock markets. “The Chinese government’s wealth is huge. They have incredibly deep pockets.”Whether China’s effort at stabilizing the market succeeds is of far more than academic interest to global investors. Even though the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges are largely restricted to Chinese investors, the turmoil spilled over into other markets this week on fears that a collapse in China could set off a worldwide economic slowdown. (Although investors have also been preoccupied with the Greek debt crisis, the nearly $3 trillion that China’s markets have dropped is a number that dwarfs Greece’s gross domestic product.)James B. Stewart, on CNBC Friday, discussed how China’s efforts to slow the slide in its stock markets may succeed in bringing stability.Since the 2008 financial crisis, China’s relatively strong economic growth has helped propel a global recovery. And in theory, economic damage from even a precipitous market drop should be contained — Chinese stocks are still much higher than they were a year ago.But the Chinese economy was faltering even before its markets began plunging last month. Many investors are now worried that further declines in stock prices could depress Chinese consumer sentiment and demand, as well as growth prospects, with ripple effects around the globe. China is the world’s biggest importer of oil and other raw materials, and commodity prices and stocks of commodity producers were hit especially hard in the sell-off this week.Even in the market-oriented United States, stock prices are not entirely free from government influence. The Federal Reserve typically floods the market with liquidity and eases monetary policy at times of crisis and market panic. During the financial crisis, United States regulators banned the short sale of stocks of financial companies in the belief that short-selling, in which investors borrow shares hoping to sell them later at a lower price, drives down prices. (Subsequent studies concluded that the effort was futile.) China is also restricting short-selling.But the United States has never embarked on the direct purchase of stocks in an effort to prop up the entire market, and such measures elsewhere have been rare. Probably the closest parallel is Japan, where the central bank this year has been buying Japanese stocks in the form of exchange-traded funds, with a goal of investing three trillion yen ($24.8 billion) in the Japanese market annually. Thus far the effort seems to be succeeding; the Nikkei index has gained nearly 15 percent year-to-date.But Mr. Saito pointed out that a similar effort in Japan in the early 1990s also seemed to be working — until it didn’t. The Nikkei index hit a historical high of nearly 40,000 at the end of 1989, and the market’s price-to-earnings ratio was an astronomical 60. After the bubble burst, the market dropped 38 percent in 1990. By 1992, the index had dropped below 17,000, and the government began buying stocks. The Nikkei rallied for two years but then resumed its plunge, hitting a low of close to 7,000 after the financial crisis. (This week it traded just below 20,000.)AdvertisementChina now faces the consequences of its own bubble. The Shanghai stock market jumped 135 percent in just nine months and was trading at a post-financial-crisis high in June. At its recent peak, the price-to-earnings ratio was over 37, according to Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ, compared with a historical average of just over 10. The Shenzhen market valuation was even more elevated, with a price-earnings ratio in June of nearly 80. And many investors do not trust the reported earnings of Chinese companies, believing them to be inflated, especially those of smaller companies.The lofty valuations were accompanied by frenzied retail investing, heavy buying using borrowed money and people leaving their jobs to day-trade — all signs of a classic bubble. In recent months, trading volume has sometimes exceeded that of all the world’s other stock markets combined. And all of this was occurring during a pronounced slowdown in Chinese economic growth, growing concerns about a real estate bubble, and huge nonperforming loans on the books of Chinese banks.Not only does the Chinese government’s timing seem bad, but its target investment in stocks of just under $20 billion is also a negligible percentage of China’s total market value, according to Mr. Saito. Together, the Shanghai, Shenzhen and Hong Kong exchanges are the world’s second largest (behind the United States stock market), with a total market capitalization of over $9.5 trillion. By comparison, he said, Japan is believed to have spent about 0.8 percent of its market’s value in the 1990s, a much larger relative amount that was nonetheless insufficient.“From a purely economic perspective, all of this suggests China’s effort will fail,” Mr. Saito said.Still, he added, “China is a Communist regime that can ignore market rules.” Both he and Mr. Whitelaw agreed that if China hopes to succeed, it could substantially increase the size of its financial commitment, and at some point the market will respond.Because of the recent plunge, Chinese stocks are starting to look more reasonably valued, with the blue-chip Hang Seng index trading this week at a price-earnings ratio of just 11, according to Capital IQ. This week’s volatility suggested to some traders that Chinese stocks were finding a bottom for now, which might make additional government-backed buying more effective.There have been rumors that the government is readying a much larger fund for direct stock purchases. “The Chinese government doesn’t care about losing a few billion dollars here or there,” Mr. Whitelaw said. “They’re trying to protect investors and maintain stability. Who wouldn’t want that?”But Mr. Saito warned that the best China can hope for, even with major intervention, is to buy time while it waits for the country’s economic fundamentals to improve. If they don’t, the Chinese market, like all stock markets, will eventually fall to the level that reflects investors’ expectations for future earnings.“Ultimately, not even China can defy the laws of economic gravity,” Mr. Saito said.A version of this article appears in print on July 10, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Why China’s Stock Market Rescue Efforts Just Might Work.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »