AdvertisementSupported byStandard DeductionBy Victor FleischerThe private equity industry has killed the idea of taxing carried interest as ordinary income. Several times. And yet it returns, relentlessly, like a “Game of Thrones” reanimated wight from beyond the wall.Representative Sander Levin, Democrat of Michigan, and Senator Tammy Baldwin, Democrat of Wisconsin, introduced legislation on June 25 that, like earlier legislative proposals, would tax carried interest at ordinary income rates. Under current law, the share of an investment fund’s profits earned by private equity and other private fund managers, known as carried interest, is often taxed at lower capital gains rates.The new legislation, which is similar to earlier proposals passed in the House of Representatives, has a slim chance of passing on its own in this Congress. But there is still a possibility that the tax change could be included as part of a package to partly offset the cost of changes to the corporate and international tax provisions that the tax-writing committees in Congress have been focused on.The value of carried interest as a budget item depends on the revenue estimate, or “score,” that the bill receives from economists at the Joint Committee on Taxation, a nonpartisan group of economists, lawyers and accountants that serves both houses of Congress. Government economists have estimated that taxing carried interest as ordinary income would raise less than $2 billion a year, limiting the proposal’s appeal as a revenue generator. The latest bill has not received a new revenue estimate, but there is no reason to think that a new estimate would differ much from the previous ones.I suggested last month that the government’s earlier estimates were off by an order of magnitude. My back-of-the-envelope estimate, based on public data from the Internal Revenue Service, was that such a move would raise $180 billion over 10 years. Douglas Holtz-Eakin, the former director of the Congressional Budget Office, writing in The Huffington Post, called my estimate “outlandish.” He did not explain why.I can think of two reasons for the large gap between my estimate and the government’s: uncertainty about the amount of carried interest earned each year and uncertainty about the response to the tax change.The first reason that estimates may differ is that the government simply doesn’t know how much carried interest is earned each year. Carried interest is not reported as a separate item on tax returns.I suggested in a recent column that the I.R.S. collect this information from investment partnerships. Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, has written a letter asking the Treasury Department to change the tax forms to provide this information to the government. In the meantime, one can draw inferences from the limited I.R.S. data that is available. Perhaps the government economists draw different conclusions than I do from the same data.One way to do a reality check is simply to count. While most tax information from private investment fund managers is kept private, a few fund sponsors are publicly traded and provide information in public securities filings.Take the four largest publicly traded private equity fund managers: Apollo, Blackstone, Carlyle and K.K.R. As shown in the table below, these companies together earned $24 billion in carry over the last three years, or $8 billion a year. If three-fourths of that amount is capital gain, which seems reasonable based on tax forms provided to investors, and the tax rate on carried interest were increased by 20 percentage points, the tax change would raise $1.2 billion a year in revenue just from employees and investors in these four companies alone.See this table on how I reached this estimate:It is hard to understand how the government can estimate increased revenue of only $1.8 billion a year if just four companies would have to pay an extra $1.2 billion a year. Add in the rest of the private equity industry, as well as carried interest from real estate, venture capital and hedge funds, and the government estimate looks impossibly small.Others agree that there is a lot of potential revenue in taxing carried interest. Consider a paper written in 2007 for the Real Estate Roundtable, a trade association. The author estimated that before accounting for behavioral responses, “the potential increased taxation of carried interest would be roughly $50 billion (for real estate) and $130 billion (over all) over the next decade.” The author of the paper: the same Mr. Holtz-Eakin who called my estimate “outlandish.”Perhaps my disagreement with Mr. Holtz-Eakin stems from the second possibility for a lower revenue estimate: the anticipated behavioral response to the tax change. Might one somehow get from an estimate of $10 billion to $20 billion a year to the government’s estimate of $1 billion to $2 billion without making heroic assumptions about tax avoidance?The Joint Committee on Taxation does not discuss the economic models that it uses for specific revenue estimates. But we can get some idea of how government economists think about the issue by reviewing recent research.A government study conducted jointly by the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation and published in 2012 used historical data to estimate generally the behavioral response to changes in the capital gains rate. The study found that investors in pass-through entities like partnerships and trusts pay close attention to tax rates, meaning that they are less likely to sell capital assets that have appreciated in value if capital gains rates are higher.The study measured the responsiveness of different kinds of investors to changes in tax rates, reporting a coefficient of almost negative two for pass-through entities. Broadly speaking, this measure of responsiveness, or “elasticity,” means that a 20 percentage point increase in the capital gains tax rate would decrease the rate of capital gains realizations in partnerships and trusts about 40 percent.The implication is that it would be largely self-defeating to increase capital gains rates on investment partnerships because many investors would defer realizations or adjust their investment strategies to avoid paying tax. As the authors of the government study write, the data on long-term capital gains realizations from partnerships and trusts show a “markedly high sensitivity” to tax rates. “Possibly,” they write, “those results are associated with partnerships in the finance industry, such as hedge fund managers, that may be extremely sensitive to tax changes.”I have no doubt that when investors hold capital assets in a partnership or trust, say shares of stock in the family business put away in a trust for a grandchild’s inheritance, realization rates are highly sensitive to tax. But the same is not true for carried interest.The problem with relying on traditional econometric models of capital gains tax elasticity is that carried interest is not a capital asset. It is labor income, the amount of which happens to be determined by reference to a capital asset. Because carried interest is labor income, the usual techniques for avoiding capital gains taxes don’t work. (Labor effort in this context, by contrast, is mostly inelastic, unless you think thousands of fund managers are ready to turn in their passports and give up American citizenship.)The usual technique for avoiding a tax on capital gains is to hold on to an appreciated capital asset, deferring the tax gain until the asset is sold later. If possible, many investors try to hold on to appreciated assets until death; heirs receive a step up in basis that wipes out income tax liability on the asset.A fund manager doesn’t have this option. In private equity, carried interest — the manager’s share of fund profits — isn’t earned until an investment is sold. Few fund managers would defer the sale of a portfolio company to avoid tax. Better to pay some tax than risk a decline in the value of the portfolio company and lose the carried interest allocation altogether.Moreover, fund managers work hard to maximize the fund’s internal rate of return, a metric used to judge the performance of fund managers. Delaying a sale to avoid personal taxes would hurt that return. And because the economic burden of the carried interest tax falls on the fund managers, not the investors, employing a deferral strategy to reduce personal taxes would breach the manager’s fiduciary duty to act in the best interest of investors.Another option for financial investors holding appreciated stock is to use a hedging strategy to mitigate the risk that the investment will decline in value, while continuing to hold the underlying stock to defer the tax hit. This isn’t a realistic option for fund managers. Investors would frown at the idea of fund managers personally taking a short position in the portfolio companies that the fund manages on their behalf.All said, I think the government estimates reflect a misunderstanding about how easy it would be to avoid a higher tax rate on carried interest. Still, I recognize that a debate about revenue estimates is not going to go viral or help a politician get elected.Revenue can drive the tax legislative process in the short run, but it is our values and ideals that shape tax policy in the long run. The best case for changing the tax treatment of carried interest has always been grounded in arguments about fairness and distributive justice, not revenue.Victor Fleischer is a professor of law at the University of San Diego, where he teaches classes on corporate tax, tax policy and venture capital and serves as the director of research for the Graduate Tax Program. His research focuses on how tax affects the structuring of venture capital, private equity and corporate transactions. Twitter: @vicfleischerAdvertisement