By LIZ MOYEROCT. 26, 2015
Massachusetts’ securities regulator is taking aim at the brokerage division of the fund giant Fidelity Investments, accusing it of allowing unregistered investment advisers to make trades in Fidelity customer accounts over the last decade, generating fees for themselves and the brokerage.In an administrative case filed in Boston on Monday, the Massachusetts secretary of the commonwealth, William F. Galvin, said that Fidelity Brokerage Service had acted as a “haven from regulatory oversight” for unregistered advisers.The activity, uncovered by the regulator over the course of an investigation, is “emblematic of a systemic failure to detect and prevent unregistered activity,” Mr. Galvin said in his complaint.In a statement Monday, a Fidelity spokesman, Adam Banker, said: “We can assure you that we take very seriously the trust investors place with us and our obligation to manage our business in accordance with all relevant laws and financial industry regulation. We do not believe that Fidelity has violated any laws or regulations in connection with this matter.”AdvertisementMr. Galvin says Fidelity allowed unregistered investment advisers to use its trading platform to conduct investment advisory business over a decade starting in 2005. The unregistered advisers had clients submit trade authorizations to Fidelity to give them trading access to their accounts.AdvertisementTrade authorization forms listed the unregistered advisers as “self-employed.”According to Fidelity’s policies, as described in Mr. Galvin’s complaint, customers are allowed to delegate the authority to someone else to conduct transactions in their account. Fidelity does not analyze the relationship between the account owner and the authorized third party and does not put restrictions on who can be named, except for minors.“It raises issues of how sophisticated the customers were,” says John Tumilty, a lawyer at Morse Barnes-Brown Pendleton in Waltham, Mass.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Galvin says his office’s investigation spurred Fidelity to begin a review last year of its internal risks from allowing unregistered investment advisers to make transactions for customers.Fidelity’s own analysis found 93 Massachusetts residents who had 15 or more trading authorizations over Fidelity customer accounts, the complaint says. Since January 2015, 13 Massachusetts unregistered advisers, including the adviser at the heart of the complaint, have had their trading authorizations revoked because of their lack of registration with state securities regulators.Mr. Galvin’s complaint highlights one unnamed unregistered adviser who managed 19 accounts totaling $9 million in assets. He was last registered with the state as a broker-dealer agent in 2004. The unnamed adviser had his own personal brokerage accounts at Fidelity and was an active trader with a background in finance. Fidelity employees had conversations with this adviser over the years where they told him to register. In at least one instance trades in his personal accounts were made before customer trades, the complaint says.Fidelity gave the unregistered adviser free trades because of all the customer referrals he made to the firm, and invitations to events such as a professional hockey game.Fidelity processed approximately $732,271.83 in payments to this unnamed unregistered adviser from seven Fidelity customers to compensate him for his advisory services.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Fidelity Focus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.