AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsThe consumer products giant Procter & Gamble has agreed to sell its portfolio of 43 beauty brands to the beauty products maker Coty for $12.5 billion, the companies announced on Thursday.Included in the deal are professional salon and retail hair products, like Nice ’n Easy and VS Salonist, as well as cosmetics and fine fragrances from Gucci and Dolce & Gabbana.P.&G. said in a statement that it hoped to structure the sale as a reverse Morris trust — typically a tax-efficient spinoff that would create a separate entity that would then merge with Coty.The deal is part of P.&G.’s efforts to shed more than 100 brands and focus on about 10 core product lines, like Tide. In November, the company agreed to sell the battery company Duracell to Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway in a $4.7 billion stock deal.“These businesses and brands have historically grown faster and have been more profitable than the balance,” P.&G.’s chief executive, A. G. Lafley, said about the company’s core group of brands. “We expect these 10 categories to grow and create value as we focus.”The beauty portfolio is expected to be the largest chunk of assets that P.&G. will spin off.“There’s probably more straggler stuff that they’ll do, but it’s quite small and not a lot of impact on the business,” said Ali Dibadj, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company.Some of P.&G.’s top-selling beauty brands include Wella, the European hair care line, as well as Clairol hair dyes and Vidal Sassoon products, Mr. Dibadj said.Coty, owned by the European firm JAB Cosmetics B.V., sells fragrances, skin products and cosmetics from brands including Calvin Klein, Marc Jacobs and Chloé. Coty had been set to appoint a new chief executive, Elio Leoni Sceti, the former head of the frozen foods maker Iglo Foods, earlier this year. But the company changed its mind in June, right when rumors about a deal with P.&G. began to swirl, saying that it had decided to keep its interim chief executive, Bart Becht, and that “leadership continuity” was “critical” as the company transitioned to a new strategy.“In our mind, that actually increased the probability that the rumors were correct,” Mr. Dibadj said.The deal with P.&G. will be Coty’s entrance into the hair care market. It tried to expand its portfolio significantly in 2012 with an ultimately unsuccessful $10.7 billion bid for Avon Products.Coty’s brands also include OPI nail polish, a ubiquitous nail varnish found in drugstores and salons across the country, as well as other pharmacy beauty staples like Rimmel London and Sally Hansen.Coty’s stock closed down nearly 4.7 percent, or $1.48, to $30.04, while shares of P.&G. fell 0.4 percent, or 33 cents, to $80.66.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.Advertisement