By JONATHAN SOBLEJULY 9, 2015
TOKYO — Honda on Thursday announced another multimillion-vehicle recall to replace airbags supplied by Takata, this time targeting 4.5 million vehicles in Japan and other markets outside North America.The Japanese automaker said it was recalling 1.63 million Fit compacts and CR-V crossovers in its home market. It withheld details of the recalls outside Japan, pending formal notices to each country’s safety regulator, except to say there were no new recalls in the United States or Canada, the epicenter of the crisis so far.With the announcement, Japan now accounts for about one-quarter of the roughly 40 million vehicles affected by what has become the world’s most extensive auto-safety recall.The Japanese supplier Takata admitted this year that faults in its airbag inflaters could cause them to explode violently when they deploy, endangering a vehicle’s occupants. The defect has been blamed for eight deaths and more than 100 injuries worldwide.AdvertisementIn Japan, automakers have described the recalls as precautionary, and no injuries have been reported. But one carmaker, Nissan, described a near miss this week.In the course of reporting, The Times obtained video showing the potentially dangerous consequences of mishandling Takata’s airbags. Millions of vehicles with the airbags have been recalled worldwide.Nissan said on Wednesday that it had confirmed the first case of a Takata-made air bag’s bursting during a collision and sending shrapnel into the vehicle’s cabin. The episode involved the passenger-side airbag of a 2001 X-Trail sport utility vehicle. The passenger seat was unoccupied, but hot shards from the ruptured inflater smashed the passenger-side window and embedded in the dashboard, causing a small fire, Nissan said.AdvertisementThe X-Trail model involved was recalled in 2013, but it had changed hands several times and the current owner had not received a recall notice, according to Japanese news media reports.Even for owners who have been made aware of recalls, the huge number of vehicles involved has created long waiting times. According to the most recent Japanese Transportation Ministry data, about one-quarter of the vehicles recalled for the airbag problem through March had not been repaired by that point. Millions of additional vehicles have been added to the recall list since then.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, Takata’s reclusive chief executive, Shigehisa Takada, made his first public appearance since the crisis gathered momentum more than a year ago. He offered an apology but said there was no evidence that fundamental design flaws were at the root of the problem. Some experts have suggested that ammonium nitrate, the compound the company uses as an explosive propellant in its inflaters, has the potential to become unstable.Still, as of last month, Takata said it had pinpointed the cause of faults in only about 10 million of the affected inflaters. It identified that cause as manufacturing error, mainly careless handling of inflater components at two North American factories.The recall on Thursday was the first initiated by Honda since its new chief executive, Takahiro Hachigo, took charge last month. Mr. Hachigo succeeded Takanobu Ito in a transition that was announced in February. The change was widely interpreted as an effort to draw a line under a series of recent quality problems.An article on Friday about Honda’s expansion of a recall of vehicles containing potentially defective airbags made by the Takata Corporation described the propellant in Takata’s inflaters incorrectly. The compound, ammonium nitrate, is a solid, not a gas.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.