JULY 10, 2015
More than a few boutique investment banks have gone public over the last decade. Now Houlihan Lokey, one of the oldest, is planning to take that step.The firm filed for an initial public offering on Friday afternoon, looking to join rivals like Evercore Partners, Greenhill & Company, and Moelis & Company in having stock that it can use for acquisitions and pay for its bankers.Independent and boutique investment banks, which lack the huge trading operations and lending arms of traditional Wall Street firms like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, have enjoyed a rise in work over the past five years amid the merger boom.That has been somewhat reflected in those banks’ stock prices. Shares in Evercore Partners have climbed 130.6 percent over the past five years, and Lazard has risen 83.9 percent. The stock of Moelis & Company, the last big independent firm to go public, has risen 11 percent since it began trading in 2014.AdvertisementFounded in 1972 and headquartered in Los Angeles, Houlihan Lokey is one of the older boutique firms, focusing on providing advice about mergers, capital-raising efforts, and corporate debt restructuring. The firm is known as one of the top bankruptcy advisers around, often working with creditors in their negotiations with troubled companies.AdvertisementIt has also become a major adviser on shareholder activism campaigns, in which hedge funds or other investors publicly call for changes to corporate strategy.Going public will make Houlihan Lokey independent from Orix, a Japanese conglomerate that bought a controlling stake in it in 2006. Orix is expected to sell some of its stake.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over the past three years, at the least, the investment bank appeared to enjoy strong financial performance. It earned nearly $80 million atop $680.9 million in revenue in its most recent fiscal year, which ended March 31.That profit is up 30 percent from the same time a year ago, while its revenue was up 15 percent.Friday’s prospectus also disclosed how much the firm’s top management made in compensation. Irwin N. Gold, the bank’s executive chairman and the founder of its restructuring practice, took home $2.5 million in the 2015 fiscal year. Scott L. Beiser, its chief executive of 12 years, reported about $3.5 million.When it goes public, Houlihan is expected to have two classes of stock that will keep control within insiders, according to the prospectus. Class A shares, which will be sold to the public, will have one vote apiece, while Class B shares, which both Orix and employees will own, will have 10 each.The firm said that it plans to list its shares on the New York Stock Exchange, under the ticker symbol “HLI.”The offering will be led by Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Goldman Sachs.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.