AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshA standards board for actuaries that is seeking ways to defuse a public pension crisis heard on Thursday about two changes that seemingly everyone could agree on, but many more where there was no consensus at all.“Everything I look at, I have found to be a study in obfuscation,” said Bradley D. Belt, a former pension regulator, who spoke near the end of a four-hour hearing by the Actuarial Standards Board.From 2004 to 2006, Mr. Belt led the federal government’s pension insurance program, which covers company pensions but not those offered by states or cities. He acknowledged that he was not an actuary but said he had spoken with many of them who often told him they were pressed by politicians into reverse-engineering their calculations to achieve a predetermined result.“That can’t be good public policy,” said Mr. Belt, who is now the vice chairman of Orchard Global Capital Group.He called for additional disclosures by states and cities, including the current value of all pensions promised, calculated with a so-called risk-free discount rate, which means translating the future benefits into today’s dollars with the rate paid on very safe investments, like Treasury bonds. This is to reflect the fact that public pensions are also very safe.Actuaries currently use higher rates, which complies with their professional standards but flies in the face of modern asset-pricing theory. Changing their practice to resolve this is one of the most hotly contested proposals in the world of public finance, because it would show the current market value of public pensions and probably make it clear that some places have promised more than they can deliver.Some at the hearing tried to persuade the board that “risk-free” calculations were being pushed by political operatives with an anti-union agenda.“Across the country, our members are unfortunately at the mercy of officials who are targeting their retirement security for political gain,” said Bailey Childers, head of the National Public Pension Coalition.But Robert C. North Jr., who retired last year as chief actuary of New York City’s pension system, said he had published “risk-free” pension numbers every year since 2003 without incident.“Often my trustees were upset by the numbers,” he said, “but the conversations that emanated led to a better understanding of the risks being borne.”Calculating future pensions with a risk-free discount rate reflects the fact that they are backed by powerful constitutional and statutory pledges and that public workers bear little risk that they will not be paid.The Actuarial Standards Board’s public hearing on Thursday was rare, reflecting mounting concern about the promises made to state and municipal retirees and the risk that actuaries might be blamed for fiscal disasters in places like Detroit, Chicago and New Jersey, where the promises now far exceed the money set aside. Puerto Rico recently reported that its main pension fund has only seven-tenths of a penny for every dollar the commonwealth has promised its public workers.Actuaries work for pension systems, insurance companies and other places where risks must be accurately forecast and hedged. For public pension systems, they calculate how much money must be set aside in advance to be sure there is enough to pay all the pensions due years in the future.As the population ages, many places are coming up short, and Mr. North was among those who thought actuaries and their methods bore some of the responsibility.“I don’t think the actuaries are entirely innocent on how we got to where we are today,” he said. He said that in some cases, actuaries were picking assumptions, like mortality rates and investment returns, that served the interests of elected officials. The profession’s code of conduct requires actuaries to serve the public.Others who spoke at the hearing expressed frustration that actuaries were being blamed when they had no control over whether or not elected officials followed their instructions.“I’m a little short on suggestions for things that would make plan sponsors listen to what we say,” said David T. Kausch, chief actuary at Gabriel, Roeder Smith & Company, a firm that works primarily with government plans.That firm has handled Detroit’s municipal pension system for decades, and it was sued after Detroit went bankrupt by city workers and residents who accused it of professional negligence. They complained, among other things, that the firm based calculations on the assumption that the city payroll was increasing when in fact Detroit was collapsing and its payroll was shrinking.The firm has denied the allegations, which it says “are based upon a complete misunderstanding of our role in serving our clients.”Mr. Kausch did not mention Detroit but said his firm’s goal was to develop a schedule of contributions that was “manageable” for its government clients.But others expressed concern that “manageable” contributions meant contributions that were too low to cover the pensions’ true cost.“There’s no real policeman in the public sector to make sure the ‘right things’ are being done,” said Mr. North. Under current circumstances, he said, it was no longer enough for actuaries to think that all they had to do was supply a contribution amount every year.Gordon Latter, chairman of the American Academy of Actuaries’ Pension Finance Task Force, told the board that actuarial methods were moving pension plans further and further away from reality.“When interest rates go down from 8 percent to 2 percent, these plans get very, very expensive,” he said. “No sector of the economy can escape the hard rules of the capital markets. Billions of dollars around the world trade on these numbers. What makes United States public pension plans so special that they don’t have to adhere to these rules?”Members of the Actuarial Standards Board did not make clear how they would bridge these differences. But despite the many disagreements on display, those who testified seemed to identify two current practices that could be eliminated.One was a technique for lowering pension contributions in cases where a government has sought to save money by creating a new tier of smaller pensions for the workers it plans to hire in the future. This method, sometimes called the “ultimate entry age cost method,” in effect pretends that all those future workers are already working. That allows the employer to contribute less.The other actuarial practice being frowned upon is “perpetual negative amortization,” a condition that means more and more of a pension plan’s costs are being pushed into the future, out of sight.Paul Angelo, an actuary with the Segal Company, said he was “not a big fan” of those two methods and proposed getting rid of them, even though he acknowledged they are widely accepted.“When the public looks at what you’re doing and sees this, they say, ‘You can’t be serious!’” he said.Advertisement