AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningIn examining the fight over the Securities and Exchange Commission’s use of administrative proceedings to pursue violations of the securities laws, a question arises: How did we ever get here?An area of the law thought long settled and, indeed, something of a backwater in the securities enforcement apparatus, has been attacked by defense lawyers and now on Capitol Hill as fundamentally unfair.Representative Scott Garrett, Republican of New Jersey, has introduced a bill called the “Due Process Restoration Act of 2015,” that would substantially curtail the S.E.C.’s use of administrative proceedings. In a statement, Mr. Garrett said that “in recent years the agency has transformed into a veritable judge, jury, and executioner with its blatant overuse of their in-house courts.”Since its inception in 1934, the S.E.C. has had the authority to impose sanctions on violators who come within its purview, such as brokers and investment advisers, without having to go to court. Even as Congress provided it with greater authority to seek substantial monetary penalties, including fines up to three times the gain from insider trading, the agency was still limited to using the administrative process for only a small range of cases.All that changed with the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, which authorized the S.E.C. to pursue any case in which it seeks a penalty in an administrative proceeding. This was the holy grail for the agency, opening the door to pursuing insider trading and faulty disclosure actions before its own in-house judges rather than filing in a Federal District Court, like it had done for the first 75 years of its existence. Armed with its new authority, the S.E.C. took a more aggressive stance by bringing many more administrative proceedings, resulting in a torrent of criticism and legal challenges.The administrative process, which had seemingly worked well for years, did not suddenly break down. Perhaps it was just that these hearings finally got enough attention as more defendants found themselves thrown unexpectedly before the S.E.C.’s in-house judges — if nothing else, lawyers hate changes in procedure.The S.E.C. continues to defend the use of the administrative process to hear cases, despite all the criticism being heaped on it. In a recent meeting with the agency’s investor advisory committee, Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the enforcement division, said that although many had attacked the use of administrative proceedings, he has not heard complaints about them from investors. Of course, investors are only rarely accused of violations that might bring them into an administrative hearing, so it is unlikely they would complain about them.Yet, the criticism appears to have had at least some impact on how the S.E.C. approaches the issue. Griping about the limited rights to obtain evidence and the short time frame provided for resolving factual issues have been addressed in a small way by proposed amendments to the agency’s Rules of Practice to liberalize the process. But as I noted in an earlier column, those changes are unlikely to blunt the objections of the agency’s many critics because they are at best small steps in responding to criticism about truncated rights.Moreover, the S.E.C. may be caving in, at least temporarily, by filing more cases in federal courts. In the last three months through the end of September, it brought only four out of 36 contested cases before as administrative proceedings, according to The Wall Street Journal.The latest salvo comes in Mr. Garrett’s bill, which would effectively eliminate the use of the administrative forum, at least in contested cases. He is the chairman of the Capital Markets and Government Sponsored Enterprises Subcommittee of the House Financial Services Committee, which has jurisdiction over the agency, so the proposal will certainly draw further attention to the issue.Rather than trying to reform the administrative process, the legislation takes a straightforward — if rather heavy-handed — approach that effectively discourages the S.E.C. from choosing an administrative proceeding over filing the case in a federal court. First, if the agency brings charges seeking a cease-and-desist order along with a civil penalty before an administrative judge, then the defendant has 20 days to request its termination. Once the case is dismissed, the S.E.C. would have to file a complaint in court to pursue the matter.A second means to keep cases out of the administrative forum is by raising the burden of proof to show a violation. Unlike an action in court, the S.E.C. would have to establish by “clear and convincing evidence” the defendant’s misconduct before the administrative judge, a more difficult standard to meet.Mr. Garrett’s proposal does not address issues about the fairness of the process so much as make it sufficiently unattractive that it would keep cases away from administrative judges. The S.E.C. is more likely to seek the benefit of the lower “preponderance of the evidence” standard used in a court action because they will be easier to win, even though that forum allows for greater discovery of evidence by defendants and the right to have a jury decide the case.The bill’s title, claiming to restore due process to administrative proceedings, gives the impression that the S.E.C. somehow corrupted the system by surreptitiously sending cases before its judges with the goal of subverting the rights of defendants. But that is hardly the case because it was Congress that created the process for administrative agencies to adjudicate matters, something done throughout the federal government.The Dodd-Frank Act gave the S.E.C. the authority to choose the forum for almost any case, so if there is a culprit here it is Congress, not the agency. It can be argued that the S.E.C. pushed too hard in bringing more cases before its in-house judges, but using the tools provided by Congress to its advantage should not have come as any great surprise.The S.E.C. is not alone in using administrative judges to hear cases, with the federal appeals courts providing a measure of oversight to ensure the evidence supports any finding of a violation and imposition of a civil penalty. If that system somehow deprives respondents of a measure of due process, then can’t the same be said for other agencies — like the Federal Trade Commission and banking regulators — that use the same means to police the industries in their jurisdiction?The S.E.C.’s administrative process worked reasonably well for a number of years, with the benefit that certain types of violations could be addressed more quickly when heard by an in-house judge rather than going into court, where cases can drag on for years.If it was a mistake to give the S.E.C. such broad authority to bring administrative cases, then using an indirect measure like Mr. Garrett’s proposal to raise the burden of proof that will keep almost every case out of the administrative process seems like a blunderbuss solution to a narrow problem.Congress can squarely address what types of cases work best in the administrative process, and whether parties who could be compelled to pay significant monetary penalties and be barred from their chosen profession should be afforded more rights in those proceedings. Simplicity may be a virtue, but an approach to a complex issue that effectively eliminates administrative proceedings for securities violations may not be the best solution.Advertisement