AdvertisementSupported byIn DebtBy Stephen J. LubbenThe big banks have filed another round of resolution plans for winding themselves down in a controlled fashion if they run into serious trouble, or so-called living wills. Only small pieces of the overall plans are available, but this bit is intended to give the general public some idea of the progress that has been made toward preventing banks from being “too big to fail.”I spent the week focused on JPMorgan Chase’s submission. JPMorgan is a challenge when it comes to ending “too big to fail,” given its heft and especially given its reluctance to deviate far from its precrisis business model.If the audience is the public at large, the JPMorgan plan opens with a sentence sure to scare off all but the sturdiest readers: eight lines long, with a barrage of defined terms, desperately calling out for some commas and periods.The opening line of the second section, where the substance begins, is no more promising:The Firm maintained its fortress balance sheet, with an estimated Basel III Advanced Fully Phased-in Common Equity Tier 1 capital (“CET1 capital”) ratio of 10.2% as of December 31, 2014, compared with 9.5% as of December 31, 2013.Well, O.K., then.It is going in the right direction, I guess. But there is no mention of what that ratio should be under Basel III (at least 9.5 percent) or the Fed’s stricter rules (11.5 percent).The plan then proceeds to describe a hypothetical bankruptcy case with so many assumptions and qualifications that it is hard to know what to make of it. It gives the whole exercise something of the flavor of a 1980s law and economics article — “assume a world with one creditor, where management perfectly represents shareholders.”The JPMorgan submission suggests that the assumptions are driven by the setup demanded by regulators. A quick look at Bank of America’s plan, however, shows no similar assumptions. Of course, Bank of America’s plan might just be more vague on this point.Both banks assume that only their holding company will file for bankruptcy. JPMorgan concedes the possibility that its main bank might have to enter a receivership but expresses hope it won’t be so. All other subsidiaries are assumed to remain afloat.The primary mechanism for recapitalizing operating subsidiaries, in both banks’ plans, is forgiveness of intercompany debts. Interestingly, there is no discussion of whether this would be permissible under the bankruptcy code. Prebankruptcy forgiveness might be attacked as a fraudulent transfer, and post-bankruptcy forgiveness would require court approval in the face of the debtor’s fiduciary duty to creditors – the holding company’s creditors, that is.The new plan is most useful in providing information about JPMorgan’s structure. Two pages of entities are listed as central to the bank’s operations — including one curiously identified as being incorporated in “United Kingdom, Ireland.”Geographical blunders aside, the chart again drives home the multi-jurisdictional nature of global finance. Later charts show the crucial linkages between legal entities, linkages that again often cross international boundaries.To take one example, a major part of JPMorgan is identified as a British corporation that is a subsidiary of the United States depository bank, which itself is then a subsidiary of JPMorgan. All depend on an Indian company for daily operations.Clearly, the process of simplifying corporate structures still has some way to go. But some additional thinking needs to go into the resolution process.At present we are presented with two unattractive options. On the one hand, we can assume (unrealistically) that all pain can be easily contained in the holding company. On the other, we can face the unattractive mess that is an entity-by-entity resolution of a large, global bank.Better count on that increased level of common equity for now.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.Advertisement