By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJULY 10, 2015
Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, in a speech on Friday in Cleveland, said the recovery remained incomplete.WASHINGTON —  Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said on Friday that she expected the Fed to raise its benchmark interest rate this year as the domestic economy continued to gain strength.“Based on my outlook, I expect that it will be appropriate at some point later this year to take the first step to raise the federal funds rate and thus begin normalizing monetary policy,” she said in a speech to the City Club of Cleveland.Ms. Yellen’s remarks, while similar to earlier comments, are the latest indication that Fed officials think the economy has shaken off a slow start to the year, and that they see little evidence that problems in China and Europe are significantly impeding domestic growth.The Fed’s optimism remains measured, however. Ms. Yellen, noting that six years have passed since the recession ended, said the nation’s recovery remained incomplete.Advertisement“I think a significant number of individuals still are not seeking work because they perceive a lack of good job opportunities, and that a stronger economy would draw some of them back into the labor force,” she said.AdvertisementEven as she affirmed the Fed’s plans to raise rates this year, she also emphasized that the Fed planned to retreat slowly from its stimulus campaign by raising interest rates more gradually than in the past.Ms. Yellen and most members of her policy-making committee say they expect prices to rise more quickly as a growing economy continues to create new jobs. They also expect less resistance from falling oil prices and a stronger dollar.On Friday, Ms. Yellen pointed to the improving health of the labor market as a reason for confidence. She has long focused on the slow pace of wage growth as evidence that the Fed needed to continue its stimulus campaign. Now, she said, it was possible that an acceleration in wage growth had begun.“Some tentative hints of a pickup in the pace of wage gains may indicate that the objective of full employment is coming closer into view,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Yellen did not specify when the Fed intended to start raising rates, describing the moment only as “reasonably close.” Many analysts say they think it’s most likely the Fed will start to raise rates in September. The central bank has held short-term rates near zero since December 2008 to stimulate economic growth.Eric Rosengren, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and a strong proponent of the stimulus campaign, struck a more cautious tone in a Friday speech in Idaho. If growth meets expectations, he said, “beginning the policy normalization process later this year might be appropriate.”The inflation outlook is a key focus of the Fed’s deliberations.Mr. Rosengren is not a voting member this year of the Federal Open Market Committee, but his concerns are shared by at least a few of those who do vote. (Voting on policy decisions rotates among the 11 Fed presidents outside New York, with four at a time given yearly stints.) They argue that inflation has been more sluggish than the Fed predicted, and so the Fed should be more cautious in deciding when to start raising rates. This view also has the support of some outside experts, including the International Monetary Fund, which has called for the Fed to wait until next year.Ms. Yellen also underscored that the Fed, by itself, could not assure the nation’s prosperity. Noting the slow growth of productivity, she said spending and investment by other arms of government had a role to play. “Policies to strengthen education and training, to encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, and to promote capital investment, both public and private, could all potentially be of great benefit in improving future living standards in our nation,” she said.AdvertisementMs. Yellen and Mr. Rosengren, like other Fed officials who have spoken publicly in recent weeks, did not appear particularly concerned about international events, including the talks between Greece and its creditors.“While these negative developments have been intensely painful for the Greek people, to date it is not obvious that these events will significantly alter the expected path of the U.S. economy,” Mr. Rosengren said on Friday.Ms. Yellen, while noting that Greece’s problems remain unresolved, said that the economic outlook for Europe as a whole appeared to be brightening.A version of this article appears in print on July 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Yellen Sees Fed Raising Rates in ’15 .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.