
Book Entry By                     
JONATHAN A. KNEE

JULY 10, 2015
It turned out that John LeFevre was not only never a Goldman Sachs employee, he didn’t work at any investment bank when he started the notorious anonymous Twitter account @GSElevator — which stands for Goldman Sachs elevator — in 2011. What’s more, he had not worked in New York at all for almost a decade, although he previously worked his way up to a midlevel position on the Citigroup debt syndicate desk. For all but a brief period after his analyst training program, Mr. LeFevre was relegated to a series of international Citigroup outposts. So when his identity was revealed, it surprised no one that his lucrative book contract was canceled.More surprising was that, within a matter of weeks, a new publisher, Grove Atlantic, emerged ready to provide its imprimatur to Mr. LeFevre. What, precisely, could the author — who now describes himself as running “a Twitter site that aggregates commentary that is supposed to embody the 1 percent” — have to tell us in a book? The new publisher also appeared to struggle with this question as it ultimately pushed back the release date from last fall to this month. The answer, which is revealed in the too many pages of the profoundly uninteresting “Straight to Hell: True Tales of Deviance, Debauchery and Billion-Dollar Deals” (Atlantic Monthly Press), is nothing much at all.The only reminders in “Straight to Hell” of the Twitter account that gave Mr. LeFevre any relevance in the first place are the pages of sample tweets that introduce each chapter and an unconvincing and self-serving four-page “author’s note” about the controversies that preceded publication. The rest is a tired and dated memoir of his infantile high jinks as a young banker.Even if you think that having a contest to see who can run into a restaurant and scream a genitalia-oriented request the loudest is hysterical, this sort of thing has been covered previously in better books like “Monkey Business,” by John Rolfe, which came out before Mr. LeFevre became a banker. The predominantly Asian locales in the book are a distinction from others in the genre, but this only serves as an excuse to increase the misogyny and racism to unbearable levels.AdvertisementWhat the book does make clear for the first time about @GSElevator is that the account is not meant to be satirical but rather aspirational. Mr. LeFevre’s lack of both irony and self-awareness is on display with his selection of the first Twitter message in the chapter dividers: “If you can be good at one thing, be good at lying … because if you’re good at lying, you’re good at everything.” There is plenty of evidence in the book and in the events leading to its publication that this tweet represents the author’s personal credo.Simon & Schuster dropped the book, according to its brief public statement, because of information that was not shared by Mr. LeFevre when the deal was signed. Although the “author’s note” contends that his “personal details were irrelevant” and that the account was simply meant as “the concentrated reflection of a culture and a mentality,” Mr. LeFevre did lie to reporters about working at Goldman. Mr. LeFevre brags in the book that he got the decision to suspend him from Choate Rosemary Hall, a private preparatory school in Connecticut, overturned by arguing that he had been guilty of “unauthorized collaboration” rather than outright cheating. And the book is filled with unapologetic lies told to clients, colleagues and friends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of the activities at Citigroup described by Mr. LeFevre, if true, are undoubtedly illegal. Even assuming the statute of limitations has not expired, however, the bank can take comfort in knowing that it is unlikely that any prosecutor would rely on Mr. LeFevre as a witness. And readers can be forgiven for wondering where Mr. LeFevre might have embellished his story to make up for how little he actually had to say — which becomes more apparent with every page.The publication in 2012 of Greg Smith’s New York Times op-ed piece, “Why I Am Leaving Goldman Sachs,” and subsequent book, “Why I Left Goldman Sachs: A Wall Street Story,” led to mixed reactions and even some sympathy for Goldman. Indeed, the most damaging “revelation” of that book was the fact that someone as undistinguished as Mr. Smith could find a place at Goldman for a dozen years. Similarly, although never an employee, Mr. LeFevre repeatedly trumpets that Goldman once made him a job offer (later withdrawn for what Mr. LeFevre euphemistically describes as a “contractual issue”).The steady decline in interest in investment banking by the best graduates of top schools is well documented. The onetime allure of investment banking was based not just on the money, but on the prestige. Young graduates are now more likely to be on the defensive for taking a position in a profession that has drawn so much scorn. The good news is that too many talented people would head into banking just to impress their family and friends. The bad news, indirectly but starkly on display in both Mr. LeFevre’s and Mr. Smith’s books, is that having so little talent drawn to the industry seems destined to worsen many of its reputational issues.AdvertisementBanking does serve a useful social function — and not just helping businesses to attract capital to grow and thrive. Most of us are better off when chief executives receive thoughtful, independent financial and strategic advice about the critical decisions that will affect the lives of not just their shareholders, but employees and communities. If only there were a silver bullet that would lead the right young people to careers in banking for the right reasons. In the absence of such a magical solution, investment banks would do well to attract better bankers the old-fashioned way: having them earn it.Jonathan A. Knee is a professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »