By NICOLA CLARKJULY 10, 2015
PARIS — Ryanair said on Friday that it would accept a takeover bid for its 29.8 percent stake in the Irish flag carrier, Aer Lingus, from the parent company of British Airways, removing the final hurdle to a combination that analysts say will bolster Ireland’s position as hub for trans-Atlantic travel.Acceptance of the offer from International Consolidated Airlines Group, or I.A.G., signals an end to a tense corporate dance between Ryanair, which is based in Dublin and is Europe’s largest discount carrier, and Aer Lingus. Over the past decade, Ryanair has made three unsuccessful offers for Aer Lingus, with the aim of expanding into the full-service air travel market and acquiring lucrative takeoff and landing slots at major European airports like Heathrow in London.“We believe the I.A.G. offer for Aer Lingus is a reasonable one in the current market and we plan to accept it, in the best interests of Ryanair shareholders,” Michael O’Leary, the Ryanair chief executive, said in a statement. He said Ryanair would vote to accept the offer at a July 16 meeting of Aer Lingus shareholders.I.A.G. — which also owns Iberia, a Spanish full-service airline, and Vueling Airlines, a low-cost carrier — made a sweetened offer in February for Aer Lingus, after two previous bids were rejected late last year. That offer, at 2.55 euros a share, values Aer Lingus at about €1.36 billion, or about $1.5 billion.AdvertisementAt that price, Ryanair would expect to make about €400 million from its stake, which analysts have estimated to be roughly the same amount the carrier spent acquiring its Aer Lingus shares from 2006 to 2008.AdvertisementMr. O’Leary said Ryanair expected to make a “small profit” on the sale.I.A.G. is one of the world’s largest airline companies, carrying more than 77.3 million passengers in 2014. Together with its partners in the Oneworld airline alliance, it already controls roughly one-fourth of the air travel market between the European Union and North America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I.A.G.’s offer for Aer Lingus still faces scrutiny from European Union competition regulators, who will most likely seek concessions before approving the combination, analysts said.Regulators could order I.A.G. to reduce its presence at Heathrow, where British Airways already owns 51 percent of the takeoff and landing slots. The carrier could also be asked to reduce frequencies on certain routes between Ireland, Britain and Spain, as well as some of its trans-Atlantic services.Ryanair’s decision comes less than two months after the Irish government, which owns 25 percent of Aer Lingus, accepted I.A.G.’s offer after securing a number of concessions. Those included the right to retain a “golden share,” giving Dublin a veto over any future sales of Aer Lingus’s 23 Heathrow landing slots.Mr. O’Leary said Ryanair would also support the government’s veto right.In addition to freeing up cash, the sale of its Aer Lingus stake would bring an end to a costly legal battle for Ryanair in Britain, where the carrier has been fighting a 2013 order by the competition authorities that it reduce its holding in Aer Lingus to no more than 5 percent. Ryanair had threatened to take the case against a forced sale to Britain’s Supreme Court on human rights grounds.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.