By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 26, 2015
The IntercontinentalExchange said on Monday that it had agreed to buy the Interactive Data Corporation, a big publisher of financial data, for about $5.2 billion, the exchange’s biggest takeover since acquiring the New York Stock Exchange.The offer from ICE, as the IntercontinentalExchange is known, is roughly 70 percent in cash and the remainder in stock.ICE beat out a rival exchange operator, Nasdaq, and the financial data publisher Markit in a highly contested auction for Interactive Data, known as I.D.C.The company, nearly 50 years old, sells reams of data on the pricing of securities and other financial products to more than 5,000 financial institutions, including big investment banks, mutual funds and hedge funds. Its competitors include Bloomberg L.P. and Thomson Reuters.AdvertisementThe company, citing data from Burton-Taylor Consulting, says it is one of the top five biggest providers in the $26.5 billion market for financial data, with an estimated market share of about 3.5 percent.AdvertisementI.D.C. was taken private five years ago by the investment firms Silver Lake and Warburg Pincus, which paid about $3.4 billion in what was one of the bigger leveraged buyouts of 2010.Both firms were drawn by the company’s high percentage of recurring revenue from subscriptions and the growing importance of data in a number of businesses, especially in the financial world.Since then, the two firms said they had invested more than $100 million in improving the company’s technological platform. That has included both upgrading I.D.C.’s servers and other systems and offering new products, like more sophisticated intraday pricing.According to the prospectus for an initial public offering filed this year, I.D.C.’s sales have grown since its leveraged buyout. Revenue reached $939.2 million last year, up 8 percent from 2011.The company lost $36 million last year. As of June 30, the company carried about $2.6 billion worth of debt.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Silver Lake, which owns about 41 percent of the company, and Warburg Pincus, which owns about 37 percent, had pursued a “dual track” process of exploring both an outright sale or an initial public offering. The two had been seeking to value I.D.C. at more than $5 billion through the stock offering.Although many private equity firms have chosen to list their holdings on stock markets, a chill has descended on the I.P.O. markets over the last two months, making it more difficult for private companies to raise as much money as they had hoped.At the same time, strong interest in I.D.C. from potential strategic owners prompted the investment firms to focus about a month ago on selling the company outright, according to people briefed on the matter.AdvertisementAmong those that showed an appetite was ICE, which bought NYSE Euronext for $8.2 billion almost three years ago.“With ICE, we have the long-term capital, strategic support and collective set of relationships to further grow our company and evolve our platform in the rapidly changing capital markets landscape,” Stephen Daffron, I.D.C.’s chief executive, said in a statement.Silver Lake and Warburg Pincus expect to reap a return of about 2.5 times to three times their original investment, according to people briefed on the matter.“It has been our privilege to partner with I.D.C.,” Mike Bingle, a managing partner at Silver Lake, and Jim Neary, a managing director at Warburg Pincus, said in a joint statement. “I.D.C. is thrilled about its future with ICE, and its continued leadership in financial data services.”The deal is expected to close by year-end, pending approval from regulators.Broadhaven Capital Partners, Wells Fargo and the law firms Sullivan & Cromwell and Potter Anderson & Corroon advised ICE. Wells Fargo, National Association and Bank of America Merrill Lynch provided financing.I.D.C. received advice from Goldman Sachs, Credit Suisse and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ICE to Buy a Supplier of Financial Information.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.