AdvertisementSupported byBy Conrad De AenlleSudden leaps in bond yields during the second quarter caused prices to experience scary downdrafts. That may lead investors to wonder whether this is a time for buying or selling. The answer for some managers is: Yes.Long/short bond funds hold a mix of positions, some that benefit when prices rise and others when they fall. The approach may be used to anticipate performance discrepancies between types of bonds based on a call on some broad factor like the direction of interest rates or currency movements. The long and short holdings can be in bonds with different maturities: high yield versus investment grade or foreign versus domestic.Another tactic is to focus on one niche, often high-yield, and execute pair trades, buying corporate bonds thought to have strong prospects and selling others that are substantially alike — same industry, similar maturity, similar credit rating — but that the manager holds in lower regard. Pair trades create little net investment in any area and, depending on what else it owns, the fund can have net market exposure that is positive, negative or neutral.If your goal is to limit risk in your portfolio, analysts and financial advisers encourage caution before giving long/short bond funds a try. After migrating from the hedge fund universe into mainstream mutual funds, they are a fairly new vehicle. Morningstar identifies 24 funds, including just three with track records beyond five years. It is unclear how they will perform in different conditions, especially when the love affair with riskier debt cools off — the very development that prospective buyers may want immunity from.“Given where we are in the credit cycle, people are starting to think about what happens when high-yield bonds sell off,” said Jason Kephart, an analyst at Morningstar who specializes in alternative investments. Long/short funds “can offer protection against that, but none of them have been around for any significant credit sell-off. That’s why we’re neutral on them. The question is whether they can outperform a long-only credit fund over a full market cycle.”Richard Saperstein, chief investment officer of HighTower Treasury Partners, has similar questions. Not only is there little history on which to evaluate the funds, he said, but they also tend to have high costs, creating an especially heavy burden with interest rates low and bond income meager. Several funds have annual expenses exceeding 2 percent, and many are sold with upfront sales charges, too.The funds can be expensive to operate for several reasons. Their asset bases are small, finding bonds ripe for moving in one direction or the other requires extensive analysis, and some funds borrow heavily to have more money to invest and, if all goes well, amplify gains.Do long/short funds deliver sufficient returns to compensate for their high costs and complexity? It depends on what they are compared with. The average one was up 1.14 percent in the first five months of 2015. That is better than the 0.85 percent gain of the average nontraditional bond fund, the category in which Morningstar places long/short funds, but below the 2.41 percent gain for high-yield funds. Long/short lagged the other groups over one and three years and was between the two, albeit with a smaller number of funds, over five years. Long/short funds have held up fairly well in part because many have sold short sparingly or selectively, or both, especially in stronger segments of the market like high yield. That has been a wise policy during a long bull market that still may be in progress.“It’s humbling and challenging to make money shorting” high-yield debt, said Mark Kiesel, manager of Pimco Credit Absolute Return, one of the larger long/short funds and one of the better performers over one and three years. “We haven’t been short much because we have a positive view on the market.”Mr. Kiesel finds that picking bonds to buy and sell requires the same skills as picking stocks, including an understanding of dynamics within companies, industries and the economy. His long bond positions lately have been in companies involved in energy production and other economically sensitive areas like lodging and building materials. He also favors specialty finance companies as a play on consumer spending.He is either shorting or avoiding bonds of companies involved in mining, which he expects to suffer as Chinese imports subside, and in retailing and oil field services. The portfolio also contains bets on continued declines in the euro and yen against the dollar.No matter how a company makes a profit, he considers ones that are the targets of shareholder activists to be good shorting candidates. Shareholders tend to lobby for corporate policies that produce better deals for themselves at the expense of bondholders, Mr. Kiesel said.Cedar Ridge Unconstrained Credit, a much smaller fund that has performed well since it was introduced in late 2013, emphasizes domestic high-yield and investment-grade corporate issues. The fund is usually net long, although it can be net short at times, and often maintains pair trades, said Jeff Hudson, a co-manager.The portfolio, like Pimco’s, has long positions in specialty finance, but it owns bonds of mining companies, a niche where Pimco has been short. Cedar Ridge Unconstrained has been short in technology; telecommunications; heavy industry, including chemicals; and in consumer discretionary, the sector that encompasses retailing and carmaking. As of Feb. 28, the latest date for which details were available, its largest short position, apart from Treasury instruments, was a 2043 Ford bond with a 4.75 percent coupon.The consumer shorts, Mr. Hudson said, are “a call on some big companies that aren’t growing as much as some people think they are.”The fund also maintains a short Treasury bond position, something that it or its predecessor hedge fund has used for most of the 11 years of the long/short strategy’s existence. It is not a bet on higher interest rates, but an effort not to bet on rates at all. The short is intended to neutralize the rate risk inherent in the fund’s other holdings so that the only exposure is to credit risk.“We use Treasuries to isolate the portfolio and be rate-agnostic as best we can and be less susceptible to rate moves,” Mr. Hudson said.For true believers in forecasts of a fresh round of Federal Reserve rate increases, one factor underpinning recent nervousness in the bond market, Mr. Saperstein of HighTower contends that there are easier ways to guard against them than long/short funds.“The more elegant way to protect against rate risk is to reduce duration in a portfolio,” he said, meaning to own bonds with shorter maturities, which makes them less sensitive to changes in rates. “It’s a lot easier to sell longer-term paper to reduce overall price risk.”Shorting Treasuries in an otherwise substantially long bond portfolio, especially one concentrated in less creditworthy issues, also opens up the possibility of having the worst of both worlds in case of an event similar to the 2008 collapse of the high-yield market, even a milder version, Mr. Kephart of Morningstar warned.“If there’s a big credit sell-off,” a long/short fund “is going to fall less than a long-only fund, but Treasuries would do well in a rush to safety,” he said. Long/short funds are no substitute for funds that hold safer, higher-quality instruments, in his view, and should be considered only for holding riskier bonds in a potentially safer way.“These funds are good for diversifying a high-yield portfolio,” he said. “They can make sense provided you go for a good manager of a good fund at a fair price — ideally a cheap price.”Advertisement