By CONRAD DE AENLLEJULY 10, 2015
Stocks traded in an extremely tight range for nearly all of the second quarter as the world awaited two drawn-out events that seemed increasingly likely to occur: the first Federal Reserve interest rate increase in nearly a decade and a full-fledged Greek debt default.From the verge of historical highs, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index plunged in the last few days of June, erasing all gains for the second quarter and leaving it barely ahead for the year. The index ended down 0.23 percent, at 2,063.11.Like the S.&P. 500, the trajectory of stock funds changed abruptly toward the end of the second quarter. The average domestic equity fund tracked by Morningstar was down 0.13 percent. International stock funds did marginally better, rising 0.78 percent, in the face of lingering discord and uncertainty surrounding Greece.Owners of stock funds that specialize in Europe may have lost sleep, but they generally didn’t lose money; the average one rose 1.97 percent in the quarter, helped substantially by weakness in the dollar, which increases returns on assets denominated in foreign currencies. The euro was especially strong, rebounding from a steep drop in the previous year or so.AdvertisementThe rise in yields for bonds with long maturities sent the average long-term bond fund down 6.41 percent, with long-term government funds off 8.22 percent. The average taxable bond fund of any type fell 0.66 percent, and municipal bond funds lost 0.95 percent.AdvertisementEvents in Greece took an unusual turn in the early hours of June 27 when the people who invented democracy decided to practice it in a way that unsettled investors. Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras called a referendum on whether to accept a proposal from creditors — one that was due to lapse by the time the vote was held last Sunday and that the creditors immediately took off the table — to provide further aid in exchange for further austerity by Greece.Greece emphatically voted “no” in the referendum, producing declines in stocks and fresh uncertainty about what would come next there and how far the repercussions might spread.A few days earlier, Greece had failed to make a payment to the International Monetary Fund, but as the third quarter began, it was hard to tell if the country had actually defaulted. That is because negotiations were continuing and default in modern finance has become more of a protracted process.The eventual Fed rate increase has become a process, too — or at least the preparation for it has. The central bank has been trying to make its intentions clear while Wall Street still devotes enormous effort trying to determine what those intentions are.One source of uncertainty is that economic activity has been so tepid that raising rates may seem unreasonable. But factors such as feeble productivity and an older population may mean that the difference between a moderately accelerating economy and sluggishness are not all that great. Against such a backdrop, bottlenecks in the work force and inflation flare-ups are possible with even modest pickups in growth, a prospect that may be spooking the Fed.“We’re at the point in the recovery where overheat risk becomes an issue,” said James W. Paulsen, chief investment strategist at Wells Capital Management, part of Wells Fargo.In Mr. Paulsen’s view, the labor market is already very tight. “We’re at full employment,” he said, “and because the supply of labor is growing so slowly, even slowly growing demand puts pressure on prices and interest rates.”AdvertisementThe serenity and resilience of stocks for most of the quarter contrasted with weakness and volatility in bonds, even among putatively safe instruments like Treasuries and their German equivalents, known as bunds. The 10-year Treasury bond yield ended June at 2.35 percent, up from 1.92 percent three months earlier, and 10-year bunds went from 0.18 percent to 0.76 percent. Bond prices move in the opposite direction as yields.Mr. Paulsen, like many investment advisers, expects the Fed to make its first increase in September. There is also a broad consensus that when it comes to economic growth, slow is the new fast. But there are differences of opinion regarding inflation risk and how aggressively the Fed is likely to respond to it.Ethan Harris, co-head of global economics at BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, foresees a quarter-percentage-point rate increase in September and at every second monetary policy meeting after that through 2016, for a total of six moves.“There’s no question that the economy has less ability to grow than in the past,” Mr. Harris said. “The peak of the productivity boom is behind us.”As for what is in front of us, Fed officials are mindful of heightened inflation pressures, he said, but factors such as a strong dollar, which depresses the prices of imported goods, are keeping them subdued. He sees little reason for the Fed to start a full-scale attack on an enemy that remains out of sight. He conceded, however, that “as the Fed goes further down the road and these tougher questions come up — that maybe the economy can’t sustain solid growth very long without creating an inflation problem — they may have to switch gears” and tighten policy rapidly.A worrisome inflation catalyst for some is accelerating wage growth. The unemployment rate, 5.3 percent in June, is at a seven-year low, and new claims for jobless benefits are hovering near a 15-year low.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Assuming the data continues to be solid, particularly wage inflation, the Fed has plenty of foundation to move in September,” said Rick Rieder, chief investment officer of fundamental fixed income at BlackRock. He expects nevertheless that the Fed will take a wait-and-see attitude after that and that it has “no preordained trajectory toward rates.”With both yields and pickings slim, Mr. Rieder recommends bonds issued in some of the less indebted emerging economies, such as India and Mexico, and intermediate-term municipal bonds. But he finds stocks better bets than bonds.“Equities have been beneficiaries of the low-rate environment and will continue to be,” he predicted.AdvertisementMr. Harris of Bank of America agrees, advising a strategy heavy on cash and stocks, for which he envisions “a couple of years of decent profit growth,” and light on bonds. “I don’t think you want to be in the bond market,” he said. “Wait for yields to rise, then go back in. Risk is high now.”In foreign stocks, he likes Japan and Europe, prefacing his second choice with an immense caveat: “if we get beyond Greece.”Tim Guinness, chief investment officer of Guinness Atkinson Funds, declared himself “quite bullish about Europe” as it emerges from a multiyear recession, and he finds Asia a better value than other regions, with one glaring exception.The Shanghai composite index of Chinese stocks rose 14.12 percent in the second quarter, although it had been up about 34 percent before a plunge that lasted through much of June. The market had more than doubled since the middle of 2014, supported by heavy central-bank stimulus as China makes the transition from an export-dominated economy to one led by consumer demand.As that continues, the pace of economic growth will diminish, much as it did in Japan in the 1970s, when the same evolution occurred, Mr. Guinness said. Japanese stocks soared through the 1980s, even as growth slowed, he noted, and he expects further gains for China, too, after it corrects a bit more to ease speculative froth.It is speculation in American stocks that concerns Brian D. Singer, manager of the William Blair Macro Allocation fund. He calls the diminished price swings this year, combined with heavy borrowing and ultraloose monetary policy, “a recipe for disaster.” If interest rates were not being depressed by the Fed, fair values for stocks would be nearly 15 percent lower than they are, he estimated.“There’s a lot of inappropriate risk-taking,” Mr. Singer said. “As we look out, our uncertainty is growing. We have less risk in our portfolios than at any time in the last four years.”He prefers stocks in Europe and emerging markets, and, like many of his peers, he is avoiding bonds. Some of his biggest bets, he added, are in currencies. He is short the euro, Swiss franc and Australian dollar and long the yen and Southeast Asian currencies.Mr. Paulsen of Wells Fargo likewise foresees a 15 percent decline in American stocks as the adjustment is made to a climate of rising rates and mediocre economic growth. He suggested that investors who wanted to endure the decline own a mix of economically sensitive sectors, including energy, materials and heavy industrials, and defensive ones like consumer staples and utilities.Advertisement“I think we will have a correction before we regroup and have another buy-and-hold run,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2015, on Page BU11 of the New York edition with the headline: Slow-Motion Events Sway the Markets .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.