AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim GrayIn the second quarter, the eurozone quivered, as Greece sparred with its creditors. In China, the stock market sank. Yet markets in the United States managed to chug along without much damage from Europe or China, with small-cap and growth stocks, in particular, showing gains and propelling mutual funds that focus on them.A commitment to buying what Richard H. Gould, a portfolio co-manager, called “pure growth companies” produced two second-quarter standouts for Turner Investments — Turner Small Cap Growth Fund and Turner Emerging Growth Fund. Emerging Growth invests in stocks with a broader span of market capitalizations, Mr. Gould said. Small Cap Growth typically buys only companies with market capitalizations of less than $2 billion. For Turner, growth investing means seeking ventures with “high revenue and earnings growth,” Mr. Gould said. The funds’ managers do not mind buying stocks that may look expensive, based on their price/earnings multiple, if they are confident about the underlying growth.The same team of managers and analysts oversees both funds, but the names in the portfolios overlap by only about 30 percent, said Jason D. Schrotberger, a portfolio co-manager. As of June 30, only two of each fund’s top 10 stocks — LDR Holding and Diplomat Pharmacy — were held in both, Mr. Gould said. LDR makes devices for spinal surgery, while Diplomat is a pharmacy benefit manager for patients with chronic diseases.Another recent common holding is Zoe’s Kitchen, a purveyor of Mediterranean-style cuisine like hummus and Greek salads. Zoe’s, based in Plano, Tex., hews to the strategy that has made Chipotle popular: selling fast food that is fresh and served with information about its origins. This dining trend “is being driven by the millennials’ desire for food in which they know the ingredients,” Mr. Schrotberger said. “It can be fattening, but it’s nutritious, and you know what’s in it.” Zoe’s has about 150 locations, and the Turner managers expect that it could grow more than tenfold and come to rival Chipotle’s current size.In the second quarter, Small Cap Growth returned 11.13 percent, while Emerging Growth returned 7.53 percent, compared with a total return of 0.28 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. The net expense ratio for Small Cap’s shares is 1.25 percent; for the investor shares of Emerging Growth, it is 1.4 percent. The average actively managed United States stock fund tracked by Morningstar has an expense ratio of 1.23 percent. Craigh A. Cepukenas, lead portfolio manager of the Artisan Small Cap Fund, also hunts for growth companies, but the lodestar of his search is profits. “We believe that stocks follow profits over any reasonable period,” he said. “So what we’re looking for is companies where profits can cycle up.” Mr. Cepukenas said two things drive rising profits — internal engines like new management or a new product and external ones like favorable changes in regulation or demographics. “We make the most money when we find the intersection of those two,” he said. An example of a company where the engines are firing together is DexCom, he said, which was recently the fund’s top holding, at 6 percent of assets. “They’re the market leader in continuous glucose monitoring,” helping people with diabetes manage their blood sugar, Mr. Cepukenas said. “We have a huge Type-1 diabetes problem in the U.S., and an even bigger Type-2 problem is emerging.” Type-1 diabetes is often called juvenile diabetes, while Type-2 is typically called adult onset and can be linked to obesity. DexCom recently received approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a blood-glucose monitor that sends signals wirelessly to a portable receiver and then to a smartphone. And the company is working on a monitor that can transmit directly to a smartphone, Mr. Cepukenas said. Health care is one of four themes woven throughout the Artisan fund. The others are information technology, industrial technology and consumer discretionary companies. Mr. Cepukenas said that about 70 percent of the fund is usually dedicated to these sectors. But just as important for the fund’s performance is what it does not own, he said. “We stay away from deep cyclical stocks. We’re underweight financials. We don’t own materials, and we have minimal energy exposure.”Another distinguishing feature is low turnover. Growth investors are known for trading frequently, but the Artisan fund, with an annual turnover ratio of 40 percent, sells only about a third of its holdings each year. The fund, with an expense ratio of 1.21 percent, returned 7.61 percent in the second quarter. While the stewards of the Turner and Artisan funds seek growth, Scott L. Barbee, the manager of the Aegis Value Fund, is satisfied with a bargain. Mr. Barbee said he sleuths mostly among small-cap stocks and likes to buy them cheap. He calls himself a “contrarian deep-value investor.” “When the consensus is negative on companies, we really dig into those and look for ones where the consensus is wrong,” he said. One way Mr. Barbee identifies the unfairly maligned is by poring over financial statements to find undervalued assets. Sometimes the combination of unloved and undervalued leads him to turnarounds. Take Ruby Tuesday, the restaurant chain based in Maryville, Tenn. It is being retooled by a chief executive — James J. Buettgen — who previously worked for Darden Restaurants, owner of the Olive Garden and Capital Grille chains, among others. “This was a family-run company, and we think there’s low-hanging fruit in terms of running the company more efficiently, like reducing food costs and better management of labor hours,” Mr. Barbee said.Ruby Tuesday also has the sort of asset trove that Mr. Barbee seeks. “One of the ways we get involved in restaurants and retail is when they own a lot of real estate,” he said. “And Ruby Tuesday owns a significant number of its own stores.” Property can give downside protection; in theory, the stock should be worth at least as much as the real estate. Mr. Barbee started Aegis Value in 1998 and has managed it since. Over that time, it has returned an annualized average of 9.3 percent, though at times its returns have been volatile. Over the last 12 months, for example, it has lost 25.9 percent. The fund, with a net expense ratio of 1.46 percent, returned 8.45 percent in the second quarter. Advertisement