AdvertisementSupported byEssayBy John SchwartzThere is nothing more American than making money off the needs of others. I’m not talking about war profiteering or selling people on prospects that aren’t real. You don’t have to do those nasty things. Just provide something others really need that you have in abundance. That’s called a win-win. Wall Street even has a technical word for it: arbitrage.One item is currently in very short supply in the western part of our country: water. With a California drought leading to tough water restrictions, that liquid is an asset. And here in the Northeast, where I live, we’ve got lots of it. You don’t have to be a marketing genius or even understand climate change to see an opportunity in water. It could make a boy like me rich.The problem is knowing where to invest to get the payoff. It is possible to find mutual funds and exchange-traded funds that are dedicated to water, and, as always, there are esoteric options for big-time institutional investors. I’m not one of those, so I reached out for some help.I called Simon Gottelier, a senior portfolio manager with Impax asset management, a company that manages $1.8 billion in water-sector investments. “There’s tremendous opportunity,” he said, though he was unable to discuss specific investments because of securities regulations. He did say that the biggest play of the moment is infrastructure: investing in water systems for communities. In California, that could conceivably mean buying bonds like the ones that helped pay for the $1 billion desalination plant in Carlsbad, Calif. Infrastructure is one of my favorite things, because I am simply that kind of nerd. And with the economic recovery, more municipal water systems can be expected to issue bonds for expansion, desalination and even what is delicately referred to as water reuse, which is actually the process of piping water out of a sewage treatment plant and piping into another plant that cleans it, making it safe for drinking. The thought is unpleasant, but the taste is fine — I’ve had some. So I asked Mr. Gottelier about my own idea. How about selling bonds for a water pipeline that stretches all the way from the Northeast to the far West. Why not? Oil pipelines crisscross the country already. Why not water? And, more to the point, why not start the pipeline in my basement? This is the brilliant part: Every house I’ve ever bought has had a wet basement. Over the years, I have paid for more sump pumps than I care to remember. It has been said that global warming is making places hotter and wetter, and so basements in the Northeast may be increasingly prone to flooding. I prefer to think that I’m a kind of real estate dowser. Mr. Gottelier answered with earnest politeness. “The problem is, it’s very expensive when you factor in the cost of pumping — and therefore, energy,” he said. “Water has to be constantly treated as well.” I got a sense that he was backing away from the phone a little.The more I heard, the more I understood why a big water pipeline hadn’t happened already: People like him were just missing the big picture.But I pressed on. I explained about my basement and told him about one place we used to own that was so wet, before we put in the French drain and sump pump, we had mushrooms growing down there.“At least you should sell the mushrooms,” Mr. Gottelier said, sounding perhaps just a wee bit patronizing. I explained that after identifying those mushrooms on the Internet, I decided they were not edible. (And, really, a guy who will drink treated sewage water is up for pretty much anything.)Mr. Gottelier said that my basement water would not be a good source for the pipeline in any case, since it was probably full of bugs and bacteria. “It requires treatment,” he said. I was thinking of those floating things as a plus, a kind of free protein with your water. But, no. I thanked my new friend for his help, hung up the phone and tried to regroup. I considered buying a house in California on the assumption that wherever I spend money on a home, the water will magically appear, and so I’ll save on the transportation costs. My special brand of optimism must be contagious, because a few minutes after our conversation, I got an email from Mr. Gottelier. It was brief but gave me renewed hope.“It occurred to me that one solution for transporting the water would be to dehydrate it to make it lighter.”Soul mate! Here’s an idea with promise. If you need me, I’ll be in the lab.Advertisement