
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
JULY 10, 2015
Cozy corporate boards, populated by a chief executive’s pals, are an all-too-common hazard of investing in a publicly owned company. But rarely do stockholders get an inside look at the ties between board members and the chief executives they are supposed to supervise.No wonder. Consider a document recently filed in a 2013 shareholder lawsuit against directors of Dish Network, the television provider based in Englewood, Colo., which contends that the company’s co-opted board cost its investors at least $800 million in one recent episode.The document also provides some seriously good, well, dish on personal and family ties between Charles W. Ergen, the company’s co-founder and chief executive, and two Dish directors the company identifies as independent in its regulatory filings.Lawyers for Dish shareholders found, for example, that the family of Tom A. Ortolf, a director who is head of CMC, a private investment firm, has taken numerous hiking trips with Mr. Ergen’s family. Another fun fact unearthed in the case: Four invitees to a 17-person bachelor party for Mr. Ortolf’s son were Ergen family members.AdvertisementThen there’s the note Mr. Ortolf sent after Mr. Ergen offered two Super Bowl tickets. “I love you man!” the director exulted.AdvertisementGeorge Rogers Brokaw, a managing partner at Trafelet Brokaw & Company in New York, is another independent Dish director with personal ties to Mr. Ergen. Mr. Brokaw’s family hosted members of the Ergen clan at their homes in New York City and the Hamptons, the lawsuit says. Mr. Brokaw also provided advice on a job search to one of Mr. Ergen’s children. Cantey Ergen, Mr. Ergen’s wife and a Dish co-founder who is also a director at the company, is godmother to Mr. Brokaw’s son.Independent directors are supposed to be independent. What’s more, Mr. Ergen controls Dish through his ownership of supervoting shares, leaving outside shareholders especially reliant on the company’s directors to hold its management accountable, the lawsuit says.But neither director had disclosed the extent of their relationships with Mr. Ergen and his family before they were sued. The associations came out in depositions and other discovery.Robert Toevs, a Dish spokesman, said its board would not comment about the shareholders’ accusations. He referred me to a lawyer for the directors, who declined to comment.The directors’ side of the story emerged in court papers filed Thursday on their behalf. In that filing, their lawyers dismiss the argument that the board members’ family associations with Mr. Ergen and his clan make them beholden to him.“Friendship, even ‘close’ friendship, does not undermine independence under the well-established law,” the filing states.The close relationships between Mr. Ergen and his directors might not have mattered so much if not for a private investment he made in 2012 that could generate personal profits for Mr. Ergen of perhaps $800 million.AdvertisementAfter shareholders sued, contending that the transaction was a breach of the chief executive’s duty to Dish, a special litigation committee of the company’s board was formed to investigate the deal. As it turned out, Mr. Ortolf and Mr. Brokaw were appointed to two of the committee’s three posts.The transaction at the heart of the case began in 2012 when Mr. Ergen started buying around $1 billion worth of distressed debt in LightSquared, a troubled company with valuable wireless spectrum licenses. The court documents say he paid roughly $850 million, bought the debt through a limited liability company and did not tell the board of his purchases at the time.For years before Mr. Ergen’s purchase, Dish had been buying spectrum licenses like those owned by LightSquared as part of its expansion into wireless offerings — delivering video programs over other platforms, like mobile phones.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.LightSquared filed for bankruptcy in May 2012; by the time Mr. Ergen was done buying the debt, he was LightSquared’s single largest creditor.A year later, Mr. Ergen bid $2 billion for all of LightSquared’s assets. Under the terms of that bid, Mr. Ergen effectively ensured that his investment in LightSquared debt would be repaid at 100 cents on the dollar, the lawsuit says.At roughly the same time, the Dish board appointed two independent directors, Steven Goodbarn and Gary Howard, to a transaction committee that would evaluate making its own bid for LightSquared. Among its tasks was to assess the conflicts of interest associated with a bid because of Mr. Ergen’s stake in LightSquared debt.The committee had difficulties. Court documents show that Mr. Ergen refused to supply it with information about his debt purchases and withheld its fees.In July 2013, Dish bid $2.2 billion for LightSquared. One condition of the bid was that the transaction committee would continue to scrutinize the conflicts of interest related to Mr. Ergen’s debt investment. But the board quickly disbanded the committee, ending any scrutiny it might have undertaken. Shortly thereafter, Mr. Howard resigned from the Dish board.When Mr. Ergen’s debt holdings came to light, shareholders sued. They contended that Mr. Ergen should have presented the LightSquared opportunity to Dish’s board for a possible purchase by the company back when he was buying up the debt.AdvertisementThe company’s board responded to the lawsuit by creating the special litigation committee to analyze whether the transaction was fair to Dish shareholders. The committee, including Mr. Ortolf and Mr. Brokaw, concluded that Dish would not have been able to buy the LightSquared debt for technical reasons. Therefore, Mr. Ergen did not take for himself an opportunity that could have benefited Dish, the committee concluded. (Dish ultimately withdrew its bid for LightSquared. A subsequent bid approved by the bankruptcy court would generate about $1.5 billion to Mr. Ergen for his debt.)Lawyers at Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossmann represent the Dish shareholders. They declined to comment further on the case, but their recent filing calls the committee’s findings a whitewash.For example, the special committee never investigated Mr. Ergen’s gains on the LightSquared debt, the lawsuit says. In a deposition, Mr. Ortolf said it did not matter if Mr. Ergen was going to make “$8 or $80 million or $800 million” on the deal.Neither did the special committee investigate whether Mr. Ergen should disgorge any personal profits from his LightSquared debt, which the shareholders noted he arranged to acquire while running Dish, with help from the company’s treasurer and its outside counsel.Lawyers for the Dish directors want the Nevada state court hearing the case (Dish is incorporated in Nevada) to dismiss the shareholder suit. In their recent papers, they say that the special committee was thorough in its investigation and that it concluded that the company was unlikely to prevail if it went after Mr. Ergen’s profits on the debt deal. The filing also contends that because the third member of the special committee was independent, the committee’s findings were unbiased.A hearing on this dispute is scheduled for July 16, where the judge will be asked to rule on, among other things, the issue of the committee’s independence.Whatever the judge decides, there is little doubt that Mr. Ergen has some very nice friends. But should they be representing shareholders on Dish’s board?A version of this article appears in print on July 12, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Dish’s Chief, and Buddies on the Board.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »