AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzSpearheaded by Starbucks and its chief executive, Howard Schultz, nearly 20 big American corporations will unveil a plan on Monday to find jobs for 100,000 unemployed young people over the next three years.The effort, to be called the 100,000 Opportunities Initiative, is aimed at the estimated 5.6 million Americans ages 16 to 24 who are neither studying nor working, and will offer full-time positions as well as apprenticeships and internships. Leaders in government, business and academia are confronting growing income inequality despite steady economic growth and are looking for new entryways into middle-class jobs for American workers who lack a college degree — more than 60 percent of the country’s work force. At 18.1 percent, the unemployment rate for workers age 16 to 19 remains more than three times as high as the 5.3 percent jobless rate for the entire work force. Unemployment among young people has remained stubbornly high, rising a full percentage point since February, even as other economic yardsticks have improved. “Summer jobs and in-school jobs have declined rapidly for this group,” said Robert Lerman, a professor of economics at American University and an expert on youth employment. “The lack of work experience translates into weaker outcomes even after they finish their schooling.”Last year, Starbucks began a plan to enable its baristas to earn a college degree online from Arizona State University, with the coffee giant picking up much of the bill. Privately, the family foundation created by Mr. Schultz and his wife, Sheri, recently donated $30 million to help veterans of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq transition to civilian life and find work, and he plans to earmark $30 million to increase economic opportunities for young people.“The leadership at the local and federal level isn’t providing the kind of results we need to address these issues,” Mr. Schultz said in an interview on Sunday. As a result, he said, companies “have to do everything we can to ensure the playing field is level.”In addition to Starbucks, 16 other companies are participating in the 100,000 Opportunities Initiative, including Alaska Airlines, CVS Health, Microsoft, Taco Bell, Target and Walmart. Hilton, the hotel chain, is promising to hire 15,000 “at risk” young people in the next three years. The Aspen Institute’s Forum for Community Solutions will provide much of the local leadership and technical assistance for the initiative, which is also being backed by deep-pocketed philanthropies like the Rockefeller Foundation and the MacArthur Foundation. On Aug. 13, many of the participating companies will take part in a job fair organized by the Chicago Cook Workforce Partnership. The goal is to make 200 job offers on the spot and hire another 1,000 workers in the Chicago area over the next 18 months. Before leading Starbucks and turning the coffee purveyor into a global brand, Mr. Schultz grew up in public housing and was the first member of his family to attend college. But young people today face much longer odds in achieving that kind of trajectory, he said. “We’re living at a time when for-profit public companies must redefine their responsibilities to the communities they serve and to their employees,” he said. In reference to contacting other chief executives, Mr. Schultz said: “This ‘ask’ was quite easy. There is a significant inequality gap that exists, and some of these things go back to my own personal story of growing up poor in Brooklyn and the access I had to the American dream.” Although Mr. Schultz and his company have had a long history of staking out progressive stands — like making health insurance available to part-time employees — not all of his public-minded initiatives have gone smoothly. An effort to initiate a broader conversation on race, with baristas writing Race Together on coffee cups, was quickly dropped in March after criticism and derision on social media. Other critics have questioned whether Starbucks, whose soaring stock has given the Seattle-based company a market value of more than $80 billon and made Mr. Schultz a billionaire, can really do more than generate headlines when it comes to problems as intractable as poverty and income inequality. After all, an extra 100,000 jobs is less than half of what the economy has been creating each month so far this year, according to Labor Department data. And while Starbucks typically pays more than the minimum wage, unlike some other chains, the $10 to $15 hourly wages of its 130,000 baristas are often barely enough to make ends meet. The same holds true at other employers participating in the 100,000 Opportunities Initiative, like Walmart and Taco Bell. For his part, Mr. Schultz acknowledged that even hiring 100,000 young people falls far short of addressing the question of where millions of unemployed will find a niche in the modern economy, where credentials and technical skills are now essential for jobs that once required only a high school diploma. But he is hoping more companies sign on, and that the 100,000 goal will serve as an initial target as momentum builds. “You have to start somewhere,” he said. “Our ultimate goal is to create the largest employer-led coalition creating pathways to good jobs for young people.” Noting Starbucks’s new effort to subsidize employees as they work toward their bachelor’s degree, Mr. Schultz added: “Our initiative doesn’t end with a job. We have to make them stick around by providing a pathway to continuing their education.” OpinionHoward Schultz and Sheri SchultzAdvertisement