AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesMonday afternoon, Puerto Rico’s creditors are invited to meet at Citigroup’s Park Avenue office for a presentation by the Commonwealth’s top financial official and a former chief economist at the World Bank. The meeting, which will be streamed online to the public, is being billed as the first face-to-face meeting between Puerto Rico and its creditors since the governor declared that the island’s debts were not payable. —Michael CorkeryContract talks begin this week between the United Automobile Workers and two of Detroit’s automakers. Negotiations start on Monday with General Motors and on Tuesday, with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Negotiations at Ford begin later this month. The union is hoping for wage increases in a new contract. The current labor agreements expire in September. —Bill VlasicRetail sales figures due from the Census Bureau on Tuesday are likely to show that spending climbed in June for a fourth straight month, buoyed by the lowest unemployment the country has experienced in seven years and strong payroll growth. Spending at auto dealers and home improvement stores has jumped in recent months, evidence that households feel confident enough to make longer-term investments in their cars and homes. Consumers are also starting to spend more at the pump, reflecting the higher costs of gas since April, though that could divert dollars away from other retailers. Consumer spending accounts for about 70 percent of economic activity in the United States. —Hiroko TabuchiThe nation’s largest banks report their second-quarter results this week, starting with JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo on Tuesday. Analysts are expecting relatively ho-hum earnings despite the stable economy in the United States. The wild card for banks like Bank of America, which reports on Wednesday, could be results from their bond, currencies and commodities trading operations. Trading revenue tends to swing wildly each quarter. Also reporting earnings this week are the private equity firm Blackstone Group and the asset manager BlackRock. —Michael CorkeryA British Parliament committee on Tuesday will question Stephen Green, the former chairman of HSBC, and Winfried Bischoff, the former chairman of Lloyds Banking Group and Citigroup, on the culture of the banking industry. The session before the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee is expected to cover a wide variety of issues, including whether global banks have become too large and complex to manage and if large fines against financial institutions are the right way to improve ethics in the industry. The committee will also examine misconduct in HSBC’s Swiss and Mexican operations and whether the bank took rules against money laundering seriously. —Chad BrayAll eyes will be on the Chinese economy this week, as the country reports its second-quarter gross domestic product. The economy is expected to have grown by 6.8 percent, the slowest rate since 2009. If the numbers prove weak, that could add to the pressure on the stock market, which has been slumping in recent weeks. On Friday, Premier Li Keqiang expressed confidence in the economy, although he also alluded to the market troubles. “Though there will be various challenges and risks along the way,” he said in a statement, “we will never let down our guard, and we have the capability and confidence to prevent regional and systemic risks.” —Adrienne CarterJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, heads across town on Wednesday to testify before the House Financial Services Committee. On Thursday, she will repeat the performance before the Senate Banking Committee. The biannual appearances are billed as reports to Congress on monetary policy, but the questions tend to range widely. House Republicans, in particular, are likely to press Ms. Yellen for details about a 2012 leak of confidential information about the Fed’s bond-buying plans, now the subject of multiple investigations. —Binyamin AppelbaumMexico’s new oil regime will undergo a major test on Wednesday when the government holds the first auction for private oil companies of 169 oil blocks that are both onshore and offshore. At least 17 companies are expected to participate, though the auction comes as oil prices are low. Pemex, the old national oil company, has decided not to participate. The Mexican Congress passed legislation last year to end Pemex’s monopoly and open the country’s oil patch to international competition. —Clifford KraussWhen Google reports its second-quarter earnings on Thursday, analysts will be focused less on the results than the person delivering them. That is because this will be the first earnings report for Ruth Porat, Google’s chief financial officer, who joined the company from Morgan Stanley in May. Google’s stock is down 9 percent from a year ago, and analysts are likely to ask Ms. Porat about her plans for Google’s $65 billion cash pile — specifically, if she may be willing to give some of it back to investors. —Conor DoughertyTwo indicators of the health of the overall economy last month will come out Friday morning, when the Labor Department reports the latest data on prices for consumers in June, while the Commerce Department releases data on housing starts. The Consumer Price Index is expected to show a gain of 0.3 percentage point, with core prices that exclude the volatile food and energy sectors rising just 0.1 percent. Both suggest there is little current threat from inflation. Housing starts for June are expected to rise slightly to an annual rate of 1.12 million, as construction rises and the real estate sector continues to be among the economy’s bright spots. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisement