AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioThe electronic dance music craze has spawned hit singles, drawn corporate sponsors and fueled the growth of outdoor festivals — all part of a worldwide business estimated to be worth $6.9 billion a year. It has also led to a blitz in the online news media world, with companies like Live Nation Entertainment, SFX Entertainment and Vice Media trying to lure a young audience through websites that chronicle the world of electronic dance music, or E.D.M.Yet one of the most influential E.D.M.-focused sites, Resident Advisor, has remained staunchly independent, with a devotion to the “underground” side of the culture that is at odds with the music’s mainstream popularity.On a typical day, other popular dance sites like Dancing Astronaut, Your EDM and Thump run news items about the antics of celebrity D.J.s and features like “I Went to a Music Festival Sober (and This Is What I Learned).”Resident Advisor’s most popular news article this month was on a far more esoteric subject: the death of Charanjit Singh, an Indian musician credited with “accidentally inventing acid house” in the early 1980s. Other recent pieces on the site have included a detailed history of a London record store and a 6,700-word report on the nightclub scene in Cairo. “I see E.D.M. — the big festivals, that side of things — and the stuff we cover as two different worlds,” said Nick Sabine, one of Resident Advisor’s two founders. “Those two worlds intersect, but I still see them as separate.”That approach has given Resident Advisor a steady following even as other outlets have struggled. Resident Advisor draws 2.5 million visitors from around the world each month, according to Google data shared by the company, and its American readership is up 25 percent this year from a year ago. Those are significant if not blockbuster numbers, but they are growing while the online traffic of one chief rival, Beatport, has been gradually declining over the last two years, according to data from comScore. (Beatport disputes this, saying its numbers have been steady at about one million visitors a month in the United States.)Like Pitchfork, the alternative music site it is often compared to, Resident Advisor has built a reputation as a tastemaker that can lift an artist’s career. Its reviews are often considered definitive, and a high ranking on its annual D.J. poll can lead to better bookings at clubs and festivals. Steve Hogan, an agent at William Morris Endeavor, pointed to the site’s championing of acts like Seth Troxler and Black Coffee, a South African D.J. whom the site featured last year in a short film sponsored by the wireless speaker company Sonos. “When you reach the pinnacle like R.A., and get that credibility, it opens a lot of doors,” Mr. Hogan said. “Other artists want to collaborate with you. Fashion brands and endorsement opportunities become available that weren’t necessarily there before.”Resident Advisor was started in Sydney, Australia, in 2001 by Mr. Sabine and Paul Clement, who each chipped in 400 Australian dollars. They said they had since taken on no new investment. Their company is based in London and now employs 40 people in six offices around the world, including its two newest, in Los Angeles and Brooklyn.Since 2007, the site has also been selling tickets to shows in 50 countries, and it now sells more than a million tickets a year. Mr. Sabine said that Resident Advisor — which makes money from ads, ticketing and live events — has “hundreds of thousands” of dollars in profit each year, an amount that keeps the site going but may be thought of as negligible by the much larger media companies that it competes with now.Thump, for example, is part of Vice, and Beatport, a music retailer and news site, is part of SFX. Dancing Astronaut, another key competitor, is said to be in talks to be acquired by Insomniac, a dance promoter whose majority owner is Live Nation. Insomniac and Dancing Astronaut declined to comment. Other sites have come and gone: DJZ.com, for example, started with $1 million in financing, arriving in late 2012 with a  mission of being something like the MTV of dance music online. But after a year and a half, the company behind it shut down its news site and turned to developing a music app, Crossfader. “For a media property covering the dance world,” said Seth Goldstein, who founded DJZ, “it felt like the inevitable path was to become fodder to sell people tickets to go to festivals.”No clear winner has emerged in the media battle for dance music, and the larger industry has remained divided about whether the rapid growth of dance music has made it an economic bubble destined to pop. But Mr. Sabine said he viewed any new interest as positive.“Look at the sheer volume of people who now embrace E.D.M. as something they enjoy,” Mr. Sabine said. “You only need 5 percent of those millions and millions to dig a little deeper to discover electronic music in more depth.”Advertisement