AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.09 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $216.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Prague, Minn., Independent School District, $58.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYFloyd County, Ky., School District, $52.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.La Porte, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.St. Peter, Minn., Independent School District, $56.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Swarthmore Borough, Pa., $53.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $98 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYMaryland, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Stillwater, Minn., Independent School District, $97.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArizona School Facilities Board, $258 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Citigroup Global Markets. Boston Water and Sewer Commission, $83 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America. Brownsville, Tex., $93.4 million of utilities system revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.California State University, $1.1 billion of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Carroll City-County Hospital Authority, Ga., $67.8 million of revenue anticipation certificates. Raymond James.Charleston, S.C., $147.8 million of waterworks and sewer capital improvement revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Chicago, $1.1 billion of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Clint, Tex., Independent School District, $80 million of unlimited tax school building. Piper Jaffray. Comal, Tex., Independent School District, $122.3 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James. Coopersville Area Public Schools, Mich., $63.6 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. El Paso, $118 million of refinancing and improvement bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. Elk Grove, Calif., Finance Authority, $90 million of special tax revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray. Frisco, Tex., $117.7 million of debt obligations. Stifel Nicolaus.Gavilan, Calif., Community College District, $50 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray. Lehigh County General Purpose Authority, Pa., $75 million of Lehigh Valley Health Network hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America.Long Beach, Calif., $134 million of harbor revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Louisiana Citizens Property Insurance Corporation, $339.4 million of assessment revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Manteca, Calif., Unified School District, $60 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Marshall, Tex., Independent School District, $90.2 million of tax school building bonds. Loop Capital Markets. Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $163 million of LifeBridge Health revenue bonds. Bank of America.Montgomery, Tex., Independent School District, $245.3 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Hope Cultural Education Facilities, Tex., $337.7 million of Texas A&M University project student housing revenue bonds. Raymond James. North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency, $477 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America. North East, Tex., Independent School District, $66.3 million of variable rate school building bonds. Stifel Nicolaus. Northside, Tex., Independent School District, $96.5 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Oxford Community Schools, Mich., $70.7 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Antonio, $124.2 million of taxable consumer facility charge revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities. San Antonio, $315.7 million of electric and gas systems revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs. Advertisement