By MICHAEL CIEPLYJULY 12, 2015
SAN DIEGO —  What would Jesus do at Comic-Con?Perhaps work the miracle of getting some attention from the comics crowd.Faith-based entertainment, though it is increasingly a staple of mainstream movie and television studios, had only a small visible presence among the zombies, “Star Wars” Stormtroopers and, of course, superheroes whose annual Comic-Con International fan convention at the San Diego Convention Center ended on Sunday.Religion was certainly not taboo at the convention. Thursday morning, the writer Mark Russell and the cartoonist Shannon Wheeler had great fun with a slide show that ran through the history of the Bible in 10 minutes or so.The Old Testament, Mr. Russell explained, was God’s exercise in anger management. He described the near eradication of mankind by flood with a slide titled “Sorry for the genocide.”AdvertisementMr. Russell and Mr. Wheeler have used irreverence to win an audience for what is actually a slyly empathetic retelling of Bible stories in their graphic novel, “God Is Disappointed in You.” It is soon to be followed by a sequel, called “Apocrypha Now.”AdvertisementAbout 200 convention-goers cheerfully watched the slides, and listened as Mr. Russell and Mr. Wheeler insisted that their intention was not to lampoon the Bible but to make it accessible. “It’s basically the Bible written for people in a bar,” Mr. Russell said.But there was almost no obvious contemporary, faith-based cultural presence on a convention exhibit floor that was crammed with gods, spirits and cultic outcroppings of almost every stripe.The Christian Comic Arts Society was supposed to have a spot in the small press pavilion, but was not to be found in its assigned spot on Thursday and Friday. If the group indeed showed up, it was lost somewhere in the crowd of 130,000 attendees. The closest approach to Christian imagery was a large drawing that portrayed a dragon-conquering woman beneath a halo.A couple of “angels” were strolling about, but they were ominously covered, head to toe, in dark makeup.An afternoon panel called “Sunday Morning Funny: The Lighter Side of Faith-Based Comics,” turned out to be a podcast focused mostly on the claimed failings of inspirational comics from the 91-year-old comic book artist Jack Chick. “The quality is not on par” with contemporary graphic novels, complained one of the speakers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, a gathering of mainstream Hollywood executives and faith-oriented marketers in Los Angeles noted a new hunger for films and television programs that connect with religious themes.Paramount Pictures waded into the faith market last year with an action-oriented film, “Noah,” but took some lumps for including Transformer-like rock monsters that seemed Comic-Con friendly. The studio will try again next year with its new version of “Ben-Hur.” Timur Bekmambetov (“Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter”) is directing, and Jack Huston (“The Longest Ride”) has the starring role.“Everywhere I go, people are unhappy with the path we are on,” said Nolan Lebovitz, who attended the Los Angeles event and sees opportunity in the pop culture.AdvertisementA filmmaker turned rabbi, Mr. Lebovitz once made the sort of films that populate Comic-Con — he wrote and directed “Tortured,” about an F.B.I. agent’s foray into torture, for instance. But he is now touring the country with his new documentary, “Roadmap Genesis,” in which he, like Mr. Russell and Mr. Wheeler, seeks to make the Bible accessible.By and large, the denizens of Comic-Con have been comfortable with some grand films in which Christian themes were a subliminal presence. At last month’s Los Angeles conference, Peter Jackson’s Middle-earth movies were offered as a prime example by a speaker, Mark Ordesky, who had a producing credit on the “Lord of the Rings” trilogy.But Comic-Con attendees have largely looked away from overtly faith-based fare. And they openly disdain what many call the “yellow sign people” — those who annually picket the convention center with signs that promise a bad end to those who consume too much comic fare. (On Thursday, A&E tried to pick up publicity by dispatching counterdemonstrators, who promoted the network’s new series “Damien” with signs warning: “The Beast Rises.”)This year, one picketer hoisted a sign that said “God hates Marvel.” He was dressed as a DC Comics character, The Joker, so it was hard to judge his motivation.Others, perhaps more serious, distributed “Get Out of Hell Free” cards.“I thought they were marketing for ‘Lucifer,’ ” said the comic book historian Jessica Tseang, who spoke on the “Sunday Morning Funny” panel.Ms. Tseang referred to a coming Fox series about the devil’s decision to become a Los Angeles crime fighter — a popular fixture on thousands of swag bags here.A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Faith-Based Entertainment Stays Mostly in the Shadows at Comic-Con.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.