By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 14, 2015
As fantasy sports continue to pick up steam — and draw big new entrants like Yahoo — one of the industry leaders is betting that it will continue to grow.FanDuel plans to announce on Tuesday that it has raised $275 million in a new round of financing, bringing its total haul from investors to $363 million.The new investment was led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, an existing investor, and included the new investors Google Capital and Time Warner. Several previous backers also participated, including Shamrock Holdings, the investment arm of Roy E. Disney’s family; NBC Sports Ventures; and Comcast Ventures.That new money, earmarked to help FanDuel, a daily fantasy sports leader, gain customers and expand the start-up’s global presence, comes as the business of legally betting on sports is increasing in popularity.AdvertisementBoth FanDuel and its archrival DraftKings, taking advantage of exemptions in a 2006 law that banned online poker and sports gambling in the United States, have grown tremendously.AdvertisementFanDuel is expected to award about $2 billion in prizes this year, up from $560 million last year, according to its chief executive, Nigel Eccles.The company said that the number of its active users over the first half of the year had grown 300 percent from the same time a year ago. (As of last year, its total active user base was about 1.1 million people.)Though FanDuel raised $70 million last year, the company still drew plenty of interest from potential backers, Mr. Eccles said in a phone interview. K.K.R., one of the biggest alternative investment firms on Wall Street, expressed interest in leading a new round of financing, and the investment round came together quickly.“We think it’s one of the most valuable kinds of media today,” Ted Oberwager, a principal at K.K.R., said in a phone interview. “Fantasy sports offers some of the highest levels of engagement that we’ve seen.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But that sort of expansion has also drawn the attention of Yahoo, whose fantasy sports communities are among the largest on the web.Last week, the company unveiled its plan to host one-day and one-week fantasy sports leagues.Mr. Eccles said that he had anticipated the entry of both Yahoo and ESPN into the industry and wondered what had taken the traditional media companies so long to move. But he argued that the business of running the leagues — built on sophisticated trading systems — was more difficult than many realized and that having a six-year head start offered his company some advantages.“If they’d launched two years ago, I think they would have had a good chance of competing,” he said of Yahoo. “They definitely have reach, but one of the things that’s missing from the conversation is how challenging it is to build and operate this product.”Mr. Oberwager added of Yahoo’s move: “On some level, it’s further validation fo the market opportunity. Yahoo’s a great partner to FanDuel, and has been a great partner. We want to make sure that partnership remains strong and in place.”AdvertisementThe new money that FanDuel has raised is meant to keep the company ahead. Mr. Eccles said that it would go toward additional spending on marketing and new features.Even if Yahoo approached FanDuel with a takeover offer to augment its fantasy sports franchise, Mr. Eccles said that he would decline.“We want to be a strong, independent company,” he said. “I don’t see that fitting within Yahoo or any other place.”The price for FanDuel also continues to rise. Mr. Eccles declined to provide a precise valuation but said that it was “well north” of $1 billion. He added that while the company increasingly looked as if it was headed toward an initial public offering, such a move was not likely soon.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.