AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberUncertainty swirls around the discovery of Harper Lee’s new novel “Go Set a Watchman.” An admired protagonist has turned from gentle hero to vehement racist. But as Monday turned into Tuesday, none of that seemed to lessen the anticipation for fans of Ms. Lee’s first published novel, “To Kill a Mockingbird.”Across the globe, readers grabbed their copies of a book that seemed for more than half a century like it would never come. Bookstores unveiled “Watchman” at the stroke of midnight on Tuesday, holding read-a-thons and movie screenings. Literary aficionados joined all-night reading parties, replete with themed music and food.In Harvard Square, in Cambridge, Mass., fans at the Brattle Theater burst into applause when a screening of the 1962 film version of “To Kill a Mockingbird” ended a hair before midnight. Some filmgoers formed a line, and, among them, they purchased about 40 copies of “Watchman.”Yasmin Ramsay, 34, of Boston, was eager to get reading, though she was apprehensive about the novel’s portrayal of Atticus Finch, the beloved lawyer of the first book. “I love Atticus,” Ms. Ramsay said, adding, “I would be very sad if he turned out to be a racist.”In “Watchman,” Atticus — who in “Mockingbird” crusaded against racism and defended a black man falsely accused of raping a white woman — is portrayed as an aging, arthritic bigot who once attended a Ku Klux Klan meeting. Whereas he displayed moral integrity in “Mockingbird,” the character says things in “Watchman” like “The Negroes down here are still in their childhood as a people.”Those revelations last week were cause for consternation and disappointment among “Mockingbird” fans. But Ms. Ramsay said Tuesday that whatever the new book holds, “I don’t know if I’d appreciate ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ any less.”At a release event at the Big Blue Marble bookstore in Philadelphia, Ryan Lovett, 31, said that reading “Mockingbird” in high school had opened her eyes to issues of justice and racial equality, issues she found especially relevant after a year of civil disturbances in cities such as Baltimore and Ferguson, Mo.Ms. Lovett, a special education teacher, said that she had been conflicted about whether to read the new book because she was not sure that Ms. Lee had really wanted it published, but that she had decided to pick it up anyway.She said she was not concerned that the new book might tarnish an idealized view of Atticus’s character, because it would present a more realistic picture. “I feel like it’s true to life,” Ms. Lovett said. “It would be unusual for someone like him in that period of time to not have racist ideas.”Since “Mockingbird” was published in 1960, it has stood as Ms. Lee’s singular masterpiece, inspiring high schoolers and literary scholars alike. But for some readers waiting for the release of “Watchman,” jubilation was mixed with lament for a diminished role model in Atticus.“What happened to this guy who was a hero to everybody?” said Matt Berg, 20, who attended a screening of the “Mockingbird” film at a theater in Littleton, Colo., on Monday night.At Foyles bookstore in London, which hosted a prerelease party Monday night, Stuart Smith, 36, said the new depiction of Atticus was “such a U-turn in personality.”“It would be very disappointing because it would go against the character that people have invested in for 50 years,” he added, as roughly 300 readers snacked on crackers and peanuts. A jazz band played in the background.“Watchman” takes place in the 1950s, 20 years after “Mockingbird.” Its protagonist, Jean Louise (known as Scout in the first book), is a 26-year-old woman who returns home to Maycomb, Ala., for a visit from New York City. Atticus, her father, is 72 and suffers from rheumatoid arthritis; her brother, Jem, is dead. Unlike “Mockingbird,” the book is written in the third person.Regardless of some readers’ misgivings, the book is slated for success. Harper, an imprint of HarperCollins, is releasing “Watchman” with a first printing of two million copies. The novel is the most preordered book in the company’s history.“This is the biggest book event of the year, and we’ve had the biggest number of preorders” for any large publication in recent years, said Andy Quinn, who leads events at Foyles.In New York, dozens of people flocked to the Barnes & Noble in Union Square for a discussion and celebration of Ms. Lee. Many in attendance said they were drawn to the book because racism and equality once again dominated the national conversation in the United States.“It’s a really interesting time to talk about issues related to race and class,” said Jennifer Warren, a lawyer from the East New York section of Brooklyn. She added that she was planning to read “Watchman” and wondered how its description of a Southern town from generations ago would resonate with younger readers, who had grown up with President Obama, the country’s first black president.Ron Simon, a curator at the Paley Center for Media and resident of the Union Square neighborhood, said that a discussion of Ms. Lee’s works could perhaps offer context for the recent racially charged events in Ferguson, Staten Island and Charleston, S.C.“I’m interested in thinking about how contemporary social issues are enlightened or not by ‘Mockingbird’ and by the new novel,” he said. “People are looking for a way to examine our racial history and ourselves.”Ms. Lovett, at the bookstore in Philadelphia, said “Mockingbird” had shattered idealistic notions of justice and fairness in America that she had grown up with, and it appeared that the new book would be consistent with a more clear-eyed vision.But Caleb Sweeny, 28, who came up from Quincy to attend the Harvard Square film screening, said that because of the portrayal of Atticus in the new book, he had decided not to view it as a direct sequel.“It’s more like a historical artifact,” he said. “I view ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ in a vacuum, where it should stay.”Reporting was contributed by Jessica Bidgood, Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, Jon Hurdle, Colin Moynihan and Julie Turkewitz.Advertisement