By MICHAEL CORKERYJULY 13, 2015
If a meeting on Monday between Puerto Rico and its creditors is any indication, restructuring the island’s $72 billion in debt could be a long process.At that meeting, the commonwealth’s finance team said it had not yet determined how it would seek to revamp the island’s obligations.The roughly 350 creditors, such as hedge funds and money managers, that had packed into a Park Avenue auditorium on Monday afternoon were told they would have to wait several more weeks until a working group made up of Puerto Rico political leaders came up with formal recommendations for ending the island’s fiscal crisis.“I ask for your patience while we develop a credible plan that meets all of our stakeholders’ objectives,” Melba Acosta Febo, the president of the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico, told the creditors gathered at Citigroup’s executive headquarters.AdvertisementThe meeting, which lasted more than an hour, was the first time that creditors heard directly from Puerto Rico officials since Gov. Alejandro García Padilla declared two weeks ago that the island’s debt was not payable.AdvertisementThe government spent most of its presentation on Monday reiterating the bleak condition of the island’s economy and calling for drastic measures like cutting sick leave for local workers and lowering the minimum wage to jump-start hiring. It has more municipal bond debt per capita than any American state.Anne O. Krueger, a former chief economist for the World Bank and co-author of a report on Puerto Rico’s troubles, told investors that the United States territory was caught in an unusual bind. It is not a struggling sovereign nation that can tap the International Monetary Fund, nor is it a state with voting members of Congress. Yet, she concluded that its economy had great potential and was entirely “underutilized.”But most of the questions from creditors like Deutsche Bank’s asset management unit and Brigade Capital Management focused on details of a possible debt restructuring. Investors asked, for example, whether the restructuring would extend to the general obligation bonds, which are supposed to carry a constitutional guarantee of repayment. Much of Puerto Rico’s debt is also widely held in mutual funds or other investment accounts by individual investors on the United States mainland.Officials said they would look at each type of bond separately, but said the designated political leaders would first need to come up with a comprehensive plan that would address not only the debt, but also ways of cutting the deficit and stimulating the island’s economy.Commonwealth officials aimed to strike a tone of cooperation with creditors by portraying the island’s fiscal woes as a common problem that all parties needed to work together to solve.“It is our hope that you will engage with us in an open and transparent process,” said Jim Millstein, founder of Millstein & Company, who is advising Puerto Rico.But the meeting was a reminder of the risks of investing in government debt. Creditors are now at the mercy of commonwealth officials, who must come up with a plan that is not only fiscally practical, but politically acceptable.AdvertisementPrivately, investors have expressed frustration that Mr. García Padilla’s finance team has not provided more details about a restructuring. Some have complained that Puerto Rico officials are painting an overly dark picture to drum up support in Congress for some form of federal assistance. Specifically, Puerto Rico is lobbying aggressively for a bill that would allow its public enterprises access to federal bankruptcy courts, which they do not have under the island’s status as a United States territory.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Puerto Rico officials have said that the island’s residents have shouldered most of the burden through tax increases and pension cuts, and now it is time for creditors to make concessions to cut the debt burden. Mr. García Padilla has said publicly that the government may seek to postpone debt payments for a number of years and that all forms of the island debt could be restructured.Citigroup, which hosted Monday’s meeting, has been hired as the lead broker-dealer for what the Puerto Rico government called “liability management transactions.” And while its government kept quiet about its restructuring strategy, there had been recent signals about how the process might unfold.Last week, the Government Development Bank announced in a regulatory filing that it may seek the purchase of billions of dollars of its outstanding debt at a discount. The regulatory filing provided few details, but people briefed on the matter said the repurchase proposal could involve the development bank buying its bonds that are due over the next few years and exchanging them for new bonds that must be paid back in the more distant future. The Government Development Bank’s liquidity problem is particularly acute.The latest meeting, which was streamed online to the public, was also meant to highlight the commonwealth’s efforts to be transparent with investors. In the past, Puerto Rico has been criticized for lack of disclosure.Mr. García Padilla’s finance team and its many consultants, lobbyists and restructuring lawyers are walking a fine line as they try to restructure the island’s debt outside a bankruptcy filing.On the one hand, they are trying to show Congress and the Obama administration that the island is in desperate need of bankruptcy authorization and other federal assistance, including increased Medicare financing. But the Puerto Rico government also faces a flood of potential lawsuits, and possibly scrutiny from securities regulators, if it is seen dealing unfairly with creditors.As part of that effort to gain credibility, Ms. Acosta Febo said the governor would propose the creation of a financial control board to ensure that its broad plan to sort out the island’s finances is being followed.The control board would be made up of members appointed by the governor and others selected independently, and could compel the government to follow its plan.There have been calls in Congress to appoint a federal control board to oversee Puerto Rico. But unlike that idea, which would need congressional approval, the Puerto Rican governor’s proposal would be more homegrown.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico Faces Its Creditors in Early Debt Resolution Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.