AdvertisementSupported byBy Serge F. Kovaleski and Alexandra AlterWhen HarperCollins delivered the stunning news in February that another novel by Harper Lee had surfaced, questions quickly arose about how and where the discovery was made, and why Ms. Lee had not sought to have the book published previously. In the months since, those questions have only grown murkier and more perplexing.Now, on the eve of publication on Tuesday, Ms. Lee’s lawyer, Tonja B. Carter, has put forth a new version of how she found the new novel, “Go Set a Watchman,” and hinted at the possibility that she has found a third book. The new statements from Ms. Carter, who has been a central figure in bringing the novel to publication, feature some discrepancies with her earlier accounts of the book’s discovery, which could revive skepticism about “Watchman’s” provenance even as bookstores and readers across the country are celebrating its release.In February, HarperCollins and Ms. Carter offered a story of a long-lost literary artifact that was recovered through an accidental discovery. Ms. Carter said that she stumbled upon the manuscript for “Go Set a Watchman” last August, attached to the original manuscript of Ms. Lee’s literary classic “To Kill a Mockingbird.” But in an opinion piece published in The Wall Street Journal on Sunday night, Ms. Carter described a more deliberate mission to unearth the manuscript, which she now acknowledges she had seen several years earlier during an appraisal with a rare books expert. The shifting narratives of how “Watchman” was discovered have hovered over the publication of the novel, which arrives 55 years after the publication of “Mockingbird.” HarperCollins is printing two million copies of “Watchman,” which is the most preordered book in the company’s history. Hundreds of bookstores across the country are marking its publication with midnight release parties, marathon readings, discussion groups, movie screenings and Southern food buffets.A lot is at stake for the publisher and for Ms. Lee, whose legacy has until now rested on her single Pulitzer Prize-winning work. As the first reviews of the book were published last week, many readers were shocked to learn that “Watchman” depicts the crusading and compassionate lawyer Atticus Finch as a staunch segregationist, an unexpected twist that could drastically alter how people view the characters and themes in “Mockingbird.” In her article in The Journal, her most detailed description of the book’s discovery, Ms. Carter described first seeing pages of the “Watchman” manuscript in 2011, during a meeting with Justin Caldwell, a rare books expert from Sotheby’s auction house, and Samuel Pinkus, Ms. Lee’s literary agent at the time. Mr. Caldwell had come to appraise the manuscript of “Mockingbird,” but when the three of them began looking at the pages, someone noticed that the first page was different from “Mockingbird,” Ms. Carter wrote. She described reading manuscript pages and seeing a reference to Hank, a character who is in “Watchman” but not in “Mockingbird.” She said she was then sent to retrieve a copy of “Mockingbird” so that the two texts could be compared. Ms. Carter said that she brought back a copy of the book and then left the meeting, and was never told that a second book had been found.She said the possibility that the unusual manuscript might represent a second book didn’t occur to her until last summer, when she was at a gathering with some of Ms. Lee’s friends and family, and conversation turned to a second novel that Ms. Lee might have written.“I immediately remembered the manuscript pages with a character named Hank and began to wonder if perhaps Hank was part of another novel,” Ms. Carter wrote. “I went to the safe deposit box and pulled out the Lord & Taylor box. I began to thumb through its contents when I came across a title page that said: ‘Go Set a Watchman.’ ”Ms. Carter’s latest version conflicts with her earlier account of being “stunned” to discover a separate manuscript when she was thumbing through “Mockingbird,” and contradicts statements that she has issued to news organizations regarding her involvement in the 2011 meeting with Mr. Pinkus and Mr. Caldwell.In a statement given to The New York Times a few weeks ago, Ms. Carter denied being at the meeting in 2011, saying that she escorted the men to the bank but left immediately to run an errand. “Neither Miss Alice nor I was in that meeting,” she said, referring to Ms. Lee’s older sister, Alice, who died in November.But a person familiar with Mr. Caldwell’s account of the meeting said that Ms. Carter returned with a copy of “Mockingbird” and stayed as they compared it with the other typescript. Mr. Caldwell, the person said, explained that the document was different from “Mockingbird” and was highly valuable, possibly worth a seven-figure sum.“With the exception of going out to get the book, Tonja was in the meeting with me and Mr. Caldwell the entire time,” Mr. Pinkus said on Monday. Sotheby’s has confirmed Ms. Carter’s attendance. According to Mr. Pinkus, there was no discussion of publishing “Watchman” in 2011, because Ms. Lee and her sister, Alice, had long maintained that Ms. Lee had no interest in publishing another book.Mr. Pinkus was later fired by Ms. Carter and sued in 2013 by Harper Lee, who accused him of duping her into transferring the copyright for “Mockingbird” to him. That lawsuit was settled out of court.HarperCollins declined to comment on Ms. Carter’s new account of the book’s discovery, and Ms. Carter did not respond to questions sent to her by email and text.Ms. Carter wrote in her article it was not until last Thursday that she returned to the bank and found the original “Mockingbird” manuscript in a tightly packed mailer. That conflicts with the account she provided in February when she said “Watchman” was attached to the “Mockingbird” manuscript when she discovered it last August. Ms. Carter’s article refers to additional manuscript pages in the safe deposit box, and she raises the tantalizing possibility that they are part of a third book by Ms. Lee. Some scholars seemed surprised by the suggestion of a third manuscript. Karla Nielsen, curator of literature at the Columbia University Rare Book and Manuscript Library, which holds the archives of the literary agents to whom Ms. Lee submitted “Watchman” and “Mockingbird,” said that “no evidence has turned up” in their archives of plans to publish a trilogy.Advertisement