AdvertisementSupported byRoad to 2016By Nate Cohn“Everything I’m telling you may end up being wrong,” Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator seeking the Democratic nomination for president, said early in our conversation on Thursday.I had written an article concluding he had slim chances of winning the nomination, based on the limits of his ideological appeal. Mr. Sanders was building a coalition of liberals, as have past liberal anti-establishment Democrats, and it was likely to fall short.But Mr. Sanders, who has surged in the polls against Hillary Clinton, called to advance a different theory of the race. “I look at these things more from a class perspective,” he said.“I’m not a liberal. Never have been. I’m a progressive who mostly focuses on the working and middle class.”The difference between a liberal and a progressive focused on workers might seem slim, but it nonetheless shapes how he envisions the potential of the political coalition he hopes to assemble. He believes he can mobilize a working-class coalition spanning ideological divides.“Ordinary people are profoundly disgusted with the state of the economy and the fact that the middle class is being destroyed and income going to the top 1 percent.”Many of these people “may not be liberal” or may not “agree with me on gay marriage,” but “they want a fighter,” he said in the cordial conversation.The issues that could potentially rally disaffected lower- and- middle-class voters “cross traditional liberal-conservative lines,” Mr. Sanders argued. He is in a good position to raise these issues, he said, citing his positions on trade, issues affecting older Americans and the minimum wage.If Mr. Sanders did build a coalition of working-class voters, it would look a lot different from the coalitions assembled by recent liberal Democratic primary candidates. It would be positioned to do far better among Hispanic, black and less educated white voters than recent anti-establishment Democratic challengers, like Barack Obama, Howard Dean, Bill Bradley and Jerry Brown.In fairness to Mr. Sanders, few, if any, recent Democratic candidates represented the economic, populist left. The anti-establishment candidate of the last four competitive primaries all featured challenges from intellectual, professional-class liberals. Mr. Brown, Mr. Bradley, Mr. Dean and Mr. Obama — each educated at some point at an Ivy League university — all fared well in Marin County, Calif., and Greenwich, Conn.; none appealed much to voters in the Appalachians or along the Rio Grande.Even the candidate who came closest to running as a populist, John Edwards, fared best among voters in Iowa and South Carolina who made more than $100,000 per year. He did do well among conservatives in relatively conservative areas, like South Carolina or along the Iowa-Missouri border, but it is hard to say whether that was a reflection of his policy views or his identity as a Southern white man, perhaps especially when running against a black man and a white woman.But so far, Mr. Sanders’s support looks a lot like the liberal coalitions assembled by those other candidates. His support is as closely tied to ideology as that of any recent Democratic candidate.In Iowa, a Quinnipiac poll shows Mr. Sanders ahead by four percentage points among “very liberal” voters, but trailing by 43 points among nonliberal Democrats.In New Hampshire, a CNN/WMUR/UNH survey showed Mr. Sanders leading by seven points among “liberal” voters, but trailing by more than 20 points among nonliberal voters.These figures follow the pattern of Mr. Obama’s support among nonblack voters in his 2008 primary against Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Obama excelled among liberal groups, but struggled among less liberal voting blocs, like Hispanics or older and Southern white voters. He made up for it with exceptional strength among black voters, one of the least liberal groups in the Democratic Party.So far, there are few signs that Mr. Sanders is faring especially well among working-class Democrats. Neither the Iowa nor the New Hampshire poll showed any significant differences in support between higher- and lower-income voters, or more or less educated voters.Mr. Sanders’s campaign has taken him to bastions of liberalism, like Madison, Wis., and Portland, Me., where past liberal challengers have fared well. He has not held rallies in the working-class communities where Mr. Brown or Mr. Bradley faltered, like Fresno, Calif., or Scranton, Pa. Mr. Sanders’s most recent stop outside of the early states was to Arlington, Va., one of the country’s most affluent counties. The median household income there sits near $100,000.When asked why his campaign was struggling to attract the working-class, less liberal voters he thought he might be reaching, Mr. Sanders acknowledged the challenges facing his campaign. “I’m not well known in the African-American community, despite a lifelong record,” he said, acknowledging one of the most consistent critiques of his chances. “That’s a real issue, and I have to deal with it.”“I’m running against Hillary Clinton, who is one of the best-known people in the world,” he said.Mr. Sanders is certainly not as well known among the party’s moderate and working-class voters as he is among liberal voters, but the huge gap in support between liberal and less liberal voters far exceeds the difference in name recognition.Mr. Sanders draws hope from his experiences in Vermont, where he says liberals “have not been the strongest supporters.” It’s where he has found a base among working-class voters.But it is not clear that his experience with white working-class voters in Vermont will be repeated nationally. Mr. Dean, Mr. Obama and Mr. Brown all carried Vermont in their primary campaigns. Mr. Bradley fell short in Vermont, winning 44 percent of the vote, but it was his second-best state. (He lost all 50 states against Al Gore in 2000.)Despite their success, all those candidates struggled among white working-class voters outside of a few northern states, like Oregon and Wisconsin.As Mr. Sanders puts his theory to the test, he is confident. “At the end of the day, you may be right,” he said. “I believe that you will see, maybe, you’re wrong.”The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.Advertisement