AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — When American carmakers negotiated their existing contract with the United Auto Workers union four years ago, the domestic auto industry was just recovering from a deep recession.But conditions have vastly improved since then. Sales in the United States are roaring toward 17 million vehicles this year and the bankruptcies and bailouts of General Motors and Chrysler are fading in the rearview mirror.Instead of closing plants and cutting workers, G.M., Ford and the newly merged Fiat Chrysler have been adding jobs, made possible by big profits on surging sales of pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles.On Monday, G.M. became the first of the three Detroit automakers to open talks on a new contract with the union to replace the current pact that expires in September.And if the upbeat tone of the opening ceremony is any indication, this summer’s discussions are all about keeping the good times rolling.“We are going to truly listen to each other and understand the issues we need to work through,” said Mary Barra, G.M.’s chief executive.The president of the U.A.W., Dennis Williams, said the union was seeking wage increases and more job security, and closing the gap between veteran workers earning $28 an hour and entry-level jobs that pay up to $19.Mr. Williams, however, was unusually generous in his praise for G.M.’s comeback, and played down the notion that the union was gearing up for a battle or even a strike against any of the three automakers.“I am not afraid of confrontation, but I don’t want one and our members don’t want one,” Mr. Williams said to the cheers of union workers packing the ceremony at the sprawling G.M.-U.A.W. human resources center in Detroit.Fiat Chrysler will open its talks with the union on Tuesday, and Ford Motor will follow next week. Together, the three Detroit automakers employ about 138,000 blue-collar workers across the country — about one-third of which have been hired since 2011.The new jobs have come at a price and entry-level workers have become increasingly vocal about the disparity in pay with longtime union members. And while G.M. and Ford have distributed big profit-sharing checks to workers in recent years, the union has not had an across-the-board wage increase in more than a decade.“The real issue for all U.A.W. members is about sharing in the gains the companies have made,” said Harley Shaiken, a University of California, Berkeley, professor who has worked with the union in the past. “And there is considerable pressure to close the divide between legacy workers and the two-tier people.”Still, industry executives note that U.A.W. wages and benefits are still higher than those of nonunion workers employed by foreign carmakers like Volkswagen and Nissan in the United States.Analysts suggest that the auto companies will be hard-pressed to avoid wage increases, even though higher structural costs will take a toll on profits when vehicle sales inevitably cool off.“They’ll likely get a contract that not only doesn’t address longer-term structural issues, but also results in mild wage inflation,” said Brian Johnson, an analyst with Barclays Capital.The automakers are expected to push for reductions in health care costs, possibly by adjusting deductibles, co-pays on doctors’ visits and prescription medication coverage.Mr. Williams has previously said he would consider pooling hourly employees into a health care plan with salaried workers if that would save the corporations money.But any concessions by the union on health care will most likely be offset by the U.A.W.’s demands for bigger paychecks in the factories.“We have stagnant wages,” he said on Monday, adding that entry-level workers deserve a large increase. “Some of them are not part of the middle class the way they should be.”The two-tier system itself has come under added scrutiny because of how different companies have taken advantage of it.G.M. and Fiat Chrysler have had unlimited freedom to hire lower-paid workers because of agreements struck by the companies and the union with the Obama administration as part of their government bailouts.Ford, which did not go bankrupt or require a bailout, is required by its U.A.W. contract to begin bumping new workers up to the higher pay grade when lower-tier employees make up 25 percent of its overall work force.G.M.’s percentage of lower-paid workers is about 20 percent. By contrast, more than 40 percent of Fiat Chrysler’s American employees are entry-level workers.“I’m happy to have a job, but I wouldn’t expect to be treated like less of a human being,” said Darlene Rau, an entry-level employee at Fiat Chrysler’s assembly plant in Detroit. “I don’t make enough to pay all of my bills.”Besides shrinking the wage gap in the United States, the union is also intent on preventing the automakers from moving production of some vehicles to lower-wage nations. Last week, Ford said it would shift production of small cars to Mexico from a Michigan factory.“There is a very difficult balancing act ahead for both sides,” Mr. Shaiken said. “They both want a strong industry and more jobs, but what is the cost going to be to get there?”The positive vibe on Monday was different than at the same event in years past, when the ceremonial handshakes between labor and management were often tense affairs.Still, the tone of Monday’s ceremony, unlike during previous events, had a sense of unity between two camps that have often been adversaries. This time, Ms. Barra and her executives arrived in starched blue shirts that were nearly identical to those worn by the union negotiators. And both the G.M. and union leaders emphasized that the company and the U.A.W. had survived because they stuck together during the last recession.“Many people counted us out,” Mr. Williams said. “But we came back.”Advertisement