AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinA scheme that ultimately brought one of the country’s biggest law firms to its knees crystallized after a steak dinner.The four-year plan to manipulate the financial books and records of Dewey & LeBoeuf began to be detailed after a gathering at Del Frisco’s in Midtown Manhattan in late December 2008, a crucial cooperating witness testified on Monday in the criminal trial of the firm’s former top executives.The witness, Francis J. Canellas, the former finance director of the bankrupt law firm, testified that after the dinner, he returned to the law firm’s offices with Joel Sanders, Dewey’s former finance chairman, and a low-level employee, Zachary Warren. Together, they spent several hours discussing ways to overcome a shortfall of more than $50 million in the firm’s net income.Mr. Canellas said the firm needed to come up with a strategy for making year-end adjustments to the firm’s net income to comply with a requirement established by Dewey’s bank lenders. If Dewey could not close the income gap, it risked being deemed to be in default on its bank lines of credit, he said during his testimony.He told a jury at State Supreme Court in Manhattan that some of the adjustments to Dewey’s year-end income statements were within the bounds of common practices.“But not all the adjustments were legitimate,” Mr. Canellas said.Mr. Canellas is one of seven former Dewey employees who pleaded guilty and cooperated with prosecutors working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney. As the most senior member of Dewey’s finance team to agree to a plea, Mr. Canellas is seen as one of the critical witnesses in the trial of Mr. Sanders; Steven Davis, the law firm’s former chairman; and Stephen DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director.Mr. Warren, who was a client relations manager at Dewey, is scheduled to be tried later.Mr. Canellas, who reported to Mr. Sanders, directly oversaw many of the people who worked in Dewey’s finance department. He pleaded guilty to second-degree grand larceny over his role in the fraud and agreed to testify against his former colleagues in hopes of avoiding a lengthy prison sentence.Until now, testimony in the trial has been less than riveting, dealing with the arcana of law firm bookkeeping and accounting maneuvers. The day-to-day testimony in the trial has been rather mundane compared with the initial shock of the decision by Mr. Vance to secure a lengthy indictment against Mr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders, charging the three lawyers with masterminding a scheme to keep Dewey’s failing finances from its bank lenders and other creditors.Several former leaders of the once-high-flying law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf apparently violated a cardinal rule that lawyers always tell their clients: Don’t put anything incriminating into an email.The jurors, however, appeared to focus intently on Mr. Canellas, with some leaning forward to get a better look at the spreadsheets and income statements for 2008 that prosecutors projected on a large screen in the courtroom.Mr. Canellas’s initial testimony is not perceived as being too damaging to Mr. Davis and Mr. DiCarmine, who were known as the “Steves” within the law firm. Neither Mr. Davis nor Mr. DiCarmine attended the dinner at Del Frisco’s or the late-night meeting on Dec. 30, 2008, in Mr. Warren’s office.Mr. Canellas did tell the jury that Mr. Sanders told him that “Steve and Steve had wanted to make the covenants,” a reference to the requirement by the banks that Dewey maintain a minimum net income of $278 million.Mr. Canellas testified that he and Mr. Sanders began discussing the need for making adjustments to Dewey’s financial statements several weeks before the Dec. 30 dinner, when it became clear the firm’s net income would fall tens of millions short of the goal set by the banks.A day after the Dec. 30 meeting, Mr. Canellas said Mr. Warren sent him a spreadsheet labeled the “master plan,” which included many of the adjustments to the firm’s net income that were discussed the previous night.The spreadsheet, which was shown to the courtroom, reflected the “adjustments that were discussed on Dec. 30,” Mr. Canellas testified. It was not clear from Mr. Canellas’s initial testimony who put together the spreadsheet figures.At its peak, Dewey employed more than 1,300 lawyers. The firm collapsed in bankruptcy in May 2012. Prosecutors contend that its top executives began manipulating Dewey’s financial records as revenues were dropping during the financial crisis and the firm was being weighed down by commitments to pay big salaries to a number of top lawyers.The lawyers for the defendants, during opening arguments, said the accounting adjustments seized on by prosecutors were minor. The defendants’ lawyers have said the firm would not have collapsed if news of the criminal investigation had not been leaked to the news media.Mr. Canellas’s direct testimony is expected to continue for at least another day before cross-examination begins.Advertisement