AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanWith Greece’s economy and its future in the eurozone both teetering, the usually astute Robert Reich has dredged up the sorry old trope that Goldman Sachs is to blame for everything, proving yet again that even a Rhodes Scholar and former cabinet secretary is clueless about the role Wall Street firms play for their clients.“People seem to forget that the Greek debt crisis — which is becoming a European and even possibly a world economic crisis — grew out of a deal with Goldman Sachs, engineered by Goldman’s Lloyd Blankfein,” Mr. Reich, the labor secretary in the Clinton administration, wrote on his Facebook page on Wednesday, before Greece’s prospects for reaching a deal with its creditors started to improve. “Several years ago, Blankfein and his Goldman team helped Greece hide the true extent of its debt — and in the process almost doubled it.”Mr. Reich’s prevarication, which quickly generated more than 20,000 “likes” on Facebook, is such a distortion of what took place in 2000 and 2001, when Greece and Goldman entered into a series of currency swaps, that it bears unpacking.Of the many prerequisites that the Maastricht Treaty set for Greece and other countries to enter the European Union and adopt the euro was that they show an ability to reduce their debt if it exceeded the prescribed debt-to-gross domestic product ratio of 60 percent. In 2000, Greece’s G.D.P. was about $130 billion, but its debt was closer to $136 billion, or 105 percent of G.D.P.Some countries reduced debt by selling state-owned companies or assets. Some did it by selling expected future revenue streams — from, say, highway tolls or taxes — through securitization, not unlike how Wall Street packaged and sold mortgages before the financial crisis. Some did it by entering into so-called derivative transactions, like swapping debt denominated in one currency into debt denominated in another. Some countries tried a combination of all three.Every Wall Street bank was eager to help. For its part, Goldman had a good relationship with Greece, so bankers in its London office were selected to work with the finance ministry. In December 2000, and again in June 2001, Goldman entered into custom-designed transactions that allowed Greece to swap a small portion of its debt denominated in dollars and yen into debt denominated in euros. Not unlike a privatization — where proceeds from a sale are paid up front but the revenue generated from it are lost in the future, potentially adding to budget deficits — Greece was able to reduce its debt immediately but was required to make future annual payments to Goldman in return.The swaps allowed Greece to reduce the amount of its debt, in euro terms, by €2.4 billion, lowering its debt-to-G.D.P. ratio to 103.7 percent from 105.3 percent. It did not make much of dent in the overall problem, but it was a directional move that satisfied the European Union. What Greece did was similar to a homeowner locking in a fixed-rate mortgage at a prevailing interest rate, recognizing that if rates shot up on a variable one, the payments would become unaffordable, risking default.No one complained at the time: Greece was happy. Goldman was happy. The deal was not public because it was between Goldman and Greece, but both parties entered into it voluntarily and contractually. Eurostat, the eurozone’s accounting authority, blessed the transaction, according to subsequently released emails.What upset the apple cart — and started some in Greece second-guessing the deal and blaming Goldman publicly — was the sharp drop in interest rates after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. Just as a homeowner who locked in a fixed-rate mortgage would not be happy if interest rates fell, Greece was not happy that it had locked in a high-price deal that became even more expensive on a mark-to-market basis after Sept. 11. Greece and Goldman renegotiated the deal in 2002, but that proved no better for the Greek government.In July 2003, the journalist Nick Dunbar wrote about the deal in Risk magazine and noted that it seemed as if Goldman had made a $200 million profit. He also pointed out that although the deal was not particularly transparent — that was Greece’s goal after all — it was valid.“There is no doubt that Goldman Sachs’s deal with Greece was a completely legitimate transaction under Eurostat rules,” he wrote. “Moreover, both Goldman Sachs and Greece’s public debt division are following a path well trodden by other European sovereigns and derivatives dealers.”Few noticed Mr. Dunbar’s article. In 2005, Goldman transferred the swap to the National Bank of Greece, one of the country’s largest private banks, and Greece’s timeline for repaying the debt, which by then had ballooned to €5.1 billion from €2.8 billion, was stretched out to 2037. Goldman’s profit on the deal increased to about $500 million, according to Mr. Dunbar, though Goldman has declined to comment on it.In an interview last week, Mr. Dunbar noted Goldman’s “greed” but also said, “The Greeks knew what they wanted to do and they asked Goldman to do it.”He also blames Eurostat for rubber-stamping the transaction. Even though the debt is barely more than 1 percent of Greece’s overall outstanding obligations, Mr. Dunbar thinks it has become a symbol of something bigger, which is “the three-way toxic relationship that was at the heart of the creation of the eurozone. The public relations of the eurozone was all about optimism and bringing together these countries that had been at war once upon a time, and this was done by papering over the major flaws that was exploited by institutions that wanted to achieve a result.”After the 2008 financial crisis, bashing Goldman has become both a sport and a pastime. In February 2010, the German magazine Der Spiegel did a splashy rehash of Mr. Dunbar’s 2003 report without crediting him.“Goldman Sachs charged a hefty commission for the deal and sold the swaps on to a Greek bank in 2005,” the magazine reported. The Financial Times picked up the Der Spiegel article, with just the right amount of snark. “Ouzo all around then,” it reported. “Well, at least for Goldman, if not the Greek banks.”The timing was propitious for the conspiracy-minded. Two months later, in April 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission sued Goldman for its role in constructing “Abacus,” a synthetic collateralized debt obligation, contending that it somehow misled two highly sophisticated investors in the process. Goldman settled the suit in July 2010 for $550 million. A few weeks later, Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, hauled Goldman bankers and executives in front of his Permanent Senate Subcommittee on Investigations and sandblasted them for a day, essentially accusing the firm of causing the financial crisis when all it did was what it has always done: take risk from its counterparties, warehouse it and then distribute it to the wider marketplace.It made for great political theater. But just like Mr. Reich’s diatribe, it also betrayed the fact that few in Washington or in Athens or in Brussels seem to understand the role Wall Street plays.“Doesn’t seem right, does it?” Mr. Reich wondered about how Goldman could rake in huge profits at the expense of the Greek people who now “struggle to buy medicine and food.”Plenty needs to be improved about the way Wall Street conducts its business, but when people who know better — or should know better — stoop to cheap political grandstanding, things won’t change for the better.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”Advertisement