AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningClient confidentiality is viewed as sacrosanct to lawyers. Ethical and professional standards dictate that what is said to a lawyer should not be revealed, even after a client’s death.But General Motors is facing a challenge to that protection as it fights a barrage of lawsuits over defective ignition switches that have resulted in more than 100 deaths and multiple injuries. Last week, plaintiffs suing G.M. asked the Federal District Court in Manhattan to find that the company and its outside lawyers engaged in criminal or fraudulent activity by covering up the defect. That, the plaintiffs say, allows the court to lift the veil of confidentiality over their communications.This request presents a significant threat that could reveal even more embarrassing information about how the automaker’s lawyers dealt with the defect. Lawyers can be quite candid when discussing a lawsuit, confident that their thoughts will never see the light of day. But that could change if the court orders G.M. and its outside lawyers to make public their internal legal analyses and assessments.Known as the crime fraud exception, a court can require the disclosure of confidential communications with lawyers that would have otherwise been protected by the attorney-client privilege. The courts can also require disclosure of documents prepared as part of a case, called work product, if the client sought legal advice to engage in what would be regarded as a crime or fraud now or in the future. If you talk to your lawyer about what you did in the past, then that communication is fully protected. But a client asking lawyers for help to engage in continuing or future crime loses that protection.A report by Anton R. Valukas issued in June 2014 about an internal investigation of the defect found that outside lawyers from King & Spalding warned G.M.’s in-house lawyers as early as 2010 that the company might face punitive damages in lawsuits filed by drivers killed when their airbags did not deploy because of the defective ignition switch. G.M. settled the cases confidentially rather than risk going to trial, but it did not disclose the defect to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration until 2014.The timeliness of the disclosure is at the heart of the plaintiffs’ request to lift the confidentiality protections for communications between G.M. and King & Spalding lawyers. The plaintiffs are asking for information related to the investigation of the defect before G.M. ordered a recall. And they are seeking information about discussions by its outside lawyers about whether the rules of professional responsibility required them to reveal information or withdraw from representing the company.To obtain client communications protected by the attorney-client privilege, it must be shown that there is some indication that the client sought legal advice to provide some help in committing a crime or fraud. Courts do not demand proof that the legal advice actually assisted in a violation – only that consulting the lawyer raised a real suspicion that the client misused the lawyer’s services. Moreover, the lawyer need not be aware of the client’s purpose in seeking legal advice; it is often the case that the lawyer is misled about the real reason that a client comes in for a consultation.According to the plaintiffs, the crime or fraud that they say G.M. committed was the company’s attempts to conceal information about the ignition defect by not reporting it promptly to government authorities. They also say the company failed to take steps to repair the vehicles with the faulty ignition switches. As The New York Times reported in May, the Justice Department identified criminal violations by G.M. in how it dealt with the defect. The company is negotiating a settlement that could result in a record penalty.One problem for G.M. is how a potential settlement with federal prosecutors might affect the plaintiffs’ efforts to obtain the automaker’s confidential communications with its lawyers. If the company is required to plead guilty to covering up the defect, then interactions with King & Spalding could well have been part of an effort to keep the faulty ignition switch from coming to light, helping the plaintiffs’ request. Even a deferred-prosecution agreement — under which the company would avoid pleading guilty to a charge in exchange for paying a hefty fine — is likely to require G.M. to admit to criminal conduct, which would aid the plaintiffs.The time frame for the violation will also be important to the application of the crime-fraud exception. Mr. Valukas’s report asserts that the company’s senior management was not fully aware of the defect until late 2013. But a potential criminal charge filed by the Justice Department might identify an earlier date when G.M. knew of the problem with the ignition switch. If prosecutors require G.M. to admit that it failed to take corrective action earlier than it did, that could help the court find that the attorney-client privilege should not apply.Unlike communications between the lawyer and client, documents and other materials created by lawyers that contain their thoughts and strategies about a case, known as opinion work product, are almost completely off limits to being disclosed. The courts go out of their way to protect lawyers from having to reveal their impressions and legal analysis because of the chilling effect that might have on their candor in representing clients. But the crime-fraud exception applies even to this type of material if it can be shown that the lawyer knew of the client’s improper purpose and provided legal assistance anyway.The plaintiffs claim that King & Spalding aided G.M. in covering up the defect by entering into confidential settlements on the company’s behalf in lawsuits to keep the problems with its vehicles from becoming public. This is a much tougher argument to win, however, because telling a client about the potential implications of a lawsuit, such as the risk of punitive damages, and the benefits of a confidential settlement are at the core of the type of advice that lawyers routinely provide.Whether the decision to settle cases was an effort by G.M. to cover up the defect does not mean King & Spalding was a party to a violation. Proving the firm’s knowledge of its client’s misconduct will be much more difficult when the legal advice is typical of what lawyers do on behalf of clients. The heightened protection afforded to this type of work product makes is much less likely that the court will order the firm to disclose its internal documents.For G.M., the negotiations with the Justice Department will involve a delicate dance. The amount of the penalty the company has to pay could be secondary to its very real concerns about how any resolution will affect the liability it faces in the private lawsuits. The more wrongdoing it is forced to admit, the greater the risk that its confidential communications could be revealed.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement