AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisWASHINGTON — Federal regulators on Monday said they now had a deeper understanding of one of the strangest market moves in recent Wall Street history.The Treasury Department and four other agencies released a highly anticipated report into an unusually sharp rise in the price of a benchmark United States government bond that took place last fall.The move, known as the Treasury “flash” rally, occurred on Oct. 15, and only lasted for about an hour. But the ferocity of the ascent — and the simultaneous eye-popping plunge in the yield — prompted widespread concern about the functioning of the market for Treasury securities, which helps set interest rates for borrowers throughout the economy.Typically, extreme volatility in the Treasuries market can be explained by an obvious news event, but no such glaring trigger occurred on Oct. 15. As a result, speculation about the causes surged.Some wondered whether a trading firm had erroneously submitted an enormous trade that drove the price up, or if a technological problem — like the one that caused the New York Stock Exchange to stop trading last week — had taken place. In addition, Wall Street bankers and traders, who have chafed at the overhaul of their industry, seized upon the bizarre jump in the price of the 10-year Treasury note to argue that new rules are hurting the market.But the five-agency group, which included the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Wall Street’s closest regulator, avoided identifying any overwhelming single cause in the 70-page report, except to say that there were far more trades to buy Treasuries in those crucial minutes than trades to sell. Acknowledging that such an imbalance is not unusual, the report tried to determine why the rush of buy orders led to such a large move in the 10-year Treasury note.In the Treasuries market, the extent of a bond’s movement is often tracked by looking at the change in its yield, which is the interest payment on the bond expressed as a percentage of the bond’s price. A bond’s yield goes down as its price goes up. On Oct. 15, the 10-year Treasury note’s yield plummeted to below 1.9 percent on the morning of Oct. 15, after opening above 2.15 percent. After a particularly steep 15-minute plunge around 9:30 a.m., the yield sharply rebounded, and ended the day close to where it started.The Treasury Department and four other agencies released a report into an unusually sharp rise in the price of a benchmark U.S. government bond.The report parses the actions of the two types of institutions that dominate the Treasuries market — traditional Wall Street banks, and trading firms that make quick-fire bets for their own account, which the report calls principal trading firms.The report asserts that the banks and principal trading firms took steps to protect themselves from a rise in Treasury prices — and those steps seemed to drive the prices even higher. The banks widened the gap at which they would buy and sell Treasuries, a standard practice in volatile moments in the markets. At one point, they stopped offering to sell Treasuries. The principal trading firms, for their part, reduced the average size of their trades. “Both actions served as risk management strategies by reducing the number and size of orders that could be executed,” the report said.The report also makes it clear that markets did not “go dark” on Oct. 15, as some on Wall Street had contended. Instead, transactions occurred continuously and trading volumes surged. The cautious steps taken by the banks and trading firms could have been enough on that day to cause such a wild ride. But to understand how would require a deeper analysis of why trading algorithms behaved as they did on Oct. 15, according to a senior regulator who was involved in the report.Critics of bank regulation in Washington said the report did not do enough to explore whether new rules have constrained the banks’ willingness to step in and correct seemingly irrational moves in securities prices.“They are trying to paint a narrative that regulations have no role — that’s the new sound bite,” Daniel M. Gallagher, a Republican commissioner at the Securities and Exchange Commission, said in an interview. “But of course it has a role; it’s the main factor.”On the other side, supporters of the overhaul of the financial system have taken up the report as evidence that Wall Street overstepped in using one market move to push back against new rules. In recent months, many on Wall Street have said that new regulations have made it hard to carry out trades at dependable prices. “That’s the latest scare that the industry is using to attack reform,” said Dennis M. Kelleher, president of Better Markets, a group that has supported many aspects of the financial system overhaul. “They have no evidence for this. Where’s the data?” The role of new trading firms that now dominate the Treasuries market may also come under scrutiny. The report’s authors said they supported a study into the implications of requiring registration for firms that carry out automated trading in Treasuries.The report does not highlight high-frequency trading firms, even though much Treasuries trading takes place on an automated basis. It took that approach because high-frequency trading is now prevalent across different Wall Street institutions. The report did, however, examine practices such as order canceling and “self-trading” within the principal trading firms. Enforcement staff at regulatory agencies may use the report to investigate trading patterns. A footnote in the report stated, “At times, self-trading may reflect unlawful conduct.”Advertisement