AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy George HayGreek banks have been dragged back from the edge of the precipice. Had marathon talks failed to produce an agreement on Monday, Greece’s four big banks would have collapsed. Instead, they will get 25 billion euros in recapitalization resources. But there’s still plenty to fret about.Lenders are almost out of liquidity. Despite capital controls limiting withdrawals to €60 a day, the sector will run out of cash sometime this week, a person familiar with the situation estimates. To survive, the European Central Bank needs to augment €90 billion of so-called emergency liquidity assistance, which is currently capped. It’s possible that the governing council of the European Central Bank will do just that now that Athens has a new deal.It’s more likely things will stay as they are until July 15. Greek banks can probably survive until then with capital controls still in place. And eurozone politicians have made their support conditional on the Greek parliament passing a host of reforms by Wednesday. Delaying extra liquidity would help ensure this happens.In theory, the €25 billion signed off to sort out Greek bank solvency should mean lenders won’t face a Cypriot-style bail-in, where depositors swallow losses on holdings over €100,000. Instead, it is assumed that the European Stability Mechanism, Europe’s bailout fund, will be paid back by privatizing “valuable Greek assets.”But Greeks have made a notorious hash of attempted privatizations in previous bailouts. The €25 billion is supposed to cover losses arising from a forthcoming stress test, but the scale of the hole in Greek banks could be epic. Around two-fifths of Greek banks’ loans were already nonperforming, and capital controls will have made things much worse. Eurozone leaders’ insistence that Europe’s new resolution directive enabling senior creditor haircuts be passed in Greece by July 22 shows that bail-ins are on the table.That doesn’t necessarily make uninsured depositor haircuts inevitable — at least some of the €32 billion of equity, hybrids and senior debt held by Greek banks as of March would theoretically be hit first, Barclays reckons. But right now, the true capital hole of the Greek bank sector – and its future shape – remains up in the air.George Hay is European financial editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement