By CHAD BRAYJULY 13, 2015
The consumer products company Jarden Corporation said on Monday that it had reached an agreement to acquire the disposable dinnerware maker Waddington Group for about $1.35 billion.The deal is expected to expand Jarden’s product portfolio and broaden its distribution platform, particularly in the business-to-business category, Jarden said.Jarden will acquire Waddington from a fund managed by the private equity firm Olympus Partners, which acquired Waddington in 2012.“As a fast-growing, well-managed business, Waddington offers a solid platform for us to leverage our proven, time-tested approach to driving organic growth and creating additional value through continued investments in product development and innovation,” Martin E. Franklin, the Jarden founder and executive chairman, said in a news release.Advertisement“Waddington’s entrepreneurial growth culture is a strong cultural fit with Jarden, while offering a compelling financial and strategic value proposition.”AdvertisementThe transaction is expected to close in the third quarter and is subject to regulatory approval.The deal is expected to be funded through a combination of cash, equity and debt.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Based in Covington, Ky., Waddington manufactures disposable dinnerwear and serving products for the commercial, food service and retail markets. It operates 17 manufacturing facilities in the United States, Canada, Britain and Ireland and has about 2,900 employees.“This acquisition provides us with the resources and scale necessary to further strengthen our existing product innovation and distribution capabilities to drive top- and bottom-line growth,” Mike Evans, the Waddington president and chief executive, said in a news release. “I am confident that Waddington’s employees share in my excitement as we look forward to becoming part of the Jarden family.”Following the transaction, Waddington will be included in Jarden’s branded consumables segment. Jarden said it expected the business to contribute about $800 million to its revenue in 2016.Jarden, based in Miami, produces a variety of consumer goods, with more than 120 brands. Its brands include Ball, Coleman, Crock-Pot, First Alert and Yankee Candle. The company had net sales of $8.3 billion in 2014.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Dinnerware Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.