By CHAD BRAYJULY 13, 2015
The pipeline operator MPLX said on Monday that it had agreed to acquire MarkWest Energy Partners, in a deal that values the company at about $20 billion, including debt.The deal would combine two companies structured as so-called master limited partnerships to own oil pipelines and petroleum or natural gas storage assets. The combined company would have a market capitalization of about $21 billion.Under the terms of the deal, MarkWest shareholders would receive the equivalent of $78.64 a share in cash and shares, representing a 32 percent premium to the company’s closing price on Friday.MPLX, based in Findlay, Ohio, was created in 2012 by Marathon Petroleum to own and operate pipelines and other so-called midstream assets. Its assets include 2,900 miles of pipeline in nine states; it posted revenue of $548.3 million in 2014.Advertisement“This combination is a significant step in executing MPC’s strategy to grow its higher-valued, stable cash flow midstream business, by transforming MPLX into a large-cap, diversified master limited partnership,” Gary R. Heminger, the Marathon Petroleum president and chief executive, said in a news release.AdvertisementUnder the terms of the deal, MarkWest shareholders will receive 1.09 shares in MPLX and a cash payment of $3.37 a share for each share of MarkWest they hold.The transaction is subject to approval by MarkWest shareholders and regulatory approval. It is expected to close in the fourth quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the deal closes, Marathon Petroleum will continue to serve as the general partner of MPLX and own about 19 percent of the combined company.As part of the transaction, Marathon Petroleum would give $675 million in cash to MPLX to help fund the cash portion of the deal.“Our best-in-class midstream platform will provide the combined company with an extraordinary portfolio of integrated services and long-term growth opportunities,” Frank Semple, the MarkWest chairman, president and chief executive officer, said in a news release.Formed in 2002, MarkWest Energy, based in Denver, owns assets used in the gathering processing and transportation of natural gas. The company posted revenue of $2.18 billion in 2014.UBS and the law firm Jones Day advised MPLX. Jefferies and the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore advised MarkWest.A version of this article appears in print on July 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Energy Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.