AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — In the wake of computer attacks on the government and other prominent targets, investor interest in cybersecurity is unsurprisingly high.The latest indication of that enthusiasm: CrowdStrike, a security services provider focused on stopping attacks before they happen, announced on Monday that it had raised $100 million in a new round of financing.The investment was led by Google Capital, one of the technology giant’s venture capital arms, in its first cybersecurity deal. It also included Rackspace, the web-hosting services company and a client of the nearly four-year-old start-up. Others in the round included existing investors Accel Partners and Warburg Pincus.As reminders about innumerable holes in security defenses emerge — most recently when the federal Office of Personnel Management disclosed that two cyberintrusions pilfered the personal information of more than 22 million people — cybersecurity has become a significant concern to companies, and a focus of private investors. Nearly $2.4 billion was invested in the sector last year, almost double the amount in 2013, according to a report by the research firm CB Insights.CrowdStrike is positioning itself as a next-generation solution for security. The company’s main product, Falcon, relies on cloud computing to run more robust threat-detection analytics and make it easier to roll out its systems across a customer’s network.According to its co-founder and chief executive, George Kurtz, one customer, a big bank that he did not name, installed Falcon quickly and seamlessly on 77,000 computers without rebooting. Traditional systems, he contended, would have taken hours at least to do the same thing.At the same time, Mr. Kurtz said, CrowdStrike is focused less on detecting specific attacks and instead on both identifying weak points and on picking up on signs that an intrusion is happening — even if the assault is not using malware. More traditional approaches, he argued, work more toward identifying incidents after the fact.“In the real world, you wouldn’t ask if the bullet shot at you was a 9 millimeter or a .45 caliber,” he said in a telephone interview. “You’d want to get out of the way.”Earlier this year, the company boasted that it had defended an unnamed American technology company from intrusions by a Chinese hacking group.The company’s approach has led to significant interest from customers, Mr. Kurtz said. CrowdStrike has enjoyed a 550 percent compounded annual growth rate in its annual subscription revenue over the past three years, while the number of its transactions worth at least $1 million has risen 700 percent year over year.Mr. Kurtz declined to provide other financial measures, including the company’s actual revenue figures or its valuation. (He allowed that the newest round provided the start-up with “near unicorn” status, Silicon Valley parlance for saying that it was near a $1 billion valuation.)CrowdStrike’s approach also drew interest from prospective backers, notably Google Capital, that focus on investing in more mature start-ups looking to expand their operations. One of its big focuses is security, which the Internet giant has an interest in, according to Gene Frantz, a partner at Google Capital.CrowdStrike first heard from Google Capital almost a year ago. At the time, Mr. Kurtz said, the start-up was not looking to carry out what would be its second investment round in two years. But taking money from a Google affiliate would provide a huge validation to the company.And after what Mr. Kurtz said was an exceedingly thorough due-diligence process, Mr. Frantz said that CrowdStrike seemed like a good place to plant its flag in the security industry.“It’s a crucial company in a crucial space,” Mr. Frantz said. “It’s differentiated and extremely well positioned.”That said, he added, Google Capital now believes it knows most of the major players in the cybersecurity industry and plans to make more investments.With the new money, CrowdStrike will focus on hiring more programmers and sales and marketing staff, as well as expanding globally. Mr. Kurtz added that talk of going public was premature but that all signs pointed to listing on the stock markets.“Given our trajectory, I believe we could become a public company in the future,” he said. “Right now, it’s more about building out the platform, and getting more customers and geographic footprint.”Advertisement