AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicFour months after his proposal to merge with General Motors was rejected, Sergio Marchionne, the chief executive of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, said Tuesday that he had no plans to make another offer.In his first detailed comments about the failed effort, Mr. Marchionne said that his interest had cooled considerably since G.M.’s board had dismissed his overture in March.“I was rebuffed once, and I won’t go back to get my nose bloodied a second time,” Mr. Marchionne said after participating in the ceremonial opening of contract talks between Fiat Chrysler and the United Automobile Workers union.Mr. Marchionne has not backed off on his belief that automakers should join forces to maximize their capital investments in new technology.But he said Fiat Chrysler was not actively seeking a merger partner and can afford to wait until the right opportunity arises.“The pitch is that there is a better to way to run this business,” he said. “I’ll wait, and we’ll get it done.”Mr. Marchionne’s comments came after he reassured U.A.W. leaders that Fiat Chrysler would not pursue a merger that threatened American factory jobs.The union has long been wary of mergers involving Detroit’s three automakers because of the potential of plant closures and job losses.But the U.A.W. has been supportive of Mr. Marchionne since he led the Italian automaker Fiat to take over Chrysler after its bankruptcy and government bailout in 2009.Fiat Chrysler has been on a hiring spree in the United States in recent years, bringing in primarily entry-level workers, who earn less than longtime U.A.W. members.The automaker has added about 15,000 union jobs since the last U.A.W. contract was signed four years ago. All told, more than 40 percent of its 36,000 blue-collar workers in the United States earn wages of $16 to $19 an hour, far less than the upper-tier union rate of $28.Union leaders again expressed a desire on Tuesday to close the gap between pay grades during this summer’s contract negotiations with G.M., Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler.“Our membership has gone through some significant changes,” said Dennis Williams, the union’s president, referring to the growth of lower-wage jobs. “Very often they feel like second-class citizens.”He declined to say whether the U.A.W. would push for a cap on lower-wage workers at F.C.A., as it has, for example, at Ford.And he refused to blame Mr. Marchionne for taking advantage of the two-tier system. Instead, Mr. Williams praised him for taking a chance on Chrysler when many industry experts predicted it would go out of business.“We have to thank a lot of people, including Sergio, for taking the risk and the challenge on Chrysler, and making it what it is today,” Mr. Williams said.Fiat Chrysler has been one of the strongest players in the resurgence of the United States auto market, and it has regularly posted sales increases that surpass the industry’s overall rate of growth.Mr. Marchionne said his goal in the new contract was to continue encouraging the business to grow while at the same time allowing all employees — including entry-level workers — to share in its financial success.“They need to participate in the economic well-being of the company,” he said. “But we need to make money to pay people.”While Fiat Chrysler is solidly profitable, it is half the size of competitors like G.M. and Toyota Motor. Because of its size, the company cannot spread its costs across the same number of vehicles produced by its bigger rivals.If he does find a merger partner, Mr. Marchionne vowed not to cut jobs as part of consolidation. “This is not a slash-and-burn strategy,” he said.Some analysts have predicted that Fiat Chrysler will face tougher negotiations with the union than G.M. and Ford, mostly because those companies have smaller percentages of entry-level workers.But Mr. Williams suggested that putting a cap on the number of lower-tier employees may not be as important as raising wages for the new workers. “I’m not hung up on caps,” he said. “I want to be creative.”The union opened contract talks with G.M. on Monday and will start negotiations next week with Ford. The current contracts for all three Detroit companies expire in September.Much of the discussion will be devoted to larger issues such as wages and benefits, particularly health care costs. But both sides will also have to grapple with the futures of individual factories across the country.Fiat Chrysler, for example, is considering moving production of its popular Jeep Wrangler out of a plant in Toledo, Ohio, that has made the sport utility vehicle for years. But Mr. Marchionne said the union would be consulted before a final decision.Besides the union talks, Fiat Chrysler is facing other pressures, particularly on vehicle safety. Federal regulators are expected to impose a fine on the company this summer for its lax approach in fixing more than 11 million vehicles included in 23 different recalls.The company also on Tuesday began an effort to get a new trial in Georgia to avoid having to pay the $150 million a jury awarded to the family of a 4-year-old boy killed in a Jeep that was involved in a rear-end collision.Advertisement