AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiRollback. Doorbuster. Blowout prices. Do those words mean anything anymore?Even Black Friday is fast getting lost in the blur of perpetual discounts as some of the nation’s biggest retailers go head-to-head Wednesday in a new midsummer event — yet another addition to an annual sales calendar packed with sales, sales and more sales.Amazon, the online juggernaut that has been upending brick-and-mortar retailing for years, set off the latest sales frenzy by announcing a sale for the site’s 20th anniversary on Wednesday. Its Amazon Prime Day, meant to attract more shoppers to its $99 free-shipping membership plan, promises “more deals than Black Friday.”Not to be outdone, Walmart swiftly announced an event of its own the very same day, with “thousands of great deals” and free shipping on orders of $35 or more on Walmart.com — and, in a jab at Amazon, no membership required.“We’ve heard some retailers are charging $100 to get access to a sale,” Fernando Madeira, chief executive of Walmart.com, said on a company blog. “But the idea of asking customers to pay extra in order to save money just doesn’t add up for us.” The two retail giants join Target, which has offered deals in midsummer for six years with sales called Black Friday in July.“It’s madness. They’re like lemmings,” said Robin Lewis, chief executive of The Robin Report, a retail industry publication. “Brands and retailers are beating each other to death for a share of the consumer’s wallet, which at best is growing slowly.”Disappointing numbers on Tuesday from the Commerce Department, which showed sales at retailers fell 0.3 percent in June from the previous month, added to concerns that consumers are not in a spending mood despite a brightening job market, lower gasoline prices and a seemingly endless parade of sales.This tepid consumer demand will force retailers to keep discounting to get reluctant shoppers to spend more, Mr. Lewis said. But the heavy discounts are a drag on retailers’ margins.“This race to the bottom just goes on and on,” he said.It is clear that America is experiencing sales fatigue.There are January sales, Valentine’s Day sales, Presidents’ Day sales and Easter sales. Mother’s Day sales, Memorial Day sales, Father’s Day sales, and Fourth of July sales. Back-to-school sales, Labor Day sales, Columbus Day sales, and Veterans Day sales.Then there are 40 percent-off sales, 70 percent-off sales, buy-one-get-one-free sales, gift-with-purchase sales, loyalty programs, price-matching guarantees, and coupons.The king of all sales has for years been Black Friday, the marathon shopping event on the day after Thanksgiving that has set off camp-outs and stampedes. But even Black Friday has started to bleed backward, with sales starting in early November and some retailers opening stores before most families sit down to Thanksgiving dinner. Black Friday itself is the opening day of more weeks of holiday sales.Behind the sales madness is a retail sector that has been plagued with tepid growth amid brutal competition, especially as online retailers, led by Amazon, steal away market share and drive down prices in almost every category. Although Amazon still trails Walmart in sales, it has a market capitalization of about $206 billion, closing in on Walmart’s market capitalization of $238 billion.Forrester Research, a research and advisory firm, forecasts that e-commerce sales in the United States will reach $334 billion this year, or about 10 percent of all retail spending. “Retailers have gotten so used to holding sales that it’s difficult for each sale to stand out as much,” said Sucharita Mulpuru, an e-commerce and consumer specialist at Forrester. “And sales are typically terrible for the bottom line. You’re basically giving away the margin. But hopefully you gain a new customer, and they pick up other items that make up that margin you lost.”E-commerce retailers are not immune. Many sites, including Amazon, use complex algorithms to update prices in real time to compete with discounter rivals. And many online retailers do not turn a profit, but rely on investor funding to offer lower and lower prices.That Amazon feels compelled to hold a big sale in midsummer, some experts said, could be a sign that even the fast-growing giant is starting to feel the pressure to jump ahead in the sales race. (Deals in a “sneak peek” include 60 percent off Amazon private-label baby wipes, $199 Chromebook laptops and Bose headphones “at the lowest price ever on Amazon.”)“They’re trying to loop people into their loyalty program,” Ms. Mulpuru said. “It’s a pre-emptive move to ensure they don’t lose market share at all.”Whether online or off, sales fatigue is a growing concern.When retailers offer deep discounts, experts say, the price of the marked-down merchandise is only one factor that entices shoppers to buy; they are also driven to purchase because they worry they will miss out on a great deal when the sale expires. But when consumers become awash in cheap deals, there is not as strong an incentive to buy.“There’s just a preponderance of merchandise out there, and consumers feel completely overwhelmed,” said Kit Yarrow, a professor of psychology and marketing at Golden Gate University in San Francisco. “They won’t purchase unless they have a strong incentive to buy.”Still, Ms. Yarrow said, she has been surprised by the tolerance American shoppers have for bargains. European retailers tend to hold big sales less frequently, she said.“It’s sort of like chasing a high,” she said. “But it gets a little bit harder to get that big burst of emotion when there are so many sales.”One silver lining is that there has probably never been a better time to be a consumer.Julio Ocasio, shopping with his girlfriend, Nelly Gonzalez, at a J. C. Penney in Manhattan for an outfit for a wedding, said he had gotten so used to sales that he almost never paid full price. “It’s always 50 percent off here, 40 percent off there. And there’s a sale for every holiday,” he said. “But that’s great for me, because I’m looking for deals.”Advertisement