By CHAD BRAYOCT. 26, 2015
LONDON — Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, said on Monday that the closing of the sale of a controlling stake in its automotive lighting and LED components business was “uncertain” after regulatory concerns were raised in the United States.A consortium led by GO Scale Capital, an investment fund sponsored by GSR Ventures of China and Oak Investment Partners, agreed in March to acquire an 80.1 percent stake in the business for as much as $2.9 billion. Philips combined the lighting and LED components operations into a stand-alone company last year. The fund has offices in Beijing, Hong Kong and Silicon Valley and its goal is to “scale up its investments in China for global markets.”On Monday, Philips said that the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, an interagency committee that includes representatives from the Treasury and Justice Departments, had raised “unforeseen concerns” about the deal.“Philips and GO Scale Capital will continue to engage with C.F.I.U.S. and will take all reasonable steps to address its concerns, but given these, the closing of the transaction is uncertain,” Philips said in a news release.AdvertisementAs part of the deal, Philips, which is based in Amsterdam, would retain 19.9 percent of the business. It would receive $2.8 billion in cash and a deferred contingent payment of up to $100 million. The deal valued the business around $3.3 billion in total.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The transaction had originally been expected to close in the third quarter.Lumileds, as the combined operations of the automotive lighting and LED components business is known, posted sales of about $2 billion in 2014. It has operations in more than 30 countries and about 8,300 employees worldwide.AdvertisementThe sale was part of a continuing effort by Philips to restructure its operations to focus on growth areas.The update on the Lumileds sale came as Philips returned to a profit in the third quarter.Philips on Monday reported a profit of 324 million euros, or about $357 million, in the third quarter from a loss of €103 million in the period a year earlier.Sales rose 12 percent to €5.84 billion in the third quarter, from €5.19 billion in the third quarter of 2014.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.