AdvertisementSupported byBy Vindu GoelSAN FRANCISCO — Jeffry James Hill, a former Napa Valley winemaker and vineyard manager who was accused of stealing grapes and misrepresenting the origin of wines he sold to consumers and to other winemakers, pleaded no contest on Tuesday to one count of grand theft.Mr. Hill’s plea in California Superior Court in Napa related to the theft of wine grapes in the early hours of Oct. 21, 2013, from Del Dotto Vineyards. Mr. Hill, who was harvesting the fruit for Del Dotto, diverted several tons of grapes to his own winery, according to court records and interviews with a former vineyard manager for Mr. Hill and a lawyer for Del Dotto.The court dismissed a second felony theft charge against Mr. Hill related to grapes he was accused of diverting a few days earlier from another Del Dotto vineyard.The rise and fall of Mr. Hill’s wine business and the many allegations of fraud against him were detailed in a lengthy New York Times article in January. The article described how federal alcohol agents met with Mr. Hill in April 2014 and laid out 19 allegations of wrongdoing, including tax evasion and falsely labeling cheaper wines as more expensive ones.The officials forced him to cede control of his business, Hill Wine Company, which then filed for bankruptcy, owing more than $8 million. The bankruptcy trustee has accused Mr. Hill and his relatives of various fraudulent acts and is seeking to recover funds from them.Bryan Tong, the Napa County assistant prosecutor handling the Del Dotto case, confirmed Mr. Hill’s plea but declined to comment further. James V. Jones, a lawyer for Mr. Hill, did not return a call seeking comment.Sentencing was set for Aug. 11. Under an agreement with prosecutors, Mr. Hill is expected to be put on probation but could also be sentenced to as much as one year in jail. Mr. Hill has told the court he will ask that the felony conviction be reduced to a misdemeanor.Mr. Hill could be facing further legal troubles from federal prosecutors.Jesus Hernandez, a former vineyard manager for Mr. Hill who turned him in to Del Dotto and later to authorities at the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, said in a phone interview Tuesday that he had received a subpoena to testify before a federal grand jury investigating Mr. Hill’s actions.Abraham Simmons, a spokesman for the United States attorney’s office in San Francisco, said that he could not comment on any grand jury proceedings that have not yet been made public.Mr. Hernandez, who was fired by Mr. Hill after the Del Dotto episode, said he was pleased with the outcome so far. “Justice has been served,” he said. “But whatever sentence he gets won’t make up for the turmoil he caused the employees. One of his employees lost a house.”Mr. Hill’s victims included famed Napa wineries like Don Sebastiani & Sons and Trinitas Cellars, which bought mislabeled grapes from him. Sebastiani was forced to recall some of its wine and claimed $3 million in damages, according to court records.Advertisement