AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperWhen the New York Stock Exchange’s systems went down during the trading day last week, few longtime employees who had helped lead the exchange during past technical problems were on hand.Since Intercontinental Exchange, known as ICE, bought the New York Stock Exchange in 2012, the company, which is based in Atlanta, has cut hundreds of workers from the exchange. That included almost everyone in the exchange’s top ranks.The disruption last week, which lasted more than three hours, has drawn attention to how quick and deep the cuts have been. In a little more than a year, ICE shed 800 jobs, or about 40 percent of the work force at NYSE-Euronext, the New York exchange’s parent company. It also sold off Euronext, a network of European stock exchanges; renovated the exchange’s building at 11 Wall Street; and moved out of the building next door at 20 Broad Street, the old home of the American Stock Exchange.ICE, which has grown into a juggernaut through a series of acquisitions, mostly of derivatives exchanges, is known for its relentless focus on cost-cutting and efficiency. But the reductions in New York have been under scrutiny because of the possibility that they left the exchange without enough experienced people to manage a crisis like the one it faced last Wednesday.A spokeswoman for ICE, Kelly Loeffler, said the staff cuts obscured larger investments that ICE had made in its New York operation, including the use of employees from Atlanta, who had provided support for the stock exchange’s technology and helped build new trading software to be introduced in the coming months. Ms. Loeffler also said most of the organization’s current hiring was being done in New York.Other technical snags that same Wednesday — most notably a computer failure that temporarily grounded all United Airlines flights — initially raised concerns about hackers. But exchange officials said then and have maintained since that the technical problems were caused by updates they were making to the software. The problems first appeared as soon as trading began that day.Other exchanges were unaffected, allowing stock trades to continue almost uninterrupted. But the questions about the shutdown have gained traction because it took the New York exchange nearly four hours to get its old system back online, longer than most recent technical disruptions at other exchanges.“If your crown jewel is down for four hours, that is a really bad statement,” said Jeffrey Wallis, a veteran market structure analyst who was most recently at SunGard Consulting Services. “It’s an indictment of our technical abilities and I think we can do better.”In addition to concerns about the length of the failure, some traders on the floor said it was hard to get information from the New York exchange about the nature of the problem and how long it would take to fix. Senior workers who had served as the go-between with traders during past disruptions left over the last year.“There used to be regular personnel assigned to have interactions with the membership — those people aren’t around anymore,” said one floor trader, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Ms. Loeffler said the exchange still had 150 workers, many of them with long histories on the floor, dealing with traders and customers.Stray squirrels, security breaches and, more commonly, technical glitches have caused exchanges around the world to halt.And the exchange won praise from some large banks, saying they were given regular updates during the failure. “N.Y.S.E.’s communications with the industry were proactive and helpful,” a JPMorgan Chase executive wrote to clients the next day. In its communication with the news media and the outside world, on the day of the failure, the exchange was hobbled by the departure, over the last two years, of its senior media officers. That left ICE to rely on a smaller number of relatively junior employees during the shutdown.When members of the New York exchange’s staff were heard on the phone after the problems first arose, they sounded as though they were struggling to identify and respond to the issues, according to two people involved in calls with the exchange.“There is frankly a level of experience and expertise that isn’t there,” said a former N.Y.S.E. employee who dealt with the exchange last week on behalf of a new employer, and who was not authorized to speak on the record. “You deal with enough of these situations and you figure out how to recover from them.”Scott Visconti, who is now in charge of the New York exchange’s technology operations, has been at the exchange since just 2012. He replaced people who had more experience with the exchange’s complicated trading system, known as the Universal Trading Platform.The fate of the New York exchange — and all the related jobs in New York — was a hot topic when ICE announced that it was buying NYSE-Euronext in late 2012 for $8.2 billion. New York politicians sought assurances from the company that it would not shut down the showplace exchange.Even within the world of stock trading, the New York exchange and its live trading floor have been viewed as an expensive relic vulnerable to closure. The ornate club rooms and expansive offices that ICE bought in New York were built in an earlier era, before electronic trading had eroded the fees that the exchanges collected. Since ICE acquired the stock exchange, stock trading fees have accounted for only about 5 percent of the broader company’s revenue, according to data from Sandler O’Neill.The chief executive of ICE, Jeffrey Sprecher, has said many times that he is committed to keeping open the trading floor and he promised to keep dual headquarters in New York and Atlanta. But he was clear from the first day that he was going to squeeze costs in the combined company.“We really believe that we can operate this combined business with a lower cost, much lower cost base than the two of us have independently,” Mr. Sprecher said on the day the deal was announced.Mr. Sprecher quickly got rid of almost all of the top executives at the New York exchange. The deputy whom Mr. Sprecher installed in New York, a 39-year-old former college baseball player, Thomas Farley, quickly set out to renovate the exchange’s main building on Wall Street to improve communication, to make room for more workers and eliminate the need for the building next door.Mr. Farley has also led an effort to build a new basic trading system, known as Pillar, for the stock exchange. But for the time being, the exchange is still running on its old software. Former employees said they worried that ICE got rid of many of the senior staff who knew the intricacies of the old system before phasing it out.Mr. Wallis said that organizations often made the mistake of putting resources into new software and not spending enough to maintain the existing infrastructure. “That’s always a risk when you thin out your staff,” he said.OpinionWilliam D. CohanAdvertisement