AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieThe top executives at the American bank BB&T seem to have become greedy. The Federal Reserve last week approved the company’s $2.5 billion purchase of Susquehanna Bancshares, one of the banking industry’s biggest transactions in years.Other lenders may be relieved to see the deal pipeline flowing again. BB&T’s top officials, however, will share an undeserved $2.5 million bonus, staining what should otherwise be good news for the company.It is a chief executive’s job to consider deals that might increase shareholder value, and he or she should not get anything extra for doing it. If an acquisition turns out well, then return on assets and on equity should both improve, along with the share price, and the boss’s pay should rise accordingly.Granted, consummating bank mergers is more difficult now than before the financial crisis. JPMorgan and Bank One needed less than six months for regulators to sign off on their 2004 tie-up.M&T Bank’s takeover of Hudson City Bancorp, on the other hand, is still under review almost three years after watchdogs started scrutinizing M&T over issues including safeguards to protect against money laundering.That deal could be an aberration, if BB&T’s experiences are any indication. BB&T, which is based in North Carolina and run by Kelly King, recently snapped up the Bank of Kentucky as well as 41 of Citigroup’s branches in Texas, receiving approval within eight months for each transaction, the same amount of time it took to get approval  on Susquehanna.Directors and executives of small- and midsize banks should take that as an invitation to jump back into the merger game. The Fed has even provided some encouragement, especially for deals that result in a combined entity with less than $25 billion in assets. Larger deals should be possible, too, as long as they do not get too close to exceeding $250 billion in assets.But the idea that executives can reap windfalls from mergers may encourage bad marriages. BB&T’s board avoided that problem, deciding to grant the bonuses only a couple of weeks before the Fed’s approval. And if the deal turns sour, the directors can void the payments. By that time, however, the damage to the bank and its shareholders will have already been done.Antony Currie is an associate editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement