AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromThe Union Square Hospitality Group, the gastronomic empire assembled by the New York restaurateur Danny Meyer, is making a minority investment in Tender Greens, a growing chain of restaurants based in California.Tender Greens will be the first business that Union Square Hospitality has bought into rather than developed itself.“We do not have a monopoly on all the great ideas in the world,” Mr. Meyer said in a telephone interview. “I saw it and ate at it and wished it was an idea I had come up with.”Tender Greens, which has 22 stores in California, is part Panera, part Bare Burger, part Union Square Cafe or Blue Smoke. “Historically, we’ve been lumped into the quick casual category, but it’s never felt particularly comfortable for us,” said Erik Oberholtzer, one of the three founders of Tender Greens.Customers line up to order in the same way they would at Chipotle, but the kitchen is overseen by a trained executive chef. “We just happen to have taken the waiters and white tablecloths out of the equation and made it a more accessible experience,” Mr. Oberholtzer said.The standard menu gives customers a choice of proteins that they can have alone, with sides or in salads and sandwiches, as well as a choice of big salads. Menus may vary by location, depending on what each chef decides to offer as specials and what is in season.The West Hollywood store, for instance, offered a special side on Saturday made of organic squash from Suzie’s Farms dressed with tarragon, oregano, dill, parsley and lemon. Its kitchen is overseen by the executive chef Ali Ohta, who trained with Gordon Ramsay before going on to restaurants like Nobu and the Westside Tavern in Los Angeles.The Burbank store is overseen by the executive chef Eric Hulme, who worked in the kitchen of The Downtown Club in Philadelphia before moving west to work in restaurants like Cheebo and at the Hotel Casa del Mar. He created a house-smoked lamb shoulder with romesco sauce, Israeli couscous and salsa verde on the same day the squash side was offered at the West Hollywood location.“It’s what you get when you broaden the accessibility of good food and make it affordable in a way that appeals to people who are trained in fine dining and don’t want to compromise on quality,” Mr. Meyer said.Tender Greens is just one of many chains in the increasingly competitive restaurant category known as fast casual dining that promotes authentic or healthy ingredients. In 2002, Mr. Oberholtzer and the two other founders, Matt Lyman and David Dressler, were working at the Shutters on the Beach hotel in Santa Monica, Calif., but had grown bored with corporate kitchens. When they opened the first Tender Greens store, they were backed by family and friends whom they promised to pay back within 10 years.More recently, the founders approached private equity firms and a few strategic investors. “We’ve talked to people over the last year, but it just never felt right,” Mr. Oberholtzer said. “We were always concerned about the message we might be sending, both to our employees and the outside — was this going to look like we sold out or put us under pressure to grow in a way that might be against our values?”Frank Vizcarra, a longtime adviser to Tender Greens, suggested reaching out to Mr. Meyer and Union Square Hospitality, which was taking Shake Shack public at the time. He knew Josh Goldin, a partner at Alliance Consumer Growth and an observer on the board at Shake Shack, and Mr. Goldin took the idea to Mr. Meyer. (Alliance Consumer Growth is part of the investor group making the investment in Tender Greens.)“It was the last thing on my mind to do anything like this,” Mr. Meyer said.But when he was in California with his family to celebrate his mother’s 80th birthday, he said, he took his children and nephews to one of its stores. “We were blown away,” he said. “I don’t think I have ever eaten better for that little money — seriously, if I had closed my eyes, I could have been in any of the 20 great restaurants I like in New York City.”Neither company will discuss the price tag. But Mr. Oberholtzer said the deal gave Tender Greens the ability to help repay its earlier backers and to expand nationally. Mr. Oberholtzer said it was considering Austin, Tex., Chicago and New York for non-California locations.As for Union Square Hospitality, Mr. Meyer said he saw the opportunity for a good investment, one that would pay off not only for him but also for the group’s senior management and the rest of its employees, who share in various ways in its gains.In 2012, Mr. Meyer was on the receiving end of a private equity investment when Leonard Green & Partners acquired a roughly 40 percent stake in Union Square Hospitality.That investment from Leonard Green helped fuel the growth of Shake Shack. After Shake Shack went public, its stock market value soared to about $3.4 billion before tumbling to about $1.85 billion. And some analysts say shares could drop lower as the lockup period for Shake Shack, during which insiders cannot sell their shares, expires on July 29.Mr. Meyer said he did not plan on more outside investments anytime soon. “After Shake Shack became a separate company, we’ve opened four restaurants in the last eight months — and this is a guy who didn’t open a second restaurant for a decade after I opened Union Square Cafe,” he said. “Our primary focus will be on what we create ourselves.”Advertisement