By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 14, 2015
Stocks climbed broadly on Tuesday as investors who had been fretting over the Greek debt crisis and plunging Chinese stocks turned their attention back to the United States economy and corporate earnings reports.The market rose broadly after JPMorgan Chase and Johnson & Johnson reported second-quarter profits that were stronger than expected.A government report showed that Americans cut back on spending at retailers last month, but some investors interpreted that as good for stocks since it may make the Federal Reserve more cautious when it starts raising rates for the first time in nine years.“It’s back to the mind-set that bad news is good news,” said James Abate, chief investment officer of Centre Funds. He said he thought the Fed would “raise rates in September, but we don’t think it will be an aggressive tightening cycle.”AdvertisementThe gains were modest, but broad. Among the 10 industry sectors of the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, only utilities fell. It was the fourth straight gain for the broader index.AdvertisementThe S.&P. 500 increased 9.35 points, or 0.5 percent, to 2,108.95. The Dow Jones industrial average gained 75.90 points, or 0.4 percent, to 18,053.58. The Nasdaq climbed 33.38 points, or 0.7 percent, to 5,104.89.Retail sales fell 0.3 percent in June, the Commerce Department said Tuesday, the weakest showing since February’s harsh winter weather kept shoppers indoors. That followed a robust 1 percent jump in May, though that was revised down from a previous estimate of 1.2 percent.Economists had expected that consumers would rein in their spending after May’s large gain. But the reversal was much sharper than projected.“It certainly is a case of ‘two steps forward, one step back’ for the U.S. economy,” Dan Greenhaus, an economist at BTIG, said in a note to clients.Investors were also keeping an eye on Greece after the country struck a preliminary deal with its creditors. Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras has to persuade lawmakers to approve tax increases and spending cuts by Wednesday to receive emergency money and reopen the country’s banks, but he faced dissent, including within his leftist party.The main Chinese index lost 1.2 percent after three straight gains. The government has been trying to lift stocks after the Shanghai Composite Index lost as much as 30 percent over the last month. Among other measures, executives and big shareholders have been barred from selling. Analysts say it is unclear whether the market can hold up once the barriers to selling are relaxed.Still, analysts say investors are probably more interested in corporate earnings news. Peter Cardillo, chief economist at Rockwell Global, a brokerage firm, said he hoped the decent reports so far would continue and overturn the low expectations investors have.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The earnings announcements are probably going to be the real driving force of the markets over the next few weeks,” he said.AdvertisementResults have grown every quarter since late 2009, supporting a bull market for American stocks over that time.For the second quarter, companies in the S.&P. 500 are expected to report that earnings fell an average of 4.5 percent, according to the data provider S&P Capital IQ.Companies also have had a habit of lowballing their earnings forecasts in the past, giving them an easier hurdle to clear when they report final results. So earnings often beat the predictions of Wall Street analysts.For example, early forecasts for the first quarter of this year showed that companies would report a 3.2 percent decline in earnings. Once all the numbers were tallied, earnings climbed 4.2 percent.Companies reporting in the coming days include Delta Air Lines and Netflix on Wednesday, eBay and Google on Thursday, and General Electric on Friday.Among stocks making big moves, the loan-servicing company Navient cut its earnings forecast because of weakened credit trends on some student loans and a drop in loans that are coming out of deferment compared with previous years. Its stock plunged $1.94, or 10.6 percent, to $16.42.Micron Technology jumped 11 percent on reports that a Chinese company was preparing a $23 billion bid for the chip maker in what would be China’s largest takeover of an American company. Some news media reports said that Tsinghua Unigroup would bid $21 per Micron share, and that an offer could come this week. Micron shares gained $2 to $19.61.Johnson & Johnson beat Wall Street’s low expectations, helped by a one-time gain of $931 million from the recent divestiture of the painkiller Nucynta and other special items. It lowered its 2015 profit forecast to $6.10 from $6.20 per share excluding one-time items. Shares closed down 49 cents to $99.78.In oil trading, benchmark United States crude rose 84 cents to $53.04 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils used by many American refineries, rose 66 cents to $58.51 a barrel in London.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Strong Earnings in U.S. Help Market Ward Off Greece and China Blues.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.