

 Amie Tsang
 

DEALBOOK
OCT. 26, 2015
HONG KONG   — Shares in China Reinsurance Group rose 2.6 percent during the early hours of their Hong Kong market debut on Monday, the first of several initial public offerings testing the waters after a turbulent summer in Chinese stocks.The mainland Chinese group had priced its $2 billion offering at 2.70 Hong Kong dollars, or about 35 cents, at the top of the range. It opened at 2.77 dollars but had eased down to 2.71 dollars by late morning, and closed at 2.70 dollars.The company is the biggest mainland reinsurance group, providing policies for both insurance companies and consumers.The company said the offering was oversubscribed, so more shares were made available to individual investors. Almost 56 percent of shares were allocated to cornerstone investors — large institutional investors whose shares cannot be sold for some time after the initial public offering. Strong interest from cornerstone investors can bolster interest in an initial public offering.AdvertisementChina Reinsurance’s move to go public is the first of several offerings that come after a summer of global market turmoil that has caused consternation over China’s markets and economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.China Reinsurance’s listing will be followed by one for China Huarong Asset Management, the largest manager of distressed debt in China. China Huarong is looking to raise $2.5 billion and has also drawn interest from cornerstone investors. It starts trading on Friday.AdvertisementChina International Capital Corporation, the investment bank, is expected to begin trading on Monday; it is looking to raise about $1 billion.China Reinsurance said in its filing that the money raised would go toward expanding the company and bolstering its capital base. The majority of its business is done within China, but it noted in its prospectus that it would seek to “pursue our international strategy and coordinate the development of our domestic and international businesses.”China International Capital Corporation, UBS and HSBC handled the deal.An earlier version of this article misstated the day that China Reinsurance Group’s shares began trading. It was Monday, not Wednesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »