By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 15, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO —  An app called Premise is used to take pictures of food around the world, or to note the price of local goods.Those seemingly mundane tasks, however, have given rise to a business that claims to spot price inflation in Brazil far faster than official sources can. Now the three-year-old start-up has drawn a prominent new backer.Premise plans to announce this week that it has brought on Lawrence H. Summers, the former Treasury secretary and Harvard president, as its newest board member.The appointment is a something of a coup for the start-up, one of those in the vanguard of the so-called hyperdata movement that collects scores of data points by harnessing new technology like smartphones and sophisticated analytics software.AdvertisementPremise powers its services with roughly 16,000 users who employ its Android app to collect any number of data points and upload them for the company to analyze.“What we see is that there’s a vast appetite for what the signals are on the ground,” David Soloff, Premise’s co-founder and chief executive, said in a telephone interview. “Intensely smart people have been working with radically insufficient data.”That approach has yielded sometimes significant results. An arm of the United Nations found this year that Premise can compile a monthly food consumer price index for Brazil up to 25 days before the official government data can be tallied. Moreover, the company’s data showed a rise in inflation not captured by official records for several months.And the World Bank is in the midst of a six-month pilot program with the start-up aimed at collecting data in Brazil, Indonesia and Nigeria. The purpose: to see whether alternative data sources can bolster official government work in developing countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Soloff added that his company’s product was being employed by government entities, which he declined to name, to provide additional — or corrective — information for official data like a consumer price index.But Premise’s services are not used only by governments. Among the company’s other customers are financial companies like Standard Chartered, the British bank, as well as an unnamed merchant bank that Mr. Soloff said adjusted currency hedges daily using Premise data.AdvertisementBusiness is expanding rapidly, according to Mr. Soloff. The company’s revenue growth has risen by more than 250 percent quarter over quarter, he said.Premise is the third corporate board that Mr. Summers has joined; he previously held directorships at Lending Club, the marketplace lending company, and Square, the mobile payments services provider.Mr. Summers was first introduced to Premise by Chamath Palihapitiya, the venture capitalist whose firm, the Social+Capital Partnership, participated in the start-up’s last financing round. Other backers include Google’s venture capital arm.Of particular interest, Mr. Summers said in a telephone interview, was the potential to harvest more and better economic data more quickly to better shape policy decisions.“Better, faster data can change the world,” Mr. Summers said. “Premise has the prospects of making an important contribution to that. That will be good for economics and for economies.”A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Summers to Join the Board of a ‘Hyperdata’ Start-Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.