AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsRobert Broadbent, a retailing executive who was instrumental in luring the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame to Cleveland in 1986 and then in raising the money to finance it, died on Monday in Vero Beach, Fla. He was 94.His death was confirmed by his son, William. Mr. Broadbent, who ran Halle’s and Higbee’s department stores in the Midwest and Gimbels in New York, was among a group of businessmen who joined with  Gov. Richard F. Celeste of Ohio and Cleveland officials to lobby for the proposed $40 million museum as an economic stimulus.Once the Hall of Fame Foundation chose Cleveland over Chicago, Philadelphia, Memphis, New Orleans, New York and San Francisco, he helped raise tens of millions of dollars to get it done. The 150,000-square-foot museum, which opened in 1995, attracts over 400,000 visitors annually. Would the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum have been built without Mr. Broadbent?“The answer is no,” Mr. Celeste said on Tuesday. “Bob understood the record executives in New York, and he was respected by his peers in Cleveland. Getting more than $25 million committed was the linchpin in bringing the rock museum to Cleveland — along with $5 million that I had committed from Day 1 as seed money.” Mr. Broadbent was no rock fan (“It was not his generation,” his son said). Nor was Cleveland necessarily the site Americans associated most with rock ’n’ roll. But civic duty beckoned, and some creative historical research justified a provincial claim, dating to 1951. That was when a local disc jockey there named Aldon James Freed (better known as Alan), was inspired by a racially mixed teenage singing group he heard on the street and by the Manhattan street musician and composer known as Moondog. Mr. Freed used Moondog’s 1949 composition “Moondog’s Symphony” as his theme music (and for a time appropriated the composer’s professional name as his own) and began playing rhythm and blues records on WJW radio at midnight. Mr. Freed popularized the music he played as rock ’n’ roll (a term that had originated earlier) and organized what is widely regarded as the first rock ’n’ roll concert in 1952. As if that was not justification enough, the Hall of Fame says Cleveland is where Chuck Berry made his first public appearance, where David Bowie made his United States debut and where Elvis Presley played his first concert north of the Mason-Dixon line.Robert Raymond Broadbent was born in Lisbon, Ohio, on May 25, 1921, the son of Robert and Ruth Broadbent. He was raised in Akron; served in the Army Air Forces during World War II as a navigator and second lieutenant and won the Distinguished Flying Cross; and graduated from the University of Akron in 1946 with a bachelor’s degree in business administration. He was president of Gimbels, once one of New York’s leading department stores, in the mid-1970s. His four decades of retailing in Cleveland included the chairmanship until 1989 of Higbee’s, a chain with Civil War-era roots, which was rebranded as Dillard’s in 1992. Besides the Hall of Fame, he helped to create Kent State University’s Fashion School and Museum, which opened in 1983, and to bring the Davis Cup finals to Cleveland in 1964.In addition to his son, he is survived by his wife, Mary, and two grandchildren. Advertisement