By MATTHEW GOLDSTEIN and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJULY 15, 2015
Mr. Icahn’s debate with Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, devolved into a heated discussion over one of the most lucrative parts of money management firm’s business.It was billed as a debate over the merits of shareholder activism, with two lions of Wall Street facing off: Carl C. Icahn, the billionaire investor, and Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, one of the world’s largest money management firms.But then Mr. Icahn got on his soapbox and the gloves came off. The 45-minute debate quickly devolved into an often heated discussion over one of the most lucrative parts of BlackRock’s business.“I think BlackRock is a very dangerous company,” said Mr. Icahn, who has made a history of taking jabs at corporate chief executives when he does not like they way they are running their companies.Mr. Icahn went into a long and sometimes rambling rant about why he sees some exchange-traded funds, a popular vehicle for trading baskets of stocks and bonds, as potentially dangerous to the market. Specifically, he singled out higher-yielding bond exchange-traded funds, or E.T.F.s, which he said did not create sufficient liquidity in the markets.AdvertisementMr. Icahn conjured up an image of Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, and Mr. Fink pushing a pile of high-yield bonds toward a cliff.Advertisement“They are going to hit a black rock,” Mr. Icahn said, with a look of mischief on his face.Criticism about E.T.F.s is not new. Several studies have examined the impact of these securities, which trade just like stocks. But Mr. Icahn’s critique seemed more of a stream-of-consciousness attack than a well-thought-out thesis.After Mr. Icahn’s long monologue, an exasperated Mr. Fink interjected, “Carl, you’re a good investor, but you’re wrong again.”He disputed Mr. Icahn’s assertion that E.T.F.s were dangerous and countered that they “create more transparency in the market,” by helping them function better.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The two had an audience of hedge fund managers and investors laughing out loud after a long day of panels at the CNBC Institutional Investor Delivering Alpha conference. Managers pitched stock ideas and there was a conversation with Ted Cruz, the Texas senator and Republican presidential candidate, who at one point asked, “The question is, How do we deliver alpha in government?”It was a takeoff from the conference title, which referred to the kind of market-beating performance money managers promise their investors.It was not so much what Mr. Icahn said that entertained the audience, but the growing and visible frustration on Mr. Fink’s face as Mr. Icahn refused to let him get a word in edgewise.At the beginning of the debate, both men exchanged pleasantries and said how much they liked and respected each other. But the atmosphere turned notably testy once Mr. Icahn began speaking about the dangers of E.T.F.s, which represent a major portion of BlackRock’s revenue.Mr. Fink looked as if he wanted to be anywhere but on the stage. He sometimes held his hands in front of his face as Mr. Icahn continued his attack on a core part of BlackRock’s business. At other times, Mr. Fink looked away from Mr. Icahn.At one point, Mr. Fink, trying to end the rant, offered to take Mr. Icahn to lunch where they could continue their conversation and he could explain to Mr. Icahn why his views on the dangers of E.T.F.s were wrong.AdvertisementMr. Fink even said he would pay for lunch.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.