AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieBank of America’s best quarterly earnings in years highlight a tougher task ahead.The lender reported a profit available to shareholders of $5 billion in the three months that ended in June as costs hit their lowest level since the end of 2008. Return on equity remained subpar, though. Core earnings would need to be almost 40 percent higher for the bank to beat its cost of capital.The bank’s reported numbers don’t quite reveal the whole story. They include a roughly $900 million enhancement to the bottom line from three one-time extras: accounting changes on certain net interest income, proceeds from the sale of consumer loans and the release of reserves set aside for past mortgage issues. Without those, annualized return on common equity would fall from 8.75 percent, which doesn’t cover the cost of capital, to 7.2 percent.That’s not to understate the progress that the bank’s chief executive, Brian T. Moynihan, and his team have made. Excluding litigation costs, they managed to reduce expenses 6 percent from last year’s second quarter, to $13.6 billion. That brought the expense ratio down to 65 percent, after stripping out one-time gains. That is still way above the 58 percent or so that JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo announced on Tuesday but a marked improvement nonetheless.Producing more sustainable returns will require cutting expenses as much as those two rivals have. It would add $1 billion to core quarterly earnings. Even that would not be enough, though, to nudge net income above a 10 percent return on equity, generally considered an acceptable level for a big bank’s cost of capital. Getting there would require a net income increase of 39 percent – or $1.6 billion – based on adjusted profit to shareholders.Closing the gap means finding new sources of revenue. That is hard to do for all banks now. Bank of America shareholders will have to hope that Mr. Moynihan can find more corporate fat to trim – and that the Federal Reserve will soon raise rates. It is looking like a long wait.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement