By EMILY STEELJULY 15, 2015
These are heady times for Netflix.Already this year, the company’s stock has more than doubled, skyrocketing past others to rank as the best performer on the S.&P. 500. The company is pouring billions of dollars into television and film content and moving ahead on its quest for global expansion. At the same time, Netflix has become an influential voice in communications policy; it led the opposition to Comcast’s failed takeover of Time Warner Cable and on Wednesday lined up in support of Charter Communications’ pair of cable deals worth $67.1 billion.On Wednesday, investors even looked past a 63 percent drop in second-quarter profits to send shares in Netflix surging nearly 10 percent in after-hours trading, on news that it added a record 3.3 million global streaming members during the second quarter, eclipsing expectations.Reed Hastings, the chief executive of Netflix, said in an interview that he was trying to avoid getting swept up in the Netflix euphoria on Wall Street and beyond.“The more that we gain attention in those ways, the more it makes us cautious,” he said.There are reasons for caution. The big falloff in net income Netflix reported on Wednesday underscored the huge level of investment required to execute its strategy of pressing deeper into original programming and aggressively moving overseas. Netflix has warned investors that it doesn’t expect to break even globally until the end of 2016. The company has said that it will deliver material global profits after that period of expansion.Advertisement“We’ve seen the issues with becoming too confident,” Mr. Hastings added, alluding to the company’s disastrous attempt to separate its streaming service from its DVD service in 2011. “We remind ourselves that we’ve only got 65 million members, and there are billions of people in the world watching television. We have such a long way to go, and we do our best to remind ourselves that we are really quite puny compared to all television viewing.”Mr. Hastings said the company was focusing on how it would continue to deliver growth and improve. Netflix predicted on Wednesday that it would continue to grow at an accelerating pace this year, forecasting that it would add 3.6 million total streaming members during the third quarter to reach 69.1 million.At the top of his wish list, Mr. Hastings said, is to better personalize the Netflix service, so that viewers see the top five programs they are dying to watch the moment that they visit the website or open up the app. Other priorities include eliminating the buffering that can frustrate viewers, and improving the quality and variety of original programming.Netflix said on Wednesday that its total number of paid streaming members (not all members are paying subscribers) reached 62.7 million in the quarter, as its slate of original shows like “Daredevil” and “Orange Is the New Black” lured new customers in the United States and across the globe. That figure compares with 48 million total paid streaming members during the period in 2014.The company said that its spending on global content would approach $6 billion in cash in 2016, as it devotes more resources to original series, documentaries and feature films.AdvertisementNetflix also said that international losses would mount during the second half of the year, as the company expands to Japan, Spain, Italy and Portugal. The company said that it was continuing to explore its options in China, where Mr. Hastings said the company would make a “modest investment.” Some investors, however, highlight China as a major growth opportunity for the company.Total revenue was $1.6 billion in the second quarter, up 23 percent from the period last year.Netflix shares have been on a tear this year, surging from around $350 at the beginning of January to a closing price of $707, a record, on Monday. The company approved a seven-for-one stock split earlier in the quarter, and shares started trading at the post-split price on Wednesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some analysts have raised concerns about the company’s long-term earnings power, worried about growth in the United States, more competition and increased costs tied to paying for content and international expansion.Mark S. Mahaney, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets, said that the risks Netflix faces included making hubristic errors as it expands globally as well as more intense competition from an array of streaming services.“I don’t know if they are going to get it right,” Mr. Mahaney said. Referring to Mr. Hastings, he said: “He sounds awfully confident, but some of these are very different markets. Japan and China — who knows how well they are going to do there?”Mr. Mahaney added that while the market was dismissive of competitive risk, the landscape could change quickly. He cited the amount of resources being devoted to streaming by Amazon, Hulu and others. “You put an all-time high on the stock, and you are going to invite other people into the market,” he said.Also on Wednesday, Netflix endorsed Charter Communications’ proposed deals for Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks, which, if approved, would create the country’s second-largest cable operator behind Comcast.Its support for the deals, worth a combined $67.1 billion, is contingent upon Charter’s new Internet interconnection policy, which would extend through 2018. As part of that policy, Charter pledged not to charge access fees to online content providers like Netflix, regardless of how much traffic they create for the network.In contrast, Netflix pays access tolls to other Internet service providers: Comcast, Time Warner Cable, Verizon and AT&T. Charter does not charge access fees because it is a smaller player with less clout, but industry executives said it would have the market power to start extracting those payments after its proposed combination with Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks.AdvertisementMr. Hastings said he was hopeful that federal regulators would impose the same condition on AT&T’s proposed takeover of DirecTV.“The key thing about the Charter deal is it’s all Internet companies that benefit — us, Hulu, Amazon, HBO Now — so that we can all compete for consumers’ affection,” Mr. Hastings said in Netflix’s video interview, during which he wore a turquoise sweater featuring BoJack Horseman, a character from an original Netflix animated comedy.“And that is the openness to everybody that’s the key thing.”A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Numbers, and Plans, for Netflix.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.