By EMILY STEELJULY 15, 2015
Amazon has landed Spike Lee’s new film, “Chi-Raq,” about violence in inner-city Chicago, as its first original movie production, seeking to make a splash with a well-known filmmaker, a controversial title and a well-known cast.In January, shortly after winning industry acclaim for its original television production “Transparent,” Amazon announced that it was starting a new original movie group to produce and acquire films for theatrical release and early distribution on its Prime Instant Video service. The company said the movies would be available for streaming in the United States four to eight weeks after they made their debuts in theaters.Amazon said it was seeking to create a dozen movies a year. Roy Price, vice president of Amazon Studios, has described the projects as “indie” movies with budgets of $5 million to $25 million.Amazon said that “Chi-Raq” would be released theatrically but did not say when.The film reimagines the ancient Greek tale “Lysistrata,” in which women withhold sex from men to end a war, as a musical featuring Nick Cannon, Wesley Snipes, Jennifer Hudson, Angela Bassett, John Cusack and Samuel L. Jackson. The relatively unknown actress Teyonah Parris stars as Lysistrata, who protests gun violence through a sex strike.AdvertisementFilming finished last week in Chicago, where some politicians and residents have denounced the title. “Chi-Raq,” a term believed to have been coined by local rappers, is a reference to gun violence that has left parts of the city feeling like a war zone.Advertisement“I’m honored to be part of the film that will launch Amazon Studios and to tell a story that is so important,” Mr. Lee said in a statement. “Please don’t be fooled by the title of ‘Chi-Raq.’ This new Spike Lee joint will be something very special.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With Mr. Lee, Amazon is tapping an acclaimed filmmaker, but one who has not had a box-office hit since 2006, when “Inside Man” took in $184.4 million worldwide. More recently, he has had a string of critical and commercial flops, including “Oldboy,” “Miracle at St. Anna” and “Red Hook Summer.”Ted Hope, head of motion picture production at Amazon Studios, called Mr. Lee “one of the most distinct and visionary filmmakers of our time.“It would be impossible to find a better filmmaker with whom to launch our studio,” Mr. Hope said in a statement. “He has a unique voice, a distinct eye, and he tackles important subjects with humor and heart, pointing to solutions and not exploiting the problems.”The rival streaming service Netflix is also pouring resources into original movies. Netflix has struck film deals with Brad Pitt, Adam Sandler and Ricky Gervais and also is releasing the sequel to the movie “Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.”Brooks Barnes contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: First Film From Amazon’s Movie Studio .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.