AdvertisementSupported byBy Stacy CowleyWill Hurley, a serial entrepreneur in Austin, Tex., wants to upend Wall Street. He’s starting with a decidedly unsexy part of the financial landscape: small-business retirement planning.Honest Dollar, Mr. Hurley’s new venture, plans to begin selling individual retirement account benefits to companies this month for a fixed monthly fee of $8 per employee. Intended for even the tiniest businesses with only a handful of employees, which rarely offer retirement benefits for their workers, the site aims to bring simplicity and transparency to a market that is often a minefield of hidden fees.An unlikely convert to the financial industry, Mr. Hurley, a longtime software developer, talks with a missionary zeal about lowering the carrying costs of retirement accounts. “When people are paying 2 percent in fees — that’s criminal,” he said. “Between you and your retirement, there’s lots of exit routes for your money.”Small companies greatly trail bigger ones when it comes to retirement benefits. When companies are young, entrepreneurs have more pressing priorities — like making enough money to stay in business — and as they grow, new obstacles emerge, like cost and complexity. Only 14 percent of businesses with 100 or fewer employees sponsor a retirement plan, according to an estimate by the Government Accountability Office, and employees at the smallest companies, those with 50 workers or fewer, pay administrative fees that are twice as high on average as those paid by participants in larger plans.That market gap is luring new players into the field.ForUsAll, a start-up in San Francisco, recently began offering 401(k) plans tailored for small companies. Like Honest Dollar, it sells its service for a fixed monthly fee with no setup costs and focuses on simplicity, building its portfolios around low-cost, institutional stock and bond index funds. Both companies let employers choose whether they want to match their employees’ contributions.“We challenged ourselves to imagine what an ideal 401(k) looks like for a small business if we rebuilt it from the ground up,” said Shin Inoue, ForUsAll’s chief executive.ForUsAll charges companies $94 for up to 10 employees and $5 per additional employee. (After 40 employees, the monthly cost drops to $3.) For tiny companies with just a few workers, that’s significantly cheaper than the thousands of dollars it typically costs to establish and manage a plan.Large providers have the best selection of low-cost funds, but small plans with just a handful of participants are not profitable enough for them to bother selling directly. Fidelity says its 401(k) plans tend to be too costly for companies with less than $10 million in plan assets. At Charles Schwab, the floor starts at $20 million. (Both companies offer more affordable I.R.A. plans for small businesses.) Vanguard’s small-group plan, managed by Ascensus, an independent administrator, carries administrative fees of $3,475 a year for up to 15 participants.The big vendors prefer to serve small customers by working through independent companies that buy shares in their funds but handle the administrative work themselves. That’s the approach ForUsAll and Honest Dollar have taken. Both use exclusively Vanguard funds, and both offer participants few choices about how their money will be invested — by design.The average mutual fund last year charged 1.19 percent in management fees, according to Morningstar. By offering only index funds, which carry significantly lower fees than actively managed funds, Honest Dollar and ForUsAll keep their fund fees to 0.20 percent or less. Thanks to the power of compound interest, every fraction of a dollar saved on fees translates into significantly higher savings over time.“We want this to be radically simple for employees,” Mr. Inoue said.Mr. Hurley says the low-fee crusade was a catalyst for his company’s creation. He sees retirement accounts as a starting point for what he hopes will eventually be a larger financial services company handling things like health savings accounts and 529 college savings plans — anything that grows over time and would benefit from having fees much lower than big providers have traditionally charged.“We’re going to be very critical of the financial products we bring,” he said. “We try not expose our customers to anything with fees higher than 10 basis points.”A few other providers have been preaching that gospel for years. Ubiquity, known as the Online 401(k) before it changed its name last year, was a pioneer in the small-business retirement market and is one of the largest players, with 7,500 clients. Low fund expense fees, once a selling point that Chad Parks, the company’s chief executive, labored to explain, are a feature that customers actively seek out.“When I started the company 15 years ago, I felt like a voice in the wilderness trying to draw attention to it,” Mr. Parks said. “Nobody understood. Now there’s increased media attention, there’s new disclosure regulations, and the millennials are in the work force. They have a whole different set of expectations.”Honest Dollar and ForUsAll will be competing against a handful of existing small-business-focused vendors like Ubiquity, Capital One’s ShareBuilder and the Employee Fiduciary. Aside from fees, there are some technical differences that business owners will want to consider in evaluating their offerings. 401(k)’s have higher pretax contribution limits than I.R.A. accounts and typically allow loans to be taken out against them, which I.R.A. plans do not.Those in the industry say they see plenty of room for growth.Steven H. Van Wie, a fee-only financial planner in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., has struggled to find affordable plans he feels comfortable recommending to his small-business clients. He is intrigued by some of the new offerings, though he wishes the companies more prominently disclosed the details of their portfolios. Finding out that Honest Dollar and ForUsAll use Vanguard funds (Ubiquity’s mix includes Vanguard along with Schwab and Barclays) requires digging deep into the fine print of their sites.“I would use that as a selling point,” Mr. Van Wie said. “A plan is only as good as the investment choices it offers.”Those are the kinds of details many small-business owners would prefer not to think about. Nick Culbertson, the co-founder of Proteus, recently went shopping for a retirement plan for his 10-person company, a health care technology start-up in Baltimore. Working with a local benefits consultant, RCM&D, he picked ForUsAll, largely because it was the most affordable option.Mr. Culbertson’s employees include physicists, data scientists and software engineers, some of whom were reluctant to leave jobs with big companies until Proteus had a competitive benefits package in place. Setting up with ForUsAll was easy, he said, and Proteus’s employees especially liked “Dave,” a virtual adviser created to answer questions and make the enrollment process easy.And the investment choices on offer? “To be frank, a lot of us didn’t look into it that closely,” he said. “We’re pretty focused on building our product, so it was like ‘O.K., check the retirement box and move on.’”Advertisement