By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 15, 2015
Since buying the IMG agency one and a half years ago, William Morris Endeavor has sought to round out its offerings and become the premier place for talent and events.Now, the combined firm, WME-IMG, is taking aim at a new field for talent: the stylists who dress celebrities and who are becoming stars in their own right.To that end, WME-IMG announced on Wednesday that it has bought the Wall Group, one of the pioneers of the stylist agency business, with one of the most prominent client lists in the industry. (Four of its stylists dressed six of the nominees for best actor and best actress at this year’s Oscars, for example.)WME-IMG executives declined to disclose financial details of the transaction. But the move is one of the most notable by the agency since its formation.Advertisement“Joining our forces gives us a massive footprint,” Mark Shapiro, the chief content officer of IMG, said in a telephone interview. “We see fashion as a really powerful growth engine.”AdvertisementAcquiring IMG at the end of 2013 already gave WME a significant presence in the fashion business. The combined agency owns and runs New York Fashion Week and represents counterparts in London and Milan. It also operates the IMG Models agency and represents fashion photographers like Steven Meisel and Patrick Demarchelier through the Art & Commerce agency.But at an internal brainstorming session, Ivan Bart, the IMG Models president, suggested that the perfect complement to those businesses was available: Brooke Wall, whose start in the hairstyling business led her to open the Wall Group 15 years ago.“I really learned quickly about all aspects of our industry, and that it’s not just about a photo shoot,” Ms. Wall said in a phone interview.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Capitalizing on the growing fandom of stylists, she built a team of agents that has collected many of today’s top stylists and hair and makeup artists, including Leslie Fremar (whose 2015 Oscar clients were Reese Witherspoon and Julianne Moore) and Ilaria Urbinati (Bradley Cooper).Ms. Wall also happened to have a number of connections to WME-IMG. She and Mr. Bart worked together at the Ford modeling agency for about two years. And about five years ago, she recalled, she met WME’s co-chief executive, Ari Emanuel, and the two got into a conversation about the fashion business.At one point, she said, he asked her, “What am I supposed to do, buy you now?”Prompted by his fashion team, Mr. Shapiro took Ms. Wall out for coffee in February at Manzo, one of the restaurants at Eataly, the market in Manhattan co-owned by Mario Batali.“It took a bit of wooing,” he said. But the courtship succeeded.Ms. Wall and her team at the Wall Group, including two directors, Ali Bird and Kate Stirling, are expected to continue their roles and run the agency as a separate organization within WME-IMG.Part of the pitch was that WME-IMG could expose the Wall Group’s clientele to a huge array of new opportunities, including some in the digital arena, important at a time when stylists’ success is measured in part by the number of followers they have on social media.“No one is doing this on a global scale,” Ms. Wall said. “They’re able to get a lot more hits in different areas.”An article on Thursday about the purchase of the Wall Group, an agency for Hollywood stylists, by the talent agency WME-IMG misstated the timing of William Morris Endeavor’s purchase of the IMG agency, resulting in the combined agency known as WME-IMG. It was one and a half years ago, not two and a half years ago.A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: WME-IMG Talent Agency Adds Celebrity Stylists to Its Offerings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.