AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressThe stock market edged a hair lower Wednesday, ending a four-day rally, as a drop in energy shares and anxiety over Greece outweighed encouraging earnings reports from banks.Energy stocks slumped with the price of oil after a report showed that a drop in United States supplies last week was less than expected.The market’s pause follows strong gains. Stocks have surged in the last week as a slump abated in China’s stock market and a deal was reached on a possible bailout for Greece. Greece’s agreement with its creditors still requires approval  by the country’s lawmakers. As investors waited for a vote in the nation’s Parliament, protesters in Athens clashed with police. The protesters want an end to the harsh austerity measures demanded by Greece’s creditors in exchange for more loans.“You come in some days and it looks like it’s all clear and that Greece has been resolved, and the next day it hasn’t,” said Michael Scanlon, portfolio manager with John Hancock Asset Management.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index edged down 1.55 points, or less than 0.1 percent, to 2,107.40. The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 3.41 points, or less than 0.1 percent, to 18,050.17. The Nasdaq composite index fell 5.95 points, or 0.1 percent, to 5,098.94.The market started the day higher after encouraging second-quarter results from banks, including Bank of America. The bank said its profit more than doubled thanks to lower legal bills. It also said an increase in deposits, lower expenses and an improving balance sheet helped offset a decline in revenue.Bank of America rose 55 cents, or 3.2 percent, to $17.68.There was economic data to sift. The Federal Reserve said U.S. factory production was unchanged for a second straight month in June as a sharp drop in auto manufacturing was offset by greater output of furniture and chemicals.The cutback in auto production comes after three months of healthy gains and is probably temporary. Still, manufacturers are struggling to overcome several challenges, including a strong dollar, weak overseas growth, and cheaper oil. The Fed said that overall industrial production — which includes mining output and utilities, as well as manufacturing — rose 0.3 percent, the best showing since November. Mining, which includes oil and gas wells, rose 1 percent, as oil output increased. Utility output jumped 1.5 percent, the most since February, as people ramped up air conditioning in the summer.Also Wednesday, the Labor Department said that its producer price index increased 0.4 percent in June, another sign that inflation remains tame. Producer prices have fallen 0.7 percent over the past 12 months due to lower oil and gasoline costs. Core prices, which exclude energy and food, rose 0.3 percent in June.Fed officials are monitoring measures of inflation as they weigh whether to raise a key short-term interest rate. The central bank’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, gave an indication of those plans Wednesday when she appeared before the House Financial Services Committee.Ms. Yellen told Congress she saw encouraging signs that the economy was reviving after a harsh winter. If the improvements continue, she said, policy makers will most likely start raising interest rates later this year. The Fed has kept its benchmark rate near zero since December 2008, pushing up bond and stock prices.Quincy Krosby, a market strategist for Prudential Financial, said Ms. Yellen was flagging the possibility of higher rates so as not to surprise investors when the Fed does eventually lift them. “That’s the last thing she wants to do,” Ms. Krosby said. “That’s why we have to pay attention when she says” that a rate increase is on the table. Among individual stocks, Macy’s was the biggest gainer in the S.&P. 500. The stock jumped 7.9 percent on reports that the activist investment firm Starboard Value had said Macy’s could raise its share price by spinning off its real estate into a separate company.In energy trading, benchmark United States crude fell $1.63, or 3 percent, to close at $51.41 a barrel, as a report on supplies showed a smaller-than-expected decline last week. The price of oil has fallen 13 percent this month.Oil has come under further pressure after Iran reached a nuclear deal with world powers. That paves the way for sanctions on the country to be lifted, allowing Iran to export oil and add to a glut in global supply.In government bond trading, prices rose. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.36 percent from 2.40 percent on Tuesday.The dollar rose to 123.78 yen from 123.35 yen. The euro was down slightly to $1.0950 from $1.1010.In metals trading, silver fell 27 cents to $15.03 an ounce. Gold dropped $6.10 to $1,147.40 an ounce. Copper declined 1.4 cents to $2.53 a pound.In other futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, wholesale gas fell 7 cents to close at $1.86 a gallon; heating oil slipped 5.6 cents to close at $1.67 a gallon; and natural gas rose 8 cents to $2.92 per 1,000 cubic feet.Advertisement