By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJULY 15, 2015
WASHINGTON — Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, told lawmakers on Wednesday that proposals to increase congressional oversight of the central bank could cause collateral damage to the broader economy.Ms. Yellen repeated versions of that warning several times in a three-hour hearing before the House Financial Services Committee, ceding no ground to Republicans who want to impose new limits on the Fed.“Efforts to further increase transparency, no matter how well intentioned, must avoid unintended consequences that could undermine the Federal Reserve’s ability to make policy in the long-run best interest of American families and businesses,” she said.Ms. Yellen provided few new indications about the Fed’s plans for the next few months, and she was not pressed on the issue. Lawmakers in Congress evidently do not share Wall Street’s obsessive interest in the exact timing of interest rate increases.AdvertisementRepublicans instead focused on proposals they describe as necessary to improve the management of monetary policy, and the regulation of the financial industry.AdvertisementRepresentative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the committee, said in his opening remarks that the Fed’s approach to monetary policy has been “amorphous, opaque and improvisational.”He continued, “One way our economy could be healthier is for the Federal Reserve to be more predictable in the conduct of monetary policy.”The Fed’s relationship with its congressional overseers has deteriorated since Ms. Yellen took over the Fed and Republicans took over both chambers of Congress. Yet the tone of Wednesday’s hearing was markedly more polite than Ms. Yellen’s last appearance, in February, which had been an openly hostile affair.The sharpest exchanges concerned the committee’s investigation of a 2012 leak of confidential information about the Fed’s bond-buying plans. The Fed has refused to provide some information, citing a continuing investigation by the Justice Department, a position Mr. Hensarling has described as “willful obstruction.”Representative Sean Duffy, a Wisconsin Republican, said the Fed did not follow its own rules in investigating the 2012 leak, and that it was now impeding the committee’s efforts to identify the source of the leak.“If anyone is trying to sweep this under the rug, it’s the Fed,” Mr. Duffy said.Ms. Yellen, in response, defended the Fed’s actions as consistent with its policies, and said it was cooperating with the various investigations.Despite the strong tone of the questioning, Republicans on Wednesday avoided any suggestion that they might try to hold Ms. Yellen in contempt, one avenue by which they could escalate pressure on the Fed.AdvertisementSarah A. Binder, a political scientist at George Washington University who studies the Fed, said on Twitter that the standoff highlighted the difficulty for Congress in holding the Fed accountable, particularly when there is a sharp partisan divide.Ms. Yellen also gave no ground to proponents of new legislative constraints.Congress is considering a number of measures to increase oversight of the central bank. One proposal would require the Fed to articulate a rule for setting interest rates, and then justify deviations from that rule. Another would subject the Fed’s policy-making process to regular external review.Ms. Yellen and other Fed officials argue that such changes would inhibit the conduct of monetary policy. The Fed, like central banks in other developed nations, is insulated from political pressure so it can make unpopular decisions that have long-term benefits, like raising interest rates to control inflation.Ms. Yellen said on Wednesday that the Fed already ranked “among the most transparent central banks,” and cautioned against opening new windows.Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, spoke to a Congressional panel on Wednesday about the effect of international events on interest rates.“Measures that affect the ability of policy makers to make decisions about monetary policy free of short-term political pressure, in the name of transparency, should be avoided,” Ms. Yellen said in her testimony.Proponents of the measures, however, say additional oversight would strengthen the conduct of monetary policy. They argue that the Fed has aimed at an increasing number of targets since the financial crisis, including job growth and financial stability, at the expense of a pure focus on inflation.“The Fed’s clamor for independence is its underpinning for circumventing any sort of congressional accountability,” Mr. Duffy said at a Tuesday hearing on Fed transparency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Yellen also pushed back against the idea of new limits on the Fed’s power to pump money into the financial system when private funding dries up.“I do think this is a very important power,” she said. “We need to address liquidity and credit issues in times when there is unusual financial market stress.”AdvertisementAs for the Fed’s monetary policy plans, Ms. Yellen said they had not changed in recent weeks. Officials still expect to start raising the Fed’s benchmark interest rate later this year, provided the economy grows in line with their expectations.She suggested the economic outlook was brightening, mentioning among other factors the benefits of low oil prices, low interest rates, increased hiring and the spillover benefits from stimulus campaigns in other developed economies.The Fed’s Beige Book survey of economic conditions, published on Wednesday, reported that growth continued nationwide at a modest to moderate pace.“Looking forward, prospects are favorable for further improvement in the U.S. labor market and the economy more broadly,” Ms. Yellen told the committee.When Representative Scott Tipton, a Colorado Republican, suggested to Ms. Yellen that rates remain low because “our economy stinks right now,” she responded by reiterating that the Fed is on the verge of raising them.“A decision on our part to raise rates will say no, the economy doesn’t stink,” she said. “We’re close to where we want to be.”Ms. Yellen mentioned problems in Greece and China, but she did not seem overly worried, a view shared by other Fed officials.In a separate speech on Wednesday, John C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, acknowledged that there were risks. “But I see them as unlikely to overturn the otherwise strong fundamentals of the U.S. economy,” he said.AdvertisementThe International Monetary Fund has said the Fed nonetheless should wait until next year before raising interest rates, and some Democrats took up that theme on Wednesday, arguing that low inflation means that the Fed can afford to wait, and the continued weakness of the economy means that it should wait.“I’ve got five minutes to try to convince you not to raise interest rates until the spring,” Representative Brad Sherman of California told Ms. Yellen.But while a few Fed officials have said that they share that view, Ms. Yellen suggested that the Fed’s majority had not changed its perspective.“If the economy evolves as we expect, economic conditions likely would make it appropriate at some point this year to raise the federal funds target rate, thereby beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy,” she said.Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet L. Yellen’s testimony to the House Financial Services Committee paraphrased incorrectly from comments by Representative Scott Tipton, a Colorado Republican. He posited that the Fed was keeping rates low because of continued problems in the economy; he did not suggest that rates “should remain low.”A version of this article appears in print on July 16, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Limits on the Fed Pose Risks, Yellen Says .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.