AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Michael Rake, the Barclays deputy chairman and senior independent director, is preparing to leave the bank’s board this year and take over as chairman of Worldpay, a British payment processor.Worldpay said on Wednesday that Mr. Rake would become nonexecutive chairman on Sept. 1, subject to regulatory approval. He will succeed John Allan, who previously announced plans to step down as chairman in May and who will remain as a director of the company.“I’ve been very impressed by the Worldpay story so far and am looking forward to being part of the journey ahead,” Mr. Rake said in a news release announcing his appointment. “The payments industry has never been more exciting and Worldpay is at the forefront of this innovation.”In a statement, Barclays said that Mr. Rake intended to stay on as deputy chairman and senior independent director until “at least the end of 2015.”“If and when he stands down from the Barclays board, a new senior independent director will of course have been appointed,” the bank said.People familiar with the discussions, but not authorized to discuss the matter publicly, said Mr. Rake was expected to leave the Barclays board at the end of the year.Mr. Rake’s impending departure was reported late Tuesday by The Times of London.The news came just over a week after Antony Jenkins was ousted as the Barclays chief executive, a move that the bank said was orchestrated by its independent directors, including Mr. Rake.Mr. Jenkins took over as chief executive in 2012 as Barclays was reeling from a rate-rigging scandal involving the London interbank offered rate, or Libor.After the scandal, Mr. Jenkins moved quickly to change the bank’s culture and exit riskier business lines, but he was ultimately forced out last week after directors lost confidence in his ability to improve returns to shareholders.John McFarlane, who replaced David Walker as the Barclays chairman this year, is expected to assume the role of executive chairman on Friday. Mr. McFarlane will serve as the bank’s top executive until a replacement for Mr. Jenkins is found.Mr. Rake has been a Barclays director since January 2008 and its deputy chairman since July 2012. He spent more than 30 years with the accounting firm KPMG, including serving as senior partner of its British business and chairman of KPMG International.He is the chairman of the telecommunications company BT Group and president of the Confederation of British Industry, a trade group.Mr. Rake will join Worldpay as it prepares for a potential initial public offering this year.The company provides payment processing and other services to businesses. In 2014, the company processed 370 billion pounds, or about $575 billion, in transactions and recorded revenue of £3.65 billion.It was previously owned by the Royal Bank of Scotland and sold to the private equity firms Bain Capital and Advent International in 2010.Advertisement