AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — As the Federal Reserve prepares to raise interest rates later this year, Republican critics have dialed down the volume of their complaints, while Democrats are now fretting loudly about the path of monetary policy.Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, testified in front of the Senate Banking Committee on Thursday after her appearance before a House committee on Wednesday, and once again she was pressed by Democrats concerned that the Fed will raise rates too soon.“I continue to be troubled by the sluggish wage growth that we have seen,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York. “I refuse to let the loud voices of those screaming for the Fed to act drown out the voices of the middle-class, working families who continue to wait quietly for our economic recovery to show up in their take-home pay.”Other Democrats echoed that argument.“It would be a mistake in my view for the Fed to shift its focus away from jobs at this critical time,” Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey told Ms. Yellen.Ms. Yellen, for her part, largely repeated her earlier answers to House members, telling senators that the Fed planned to raise rates as long as the economy kept growing. And she made clear that the Fed intended to act relatively soon even though inflation remained below its preferred level of around 2 percent.As the cornerstone of its campaign to increase job growth, the central bank has held short-term interest rates near zero since December 2008. Ms. Yellen said success was on the horizon and nearing by the day. “The labor market is getting closer in my view, by almost any metric, to a more normal state,” she said.Ms. Yellen also described a shift in the Fed’s thinking. She said the concern about moving too quickly was an important reason the Fed continued to hold rates near zero, but that officials increasingly were concerned about waiting too long.“There are lags in the effect of monetary policy,” she said. “We need to be forward-looking, and on the other side, there are risks from waiting too long to act as well.”For example, she said that waiting longer might then require the Fed to raise rates more sharply, making it harder for the economy to adjust. “My own preference would be to proceed to tighten in a prudent and gradual manner,” Ms. Yellen said.The consensus of Wall Street analysts is that the Fed will decide to raise rates at its September policy-making meeting. In commentary after her testimony, several analysts said that Ms. Yellen reinforced that expectation, although they cautioned that disappointing economic data could persuade the Fed to postpone an increase.The most obvious sticking point is the sluggish pace of inflation. A small group of Fed officials want the central bank to keep rates unchanged until inflation rebounds to the 2 percent annual pace that the Fed regards as most healthy.Mr. Menendez channeled the views of those Fed officials at Thursday’s hearing, asking Ms. Yellen, “In order to avoid choking off economic growth prematurely, will the Fed wait to raise interest rates until after it has seen signs of actual inflation, rather than based on some intangible fear of future inflation?”Ms. Yellen responded that the Fed expected inflation to rise in the coming years, and she sought to reassure Mr. Menendez that she was acting not because her priorities had changed, but because of changes in economic conditions.“We don’t want to cut off job growth and income growth, and we do want to see inflation come up to 2 percent,” she told the committee. “We would not be pleased to see it linger indefinitely below 2 percent.”Questions from Republican senators ranged widely, but few touched on monetary policy — a marked change from earlier sessions with Ms. Yellen, in which she faced repeated questions about the economic consequences of low interest rates.Senators asked about the regulation of small banks, of midsize banks and of large banks. They asked about regulation of the insurance industry. They asked whether the Fed was overly fixated by the ups and downs of the stock market. They asked whether the Fed might spare some money to fund highway construction and asked about the state of the Fed’s preparations to beat back online attacks.They did not ask how soon the Fed plans to start raising rates.The answer, it seems, is soon enough.Advertisement