
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
JULY 16, 2015
The case of the London Whale has ended — with a whimper.Last week, Britain’s Financial Conduct Authority took the unusual step of announcing that it was dropping its investigation and would take no further action against Bruno Iksil, whose risky bets on complex derivative contracts ended up costing JPMorgan Chase $6.2 billion in losses.Mr. Iksil, who got his catchy cetacean nickname from trading counterparties that marveled at the immense size of his positions, emerged as the latest face of international financial scandal in 2012, when The Wall Street Journal identified him as the mysterious figure at the center of huge derivative bets that were roiling the market.Since then, JPMorgan Chase has agreed to pay a total of $920 million to resolve accusations by several agencies in the United States and Britain that the bank had misstated financial results and lacked sufficient internal controls to prevent its traders from “fraudulently overvaluing investments,” as the Securities and Exchange Commission put it.As in all such cases, companies do not commit crimes or frauds. Last week, Hillary Clinton, a Democratic presidential candidate, vowed “to prosecute individuals as well as firms when they commit fraud or other criminal wrongdoing.” In JPMorgan’s case, it was only a matter of time, regulators reassured the public, before individuals were held accountable.AdvertisementBut today Mr. Iksil,48, faces no charges. He does not even face civil claims, which have a much lower standard of proof. Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, disclosed in August 2013 that the government had entered into a nonprosecution agreement with Mr. Iksil, and that he would not be required to plead guilty to any crime. The Securities and Exchange Commission took no action against him. And now British regulators have dropped the case.AdvertisementThe result has left many white-collar defense lawyers mystified, even as they profess admiration for Mr. Iksil’s lawyers. While Mr. Iksil has emerged scot-free, his immediate boss, Javier Martin-Artajo, a Spanish national, and Mr. Iksil’s lower-ranking assistant, Julien Grout, who is French, face criminal charges and civil claims. But Mr. Martin-Artajo is in Spain, where a court has refused to extradite him, and Mr. Grout is in France, which typically does not extradite its own citizens. Although the investigation in the United States officially remains open, it appears no one, in all likelihood, will be held legally accountable.“It’s laughable, really, that so many banks have been prosecuted and it’s always the fault of a rogue trader, or an isolated trading desk,” said Brandon L. Garrett, a law professor at the University of Virginia and author of the book “Too Big to Jail.” ”But when risky behavior is repeatedly tolerated or concealed, you have to wonder if higher-ranking people should have been targeted.”The case of the London Whale shows how difficult that can be. Far from being the rogue trader portrayed in early news coverage, Mr. Iksil emerges in government documents and interviews with people familiar with much of the evidence as a conflicted figure on the trading floor, troubled by conscience, even as he tried to please his bosses. They pushed him to undertake the risky derivatives trading that proved his undoing and caused the great losses. Then, as the losses mounted, he repeatedly warned his colleagues that they should be more forthcoming about their extent, to no avail.“Four regulators in two countries investigated this thoroughly and came to the same conclusion, which is that it wasn’t appropriate to pursue any charges against Mr. Iksil,” said Jonathan B. New, a lawyer for Mr. Iksil and partner at the law firm BakerHostetler. “He cooperated fully with every investigation, and the actual facts speak volumes. The facts are often lost in the initial publicity.”Added Jonathan R. Barr, another BakerHostetler partner, “He was never a rogue trader. The trading strategy was approved and directed by higher-ups. Making him the face of this scandal was very unfair.”Of course, only Mr. Iksil’s version of the story has been heard, although regulators say it is backed by extensive emails, recorded conversations and corroboration from other witnesses. Mr. Grout and Mr. Martin-Artajo, should they ever testify, are likely to paint a far less flattering portrait of Mr. Iksil, people familiar with accounts their lawyers submitted to regulators said. It depicts him as not only directing the flawed trading scheme, but as being actively involved in concealing the losses, these people said. And while he may have been a relatively low-ranking employee in the vast JPMorgan hierarchy, he certainly was not underpaid: he earned $6.8 million in 2012 and $7.3 million in 2011.James B. Stewart, on CNBC, discusses the “London Whale” case, in which risky bets on complex derivative contracts ended up costing JPMorgan Chase $6.2 billion.Mr. Bharara conceded as much when he revealed that Mr. Iksil had been granted a “rare” nonprosecution agreement from the Justice Department. “I wouldn’t call him blameless,” Mr. Bharara said, “but he did sound the alarm more than once.” Mr. Bharara also praised Mr. Iksil’s cooperation and cited the difficulty of compelling him to testify when he was in France.AdvertisementOf course, it is not illegal to engage in risky trading and lose money, even billions. Mr. Iksil did not conceal his positions within the bank, and his strategy was discussed repeatedly with higher-ranking executives. The government alleged that Mr. Iksil’s colleagues (but not Mr. Iksil) fraudulently hid the amount of the losses by assigning false values to the positions in their internal reports.Instead of using the midpoint of the trading spread to value the positions, Mr. Iksil and his assistant, Mr. Grout, began using more favorable values in the spread, or even values outside the spread. In March 2012, Mr. Grout prepared a spreadsheet that compared the values of the positions they had reported, and the values they should have used if they had been making a good-faith effort to accurately value the positions. The difference was $432 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Iksil apparently grew increasingly uncomfortable with the valuations. “I can’t keep this going,” he told Mr. Grout in a conversation recorded by the bank. Referring to their boss, Mr. Martin-Artajo, he continued: “I don’t know where he wants to stop, but it’s getting idiotic. Now it’s worse than before. There’s nothing that can be done, absolutely nothing that can be done. There’s no hope. The book continues to grow, more and more monstrous.”On March 23, 2012, JPMorgan halted trading in Mr. Iksil’s credit derivatives portfolio. But the favorable valuations continued, with Mr. Martin-Artajo repeatedly resisting attempts by Mr. Iksil to be more forthcoming. That March day, Mr. Iksil told Mr. Martin-Artajo that that day’s losses were huge — $300 million using the “best” prices, or $600 million using the midpoint of the trading spread. “We are dead,” Mr. Iksil wrote in an instant message to Mr. Grout. “They are going to trash/destroy us. You don’t lose $500 million without consequences.”As for valuations, Mr. Iksil told Mr. Grout to ask Mr. Martin-Artajo, “because me, I don’t know anymore.”At this juncture, Mr. Iksil seems close to something approaching a nervous breakdown. It’s hard not to see him as a sympathetic figure caught up in something “monstrous” beyond his control. Still, Mr. Iksil never stopped the inflated valuations, nor blew the whistle with higher executives at the bank.It seems perverse that Mr. Iksil faces no charges, but that his junior aide does. While Mr. Grout may have played a more active role in the misleading valuations, he emerges as someone who largely took orders from Mr. Iksil or Mr. Martin-Artajo.JPMorgan fired all three, as well as others connected to the scandal. (Ina Drew, who ran the chief investment office in which the three men worked, was the highest-ranking casualty.) Since then Mr. Iksil has been living outside Paris with his family. He doesn’t have another job, and has been focusing on his legal defense. JPMorgan is paying the legal expenses for all three men.So if Mr. Iksil isn’t primarily responsible, then who is? The answer presumably lies with Mr. Martin-Artajo, the highest ranking — and highest paid, having earned $12.75 million in 2011 — of the three, and the one who dealt with the bank’s senior management. He has taken the position that the valuations were in line with industry practice and weren’t misleading, a conclusion the bank’s own internal investigation agreed with, notwithstanding its decision to pay a huge fine. Since he maintains no one did anything wrong, he wasn’t in a position to implicate anyone else.So far, Mr. Martin-Artajo hasn’t been questioned in the United States. He did testify in London, but British regulators didn’t aggressively question him and haven’t charged him with any wrongdoing. His lawyer, Bill Leone at Norton Rose Fulbright, said he had no comment. Spokesmen for the S.E.C. and the United States attorney’s office said they had no comment beyond their earlier statements.Advertisement“It’s so frustrating about these cases,” Professor Garrett said. “It’s hard for prosecutors when some of the key figures are resisting extradition and won’t talk to you. But you get the sense that they get a few small fish, start working their way up the chain, and then at some point, they just drop it. We want the right people to be held accountable, not some expendable minions.”A version of this article appears in print on July 17, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Convictions Prove Elusive in ‘London Whale’ Trading Case .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »