AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — The number of Americans filing new applications for unemployment benefits fell more than expected last week, and confidence among home builders held in July at almost a 10-year high, indicating underlying momentum in the economy.The solid labor market and firming housing industry were underscored by the reports on Thursday. Manufacturing, however, continues to struggle.Initial claims for state unemployment benefits fell 15,000 to a seasonally adjusted 281,000 for the week ended July 11, the Labor Department reported. The decline reversed the previous week’s rise and ended three consecutive weeks of increases.Economists forecast claims’ falling to 285,000 last week. While claims tend to be volatile during the summer, when automakers normally shut assembly plants for annual retooling, a Labor Department official said there was nothing unusual in the state-level data.Some automakers keep production running, which can throw off a model the government uses to smooth the data for seasonal fluctuations. The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends because it smooths out week-to-week volatility, increased 3,250 to 282,500 last week.It was the 16th consecutive week that the four-week moving average of claims held below 300,000, a threshold normally associated with a firming labor market.The labor market is tightening. The unemployment rate has dropped 4.7 percentage points from its peak in late 2009 to the current 5.3 percent, near the range that most Fed officials consider consistent with full employment.The jobless claims report on Thursday showed that the number of people still receiving benefits after an initial week of aid declined 112,000 to 2.22 million in the week ended July 4, suggesting that some long-term unemployed were finding work.The strong labor market is helping the housing market. A separate report showed that the NAHB/Wells Fargo Housing Market index stood at 60 this month, the highest point since November 2005.That was unchanged from June’s upwardly revised level, which was originally reported at 59. Readings above 50 indicate that more builders view market conditions as favorable than poor. The index has not been below that level since June 2014.Builders this month maintained their optimism about current and future sales, though a measure on prospective buyer traffic slipped from a five-month peak.“This is more evidence that housing is strengthening,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief United States economist at High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, N.Y.But manufacturing continues to lag. In a third report, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia said that its business activity index fell to 5.7 this month, from 15.2 in June. A reading above zero indicates manufacturing expansion in the region, which covers eastern Pennsylvania, southern New Jersey and Delaware.Manufacturing has been hurt by a stronger dollar and lower oil prices. The dollar has eroded the profits of multinational corporations, while cheaper oil has undercut oil drilling activity, reducing investment spending in the energy industry.“It adds to the disconcerting trend seen in other manufacturing sector indicators that have been consistently pointing to a lingering stagnation in U.S. manufacturing sector activity,” said Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York. “While we believe that the dissipation of the various headwinds buffeting this sector should result in a meaningful rebound later this year, the timing of this seems farther into the horizon.”A gauge of new orders in the Philadelphia Fed survey fell sharply this month, as did shipments. Inventories contracted, and a measure of factory employment in the region was negative for the first time since January.Advertisement