AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperGoldman Sachs said on Thursday that its profit was reduced nearly by half in the second quarter, as it wrestled with volatile markets and had to put aside more money to deal with investigations stemming from the financial crisis.The big hit came from the $1.45 billion that the bank put aside for “mortgage-related litigation and regulatory matters.”Goldman is said to be in the final stages of reaching a deal with the Justice Department over the bank’s sale of mortgage-backed securities before the financial crisis. Most other large banks have already settled similar cases.More worrisome was a slump on the firm’s trading desks, traditionally a major source of profit for Goldman. Fixed-income trading revenue fell 49 percent from the first quarter and 28 percent from the quarter a year ago — a sharper drop than other banks have reported so far this quarter.The bank’s chief executive, Lloyd C. Blankfein, said in a statement that the “uncertainty” in Europe, where the prospect of a Greek exit from the euro has loomed, “weighed on investors’ level of conviction.”Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.On a call with analysts, the bank’s chief financial officer, Harvey M. Schwartz, said that with the Greek situation now looking more likely to be resolved, many of the bank’s clients — particularly those looking at potential mergers and acquisitions — were expressing confidence.“The momentum in the advisory side of the business feels very strong,” he said.In the second quarter, revenue on advising on mergers and acquisitions was down 15 percent from the first quarter, but up 62 percent from the quarter a year ago.Over all, the bank earned $1 billion, or $1.98 a share, down from $2 billion, or $4.10 a share a year ago. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters had expected earnings of $3.89 a share.Apart from the $1.45 billion that Goldman put aside for legal costs, the bank’s earnings were higher than a year ago and better than most analysts expected.“The second quarter of 2015 was another example of the benefits that come with having a diversified global client franchise,” Mr. Schwartz said. “Certain businesses show year-over-year strength, while others faced headwinds.”The bank’s overall revenue was down 1 percent from a year earlier, to $9.1 billion, but that was still slightly better than the $8.8 billion anticipated by analysts.Like other banks that have already reported their earnings this quarter, Goldman Sachs saw a slowdown in several business lines since its strong first quarter this year.The first-quarter performance raised expectations that Goldman might surprise again in the second quarter.Investors signaled some disappointment with the second-quarter results on Thursday, pushing Goldman’s stock down 0.8 percent, to $211.18. Mr. Schwartz said that Goldman had been positioning itself to adjust to postcrisis financial regulations. A number of large European banks have recently made big moves to cut back the trading businesses where Goldman is strong, and Mr. Schwartz said that was likely to ultimately benefit Goldman.Mr. Schwartz also responded to questions about the bank’s recent moves to expand into online consumer lending, a business where it has not been involved before.“As it relates to, let’s just call it the space of digitally led consumer finance, we have no legacy costs, we have no legacy infrastructure to deal with,” he said. “It’s early days, and we just got on board and so we’ll be back with the with more details as things develop.”Advertisement