By RAVI SOMAIYAJULY 17, 2015
The news and gossip website Gawker removed an article about an executive at a prominent media company after widespread condemnation Friday from its readers and others, the first time the site has formally retracted a story for reasons other than legal or factual, according to a statement.The decision to remove the article was a departure for Gawker, which became a symbol of the unfettered nature of Internet journalism by publishing stories that pushed the limits of privacy and media ethics, the kind that most other publications think twice about. It comes as other websites, including Reddit, have indicated that they were also rethinking business models that included content that many found objectionable.In a statement posted on the website, Gawker’s founder, Nick Denton, explained the reason for the article’s removal, which accused the married male executive of seeking, via text message, to pay for sex with a gay escort. Gawker did not reveal the identity of the escort. In a statement provided to Gawker, the executive said, “This is a shakedown” and said he had not had a text exchange with the individual concerned.Mr. Denton described the article as “true and well reported.” But he said that publishing the retracted article “was an editorial call, a close call around which there were more internal disagreements than usual,” and one he regretted. It might have been justifiable in the early days of the web, he wrote, but “the media environment has changed, our readers have changed, and I have changed.” Stories must now be both true and reveal something meaningful, he said.AdvertisementThe now-removed article had been roundly condemned in the hours after its publication on Thursday. Critics argued that there was no news value or public interest to justify its publication, and that by posting it the site was acting as a party to the extortion of the executive by the escort. The columnist Glenn Greenwald, of the website the Intercept, described it as one of “the sleaziest and most repugnant articles seen in quite some time from an outlet of its size and stature.”AdvertisementThe decision to remove it — more of a gesture than a practical step, given that the article had more than 450,000 views by the time it had been taken down, and had been widely discussed — was made against the wishes of the editorial staff, who objected to the fact that it had been decided by “business executives,” according to a statement they released Friday evening. Referring to its recent successful drive to unionize, the staff said, “one of our core goals is to protect the editorial independence of Gawker Media sites from the influence of business-side concerns.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The statement went on to say: “Our opinions on the post are not unanimous but we are united in objecting to editorial decisions being made by a majority of noneditorial managers. Disagreements about editorial judgment are matters to be resolved by editorial employees. We condemn the takedown in the strongest possible terms.”Gawker Media, the company that owns Gawker and a number of affiliated sites, said it generated about $45 million in advertising revenue last year, and was profitable, earning about $7 million. It had been known, in part, for paying its writers bonuses based on the number of clicks their posts received. But in a memo to the staff last year, Mr. Denton said that he had reassessed the drive for traffic above all other considerations.Mr. Denton declined to comment further. Gawker had previously courted controversy by publishing content like videos of Tom Cruise participating in Church of Scientology events, and screen shots of Sarah Palin’s personal email account, which was apparently hacked. It is also preparing for a lawsuit brought by Terry Bollea, the wrestler known as Hulk Hogan. Gawker had posted an edit of a video featuring Mr. Bollea having sex with a woman who was then the wife of a friend. He forced the site to take down the video, and is now suing it, and Mr. Denton, for violating his privacy, seeking $100 million in damages.The controversy over the retracted article came in the same week that Reddit, an online message board, proposed a new content policy that would effectively ban spam, illegal activity and harassment, as well as objectionable material of a sexual nature. The policy received a mixed reaction from the site’s users, who prize Reddit for its unrestricted discourse.A version of this article appears in print on July 18, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gawker Retracts an Article After Criticism, and Gets More Brickbats From Its Staff .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.