AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiCVS and Walmart Canada said on Friday that a data breach at a Canadian information technology vendor may have leaked credit card information from their online photo processing websites, possibly compromising data on millions of users.The two retailers have temporarily shut down their online photo processing services and related mobile services, and are investigating the scope of the possible breach, the companies said in separate statements. Both retailers urged customers to check their credit card records for any suspicious activity.CVS and Walmart Canada said that a vendor based in Vancouver called PNI Digital Media hosts the photo sites, and collects customers’ payment information. The vendor is owned by Staples, which suffered an online attack of its own last year.Neither retailer disclosed how many users may have been affected by the possible breach, which was first reported by Krebs on Security, a news site that focuses on online crime and other Internet security topics.According to PNI’s investor relations page, the vendor also provides software to the online photo processing services of a third retailer, Costco. On Friday evening, the investor relations page appeared to be inaccessible.Costco’s photo site appeared to be functioning Friday afternoon. Officials at the warehouse retailer could not immediately be reached.Adam Levin, founder of the security firm IDT911, said the breaches highlighted the importance of more rigorously vetting I.T. vendors at a time when companies outsource more and more of their technology operations. Vendors have often proved to be the weakest link, he said.“Breaches have become a certainty in life, and everybody’s got to step up their game,” he said. “Even if the problem stems from a vendor, the retailer’s reputation is harmed, and it ends up in the middle of lawsuits.”Kirk Saville, a spokesman for Staples, confirmed that PNI was investigating a potential credit card data security issue.“If an issue is discovered, it is important to note that consumers are not responsible for any fraudulent activity on their credit cards that is reported on a timely basis,” he said. “We take the protection of information very seriously.”Erin Pensa, a CVS spokeswoman, said that the pharmacy chain’s main e-commerce site, as well as sites dedicated to contact lens sales and the chain’s medical clinics, were managed separately and were unaffected.The retailer is working closely with PNI and credit card companies to investigate the possible breach, she said in an email.“Nothing is more central to us than protecting the privacy and security of our customer information, including financial information,” Ms. Pensa said.Walmart Canada also had no reason to think that the retail giant’s photo processing site in the United States, or Walmart’s main e-commerce sites in Canada or the United States, were affected, according to Marilee McInnis, a company spokesman. “Our customers’ privacy is of the utmost importance. We immediately launched an investigation and will be contacting customers who may be impacted,” Ms. McInnis said. She said that Canadian authorities and regulators had been alerted to the attack.Advertisement