AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Una GalaniThe Lee family behind Samsung must be breathing a heavy sigh of relief. Its plans for an $8 billion merger of two Samsung affiliates, Samsung C&T and Cheil Industries, was narrowly approved on Friday by shareholders. The move came despite strong opposition from by Elliott Management, the hedge fund led by Paul E. Singer.The vote helps the family, whose patriarch is seriously ill, in its succession planning. But Mr. Singer’s activist fund is likely to fight on. And the challenge shows that Samsung, South Korea’s largest conglomerate, is vulnerable to restive investors as it continues to restructure.Samsung went to extraordinary lengths to woo shareholders, handing out watermelons and publishing pleading newspaper advertisements. The target company, C&T, even sold 6 percent of itself to friends to rally support for the takeover by Cheil Industries, the family’s primary control vehicle.Even so, only 69.5 percent of the shareholders who voted said yes — just 3 percent more than the minimum required.The bittersweet victory shows that serious opposition is finally emerging against the chaebols, or powerful family-run conglomerates, that have dominated the South Korean economy for decades.The Lees will now get control of around 30 percent of the enlarged entity, which is widely expected to eventually sit atop the Samsung empire, which is made up of about 70 companies. It also gives them a tighter grip on the $184 billion Samsung Electronics, the smartphone maker, of which C&T owns roughly 4 percent.In time, the Lees will need to consolidate their control while limiting any inheritance tax bill. This could involve creating a structure that eliminates circular shareholdings and divides assets into financial and industrial arms. Splitting Samsung Electronics into operating and holding companies would help achieve the latter, Credit Suisse analysts have suggested.But Elliott may not be finished. For starters, it can probably pursue further legal challenges. The fund could also use its 7 percent stake in C&T, plus holdings in other Samsung companies, to call for management changes or press for higher payout ratios. Initiatives like this typically require the approval of only 50 percent of the shareholders. At Samsung Electronics, which has far more foreign shareholders than C&T, the Lees may find it even harder to get their way.Una Galani is the Asia corporate finance columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement