AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressWASHINGTON — Builders in the United States broke ground on apartment complexes last month at the fastest pace in nearly 28 years as developers anticipated that recent jobs gains would create a wave of renters. Also in June, rising gasoline prices pushed inflation up modestly, leaving overall consumer prices higher than they were a year earlier for the first time since December.The Commerce Department said on Friday that housing starts in June climbed 9.8 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.17 million homes. All of that growth came from a 28.6 percent surge in multifamily housing that put apartment construction at its highest rate since November 1987. Starts for single-family houses slipped 0.9 percent last month.The gains show that what had been a sluggish construction sector is now running on economic adrenaline. Strong job growth and a rebounding economy have increased the numbers of buyers and renters searching for homes, while gradually rising mortgage rates have spurred homeowners to complete deals."The residential market recovery is here, and it is strong and sustainable," said Peter Ciganik, managing director at the real estate investor GTIS Partners.Housing starts increased 35.3 percent in the Northeast because of apartments, while climbing 13.5 percent in the South. Home construction slumped in the Midwest and West in June.Nationwide, housing starts have risen 10.9 percent year-to-date.Over the last 12 months, employers have added 2.9 million jobs, meaning there are that many more people with paychecks to spend across the broader economy. The impact of those job gains and the unemployment rate dropping to 5.3 percent has surfaced in housing, where demand is outpacing the supply of homes and creating more pressure to build houses and apartments.The market for new homes for sale had just 4.5 months of supply in May, compared with six months in a healthy market.But the financial distress has also left more Americans renting instead of owning, creating a need for more apartments. The share of Americans owning homes has fallen so far this year to a seasonally adjusted 63.8 percent, the lowest level since 1989.Approved building permits increased 7.4 percent to an annual rate of 1.34 million in June, the highest level since July 2007. The bulk of that increase came for apartment complexes, while permits for houses last month rose just 0.9 percent.Also on Friday, the Labor Department said that its Consumer Price Index rose 0.3 percent last month. Prices at the gas pump rose 3.4 percent in June on top of a 10.4 percent increase in May. An outbreak of avian flu drove egg prices up 18.3 percent in June, but overall food prices rose just 0.3 percent. Excluding the volatile food and energy prices, so-called core inflation was 0.2 percent last month.Overall consumer prices rose just 0.1 percent the last year; core prices are up 1.8 percent. Gasoline prices are down 23.3 percent over the last year; they hit bottom in January, then rebounded.Advertisement