By JACK EWINGJULY 17, 2015
FRANKFURT — In September 2012, the co-chief executives of Deutsche Bank held a news conference here to announce an ambitious plan to make sure that the ethical lapses of the past, which had damaged the bank’s reputation and led to huge fines, would never happen again.But less than a month later, one of the executives, Anshu Jain, may have deliberately made incorrect statements to regulators looking into allegations that Deutsche Bank employees were involved in manipulating benchmark interest rates to earn hundreds of millions of dollars in profit, according to findings by Germany’s bank supervisory agency.The accusation against Mr. Jain, who resigned in June, was contained in a 37-page draft report sent to Deutsche Bank’s management board in May by the agency, the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority, known by its German acronym, BaFin. The report also faulted to varying degrees the conduct of numerous other top executives who are still in their jobs, though none were accused of crimes. The executives named included Stephan Leithner, Deutsche Bank’s chief executive for Europe. He was also supposed to be leading a drive to remake the bank’s culture.The tone of the report and the blame it assigns to top executives support the conclusion that pressure from German regulators helped lead to the resignations last month of Mr. Jain and Jürgen Fitschen, the other co-chief executive. Deutsche Bank had insisted regulatory pressure played no role in the management shake-up.AdvertisementThe findings in the report, first published in full on Thursday by The Wall Street Journal, suggested that Deutsche Bank still had much work to do to address the underlying problems that led to huge financial penalties and management turmoil and that have interfered with the bank’s ambition to remain among the world’s top-tier investment banks.AdvertisementIn April, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay $2.5 billion in penalties to the United States and British authorities to settle accusations of rate fixing.Deutsche Bank said the findings in the BaFin report, excerpts of which had leaked before Thursday, confirmed its assertion that no top executives of the bank were involved in manipulating the benchmarks used to set the interest rates on trillions of dollars in mortgages, credit card debt and other loans.“The BaFin report confirms our findings that no present or former member of Deutsche Bank’s management board or group executive committee instructed employees to manipulate intrabank offered rates (IBOR) submissions or was aware of any attempted manipulations prior to June 2011 when certain misconduct first came to light during the bank’s investigation of this matter,” Deutsche Bank said in a statement. “We have paid a heavy price and expressed deep regret for the wrongdoing that occurred, and continue to draw lessons from this matter.”The report does not accuse Mr. Jain or other top Deutsche Bank executives of crimes, but says they helped create an “unbalanced business culture” that contributed to the wrongdoing. They maximized profits, failed to set up adequate oversight and took little or no action in response to signs of misconduct, according to the report, which was signed by Frauke Menke, head of a department at BaFin that oversees large banks.When accusations of rate manipulation came to light, Deutsche Bank conducted inquiries that were superficial, the report said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The regulator’s assertions underline statements by the American and British authorities, who complained in April that the bank dragged its feet in producing information sought by investigators. The fine paid by Deutsche Bank in the rate-setting case was higher than other banks accused in the conspiracy, in part because the bank was perceived as not cooperating fully.Addressing the criticism, Deutsche Bank said, “The report also addresses concerns about control-related issues, a number of which we have since rectified and others of which we will continue to improve through further enhancements.”Much of the report focuses on the behavior of Mr. Jain, who was head of Deutsche Bank’s investment banking operations before becoming co-chief executive in 2012. In an interview with officials of the Bundesbank, the German central bank, which shares supervisory duties with BaFin, Mr. Jain said he was not aware until 2011 of doubts about the integrity of the process used to fix benchmark rates, according to the report.AdvertisementThe report said, though, that there was evidence Mr. Jain was aware of market rumors about rate fixing in 2008 and that he “might have knowingly made incorrect statements” to Bundesbank officials about his knowledge. The report also said that in 2009, Mr. Jain pushed for bonuses worth tens of millions of dollars for traders later said to be at the center of the rate-fixing scandal.Mr. Jain was not immediately available for comment.Deutsche Bank said that people named in the report had submitted responses to BaFin, but that these could not be disclosed publicly.“The report includes statements that are taken out of context,” the bank said. “It would be unwarranted to infer conclusions about the conduct of the bank or any individuals at this stage, especially because their detailed responses are submitted privately, out of respect for the regulatory process.”A spokesman for BaFin declined to comment.The report also faults numerous other top Deutsche Bank managers as failing to energetically investigate signs of wrongdoing. They include Michele Faissola, the head of asset and wealth management, who in his previous position as head of global rates did not respond adequately to signs of problems in the way benchmark interest rates were set, the report said.Mr. Leithner, the chief executive for Europe, had no role in the rate manipulation but did not conduct a thorough enough investigation once suspicions came to light in 2012, the report said.Through a Deutsche Bank spokesman, Mr. Leithner declined to comment. A spokesman for Mr. Faissola said that he “was never in charge of the area that submitted intrabank offered rates.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.