AdvertisementSupported byBy Steve LohrEver since the financial crisis, General Electric has been steering back to its industrial roots and retreating from finance. The strategy always looked sound, but the question has been whether G.E. could deliver profitable growth going down that path.The company’s second-quarter financial performance, reported on Friday, provides further evidence that the company’s industrial plan is working. Its industrial business showed encouraging growth in earnings and profit margins, orders are rising briskly and the company slightly lifted its full-year earnings forecast.G.E. sounded the note of optimism even as some other industrial corporations have lowered their financial targets for the year.The global market for industrial machinery in general is challenging, especially for companies supplying the exploration and production gear for oil fields, given sharply lower oil prices.G.E. has a large business in oil and gas equipment, and that unit’s revenue fell 15 percent in the quarter, to $4.06 billion. But that division has been aggressively cutting costs, and G.E. has benefited from the strong performance of other divisions that sell and service equipment including jet engines, railway locomotives and power turbines.Overall orders for G.E. equipment rose 11 percent during the quarter, and were up 19 percent excluding the foreign exchange impact of a stronger dollar. Most of the company’s business is outside the United States.“G.E. put up a solid operating quarter, and this isn’t the first one,” said Steven Winoker, an analyst at Bernstein Research. “The high order rates and improving profit margins show that its industrial business is executing well.”In a conference call, Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chief executive, described the financial result as “a strong quarter in a slow growth and volatile environment” and proof that “we’re gaining momentum toward our long-term goals.”Shares of G.E. rose 0.7 percent to close at $27.24 on Friday.G.E. is also accelerating its exit from finance, other than financial services linked to its industrial business like lending to customers buying G.E. equipment.In April, the company announced an aggressive timetable for shedding most of GE Capital, its once-mammoth finance arm. At the time, G.E. sold off its commercial real estate business as one step in a program the company said would involve selling more than $200 billion in assets from GE Capital by 2018 — a “historic pivot,” as Mr. Immelt puts it, so that 90 percent of the company’s profits will come from its industrial business. In some years before the 2008 financial collapse, more than half of G.E.’s profit came from finance.Yet the financial asset sales are going faster than anticipated. The company is on track to sell off $100 billion in assets this year alone, and the entire program will probably be completed by 2017, a year earlier than planned, said Jeffrey S. Bornstein, G.E.’s chief financial officer.G.E. reported a net loss of $1.36 billion for the quarter. But the quarterly loss resulted from a $4.33 billion charge for shedding finance operations. Operating earnings per share, including the contribution from financial services linked to the industrial businesses, rose 19 percent, to 31 cents a share. That was above the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of 28 cents a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.Industry analysts and investors now focus mainly on the performance of the company’s industrial business. In the quarter, operating profit from its industrial business grew 5 percent, to $4.4 billion, and it was up 11 percent before currency translations. Industrial revenue, at $26.9 billion, was flat, though up 5 percent without the currency effect.The company has forecast double-digit earnings growth for the industrial side of the corporation. But on Friday, G.E. said it expected the profit contribution from its industrial operations to be $1.13 to $1.20 a share this year. Earlier, its forecast was $1.10 to $1.20 a share.G.E.’s total revenue, including GE Capital, was $32.8 billion. But the revenue most closely followed by analysts — for the industrial businesses and financial services related to the industrial side — was $29.66 billion for the quarter, above the average forecast of analysts of $28.70 billion.Mr. Immelt’s plan to hone the G.E. portfolio and expand its industrial business is facing regulatory challenges in both Europe and the United States. In Europe, antitrust officials filed a formal objection last month to G.E.’s $17 billion deal to buy the energy business of Alstom. The regulators fear that the combined business would hold a sizable share of the European market for large gas turbines, allowing it to raise prices sharply.On Thursday, G.E. presented the European regulators with a confidential proposal to modify the Alstom deal. In the conference call, Mr. Immelt would not comment specifically, but he said, “We proposed a remedy that addressed their concerns while preserving the strategic and economic rationale for the deal.”In the United States, the Justice Department filed a suit this month to block the sale of G.E.’s appliance business to Electrolux of Sweden for $3.3 billion. The government said the deal would give Electrolux enough power in products like stoves and ovens to lift prices for buyers.G.E. says it is confident both deals are delayed rather than derailed and hopes to complete them this year.Advertisement