AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Britain is looking for new leadership to oversee its financial markets.The Financial Conduct Authority said on Friday that Martin Wheatley would stand down as its chief executive on Sept. 12, but would continue to serve as an adviser to the regulator’s board until January.The move came as George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, called for new leadership at the financial regulator, which was created two years ago after the responsibilities of its predecessor agency, the Financial Services Authority, were split between two organizations.“Britain needs a tough, strong financial conduct regulator. Martin Wheatley has done a brilliant job of launching the F.C.A. in tough circumstances,” Mr. Osborne said in a news release.“Now that phase is complete, the government believes that different leadership is required to build on those foundations and take the organization to the next stage of its development.”Tracey McDermott, the regulator’s director of supervision for investment, wholesale and specialists, will become acting chief executive in September and serve in that role until a permanent replacement for Mr. Wheatley is found.Mr. Wheatley had been the Financial Conduct Authority’s chief executive since its inception in 2013.He previously served as managing director of the Financial Services Authority’s conduct unit beginning in 2011 and was chief executive of Hong Kong’s Securities and Futures Commission for five years.“I am incredibly proud of all we have achieved together in building the F.C.A. over the last four years,” Mr. Wheatley said in a news release. “I know that the organization will build on that strong start and work so that the financial services industry continues to thrive.”Mr. Osborne said that the government would conduct a worldwide search for Mr. Wheatley’s replacement.“Martin’s replacement will – like him – need to be passionate about protecting consumers, promoting competition and completing the job of cleaning up the City, so it is the best-regulated market in the world,” Mr. Osborne saidAdvertisement