AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithThe lead defendant in the first criminal trial in the United States of traders in the Libor interest rate scandal took the stand on Tuesday, offering point-by-point rebuttals of prosecution charges that he had participated in a conspiracy to help traders at his Dutch bank profit from sham submissions for the widely used financial benchmark.Anthony Allen, the London-based former head of global liquidity and finance at Rabobank, said that when he had sent email or text replies appearing to agree to traders’ demands for higher or lower Libor submissions, he was actually trying to push back or brush them off.In one striking instance, when a trader asked Mr. Allen on Dec. 1, 2006, for a “high” three-month Libor submission, Mr. Allen used colorful language to observe that he was “fast turning into” the other trader’s Libor slave, and soon added, “No worries mate, glad to help.”Explaining the reply, Mr. Allen said he was trying to signal to the trader that his request, which followed a similar entreaty from the same trader two days earlier, was out of line. “In my way, I’ve pushed back on him,” Mr. Allen said. “I was telling him,” he added, “it’s just not right.”In the earlier exchange, when the same trader asked for low one-month and high three-month submissions, Mr. Allen, who was acting as a backup Libor submitter, replied, “O.K. mate, will do my best.” Explaining the message, Mr. Allen testified that he didn’t want “to get into a discussion” with the trader, and it was “easier sometimes just to say that.” The entire email, he said, had a “joking, rather flippant” tone.Abuse of interest rates and the failure to address the problem is one of the most expensive scandals to hit Wall Street since the financial crisis.When Mr. Allen forwarded another request for a six-month Libor “as high as possible” to one of his subordinates, Anthony Conti, with the notation “F.Y.I.,” Mr. Allen explained on the stand that “I was just being noncommittal, really.” He added it was “difficult” to explicitly refuse such requests when they came from colleagues, but he interpreted his response as “almost brushing him off.”Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti, a money-market trader, are accused of manipulating Libor, officially the London Interbank Offered Rate. It is the rate reflecting what some of the world’s leading banks charge one another for short-term loans, and it influences rates on other loans worldwide. Traders can make profits on derivatives tied to the rates. Libor rates are set daily just before noon London time after a tally of submissions by 16 banks. The resulting benchmarks are supposed to represent rates at which banks can borrow from one another for short periods, up to one year. But the defense has noted that their reliability came into question starting in 2008 when interbank lending froze up in the face of fears about banks’ solvency, and submitters had to rely more on guesswork.More than a half-dozen major banks, including Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and Barclays as well as Rabobank, have agreed to pay more than $10 billion to regulators globally to settle Libor-rigging charges. Tom Hayes, a former UBS and Citigroup trader, was convicted in Britain last summer of conspiring with others to manipulate Libor. Sentenced to 14 years in prison, Mr. Hayes is appealing. Three former Rabobank traders who pleaded guilty to charges related to manipulation of the rates testified for the prosecution against Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti during the first two weeks of the trial in United States District Court in Manhattan. The trial began with jury selection Oct. 13; closing arguments are expected by early next week.Reports and settlements from a global investigation into whether big banks had improperly set key interest rates.Mr. Allen took the stand shortly before a lunch break to describe his career at Rabobank, which he began in 1998 as a dollar cash trader before being promoted in May 2005 to a role in which he supervised 40 people.Hunched forward over the court’s microphone, Mr. Allen showed a photo he had taken years earlier, with a “late-model phone” he had just received, of the various computer displays on his section of the Rabobank trading desk, in what he described as a noisy room with 400 to 500 other staff members.Gesturing with his hands, he said the computer screens extended above his head as he sat at his desk. He testified that a former trader who pleaded guilty in the case — Lee Stewart, known as “the Ambassador” — would often stand up to offer commentary on interest rates, coupled at times with suggestions about Libor submissions that would help him make money on his own positions.Mr. Allen said that he would take Mr. Stewart’s observations about market conditions into account, while disregarding his potential profits on pending trades as “not relevant.” And Mr. Allen noted that his own compensation was not tied to such traders’ profits or losses, and that they were supervised by different executives.Mr. Allen said he had not been told about any discussions about Libor submissions between the Rabobank traders Paul Robson and Takayuki Yagami, both of whom also pleaded guilty and testified for the prosecution. And he denied having a conversation condoning the scheme with Mr. Robson, a Libor submitter he supervised.Before Mr. Allen took the stand, an expert witness for the defense, Marti G. Subrahmanyam, analyzed nine instances in which the defendants had been asked to adjust their Libor submissions but appeared not to have done so. In a few of those examples, however, the submissions moved in the requested direction relative to the rates submitted by other banks.On cross-examination, the prosecutor Carol L. Sipperly produced several examples not covered in Mr. Subrahmanyam’s testimony in which the Libor submissions appeared to move in the direction of the traders’ requests.Advertisement