AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesAfter receiving a short-term loan from the European Union last week, Greece is expected to pay 4.25 billion euros ($4.6 billion) due on bonds held by the European Central Bank, as well as €2 billion in overdue payments to the International Monetary Fund. Failure to pay the E.C.B. would have forced the bank to cut off emergency funding for Greek banks, causing them and the Greek economy to collapse. The debt payments represent a step back from the precipice of a eurozone exit for Greece, but the government led by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras must cope this week with the political turmoil caused by his decision to accept unpleasant conditions set by eurozone creditors in return for financial aid. In a move toward normalcy, Greek banks reopened on Monday. —Jack EwingMorgan Stanley announced its second-quarter earnings on Monday morning, making it the last of the major Wall Street banks to do so. Morgan Stanley’s results were stronger than expected, as trading revenue and its wealth management business drove a 13 percent gain in net revenue. —Nathaniel PopperApple Watch, which has been on the market for nearly three months, is Apple’s first new device since the death of Steve Jobs. Analysts are viewing the wristwatch as a litmus test for whether the company can still make successful products. When Apple announces its fiscal third-quarter earnings on Tuesday, financial analysts are expected to scrutinize the company’s revenue numbers to assess whether the product was a hit or a miss. —Brian X. ChenNew data will be presented this week on experimental drugs for Alzheimer’s disease at the Alzheimer’s Association International Conference in Washington. Of particular interest will be additional results, which are expected on Wednesday, from clinical trials sponsored by the biotechnology company Biogen and the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly. The results will be incremental, not definitive, but Wall Street will be watching closely. Biogen’s drug, aducanumab, slowed the decline in cognition in an early-stage trial. The new data this week from that same trial could solidify those findings or cast doubt on them. Eli Lilly’s drug, solanezumab, a treatment for those in the earliest stages of the disease, failed in late-stage trials, but the company has started a big new trial. Data this week could bolster or weaken confidence that the drug will succeed in the new trial. —Andrew PollackThe Bank of England on Wednesday will release the minutes of its recent Monetary Policy Committee meeting. The minutes may provide more insight on when the central bank will look to raise its benchmark interest rate, which has remained at an all-time low since March 2009. In a speech last week at Lincoln Cathedral, Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, said a decision on when to begin the process of increasing the benchmark rate “will likely come into sharper relief around the turn of this year.” Mr. Carney added: “It would not seem unreasonable to me to expect that once normalization begins, interest rate increases would proceed slowly and rise to a level in the medium term that is perhaps about half as high as historical averages.” —Chad BrayThe Swiss bank Credit Suisse reports its second-quarter results on Thursday as earnings season kicks off for Europe’s largest banks. In a research note last week, Deutsche Bank said that Credit Suisse’s results could be pressured by lower revenue from its investment bank, particularly in its fixed-income business. Last week, two of its investment banking rivals, JPMorgan Chase and Goldman Sachs, reported declines in their fixed-income trading revenue in the quarter. —Chad BrayGeneral Motors, the largest American automaker, is expected to report solid second-quarter earnings on Thursday. The company posted strong vehicle sales in the United States during the quarter, primarily of pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles. But G.M. continues to struggle to make money in Europe, and its profits will probably be hurt by the effects of fluctuating currencies in South America and slowing industry sales in China. —Bill VlasicThe Food and Drug Administration is expected by Friday to approve Praluent, the first of a new class of powerful cholesterol-lowering drugs. Doctors are excited, but health care companies are worried about the potentially huge cost of treating all of the people who may need an extra boost to lower their lipids. Health carriers and Wall Street will be watching the price set by Praluent’s developers, Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, (estimates are $7,000 to $12,000 a year). Which types of patients will be eligible for treatment according to the drug’s label is also of interest; this information may determine how widely Praluent will be used. —Andrew PollackA judge will rule on Friday on whether Chicago can proceed with plans to restructure two city pension funds that are at risk of going broke. Chicago hopes to reduce benefits and increase yearly contributions to the funds, from workers and from the city. Unions say the Illinois State Constitution bars any reduction of public pensions. But the city argues that the restructuring is lawful, because it would give the workers a valuable, healthy pension plan in exchange for their current failing plan. The decision will most likely affect Chicago’s credit rating and bond values. —Mary Williams WalshAdvertisement