By JOHN KOBLINOCT. 27, 2015
The nation’s new favorite reality TV show, the Republican presidential debate, returns on Wednesday. But political-minded viewers will be forgiven for having to consult their channel guides to find it.The debate will be on CNBC, the financial news channel known less for its political coverage than its stock ticker. After Republican debates on Fox News and CNN that set ratings records, CNBC executives and anchors are ready to take their turn with what has become an unexpectedly enormous television event.“Somebody emailed me the other day and said there had been 441 questions in the presidential debates so far, and not one of them was about the debt ceiling,” Becky Quick, a CNBC anchor who will serve as one of the debate moderators, said in an interview.She pored over the debate transcripts and confirmed it: Moderators had ignored the debt ceiling. And how did this make Ms. Quick feel?Advertisement“Fantastic!” she said. “This is our time.”The 26-year-old financial cable news channel, often played on mute on trading floors and in financial firms’ offices (as well as in the lobby of CNBC’s headquarters in northern New Jersey), will center the debate on its bread and butter: business, the economy, money. Ms. Quick, John Harwood and Carl Quintanilla are serving as the moderators. Jim Cramer, Sharon Epperson and Rick Santelli are expected to each get in a question or two.AdvertisementThe debate is poised to shatter previous viewership records for the channel and provide it with some welcome news. Over the last decade, CNBC has confronted declining ratings and increased competition. Online services have neutralized the power of its stock updates, Fox Business debuted eight years ago, and Bloomberg Television has invested plenty to gain traction.Yet despite all of that, CNBC remains at the top when it comes to financial news on cable.“They’ve been the category leader, and there’s a built-in audience there,” said Brad Adgate, the senior vice president for research at Horizon Media, a media buying company. “If you’re talking financial news, it’s very much a desirable audience and you’re reaching corporate executives who are not heavy viewers of television.”Last year, CNBC had an average audience of 131,000 viewers, including on weekends, when it runs paid programming, down about half from its numbers in the throes of the 2008 financial crisis, according to Nielsen. (It did increase viewers from 2013 to 2014.)That may have been, in part, why the network announced last year that it would no longer use Nielsen ratings for its daytime hours. The network contends that its affluent audience cannot be tracked by Nielsen’s household set meters; Brian Steel, a network spokesman, pointed to “trading floors, hotel rooms, corporate suites, restaurants and country clubs” as places where viewers watch.Any ratings change has not affected CNBC’s revenue. The channel receives about 39 cents per subscriber, up from the 25 cents it was getting a decade ago, according to the financial research firm SNL Kagan. The network will also take in an estimated $220 million in advertising revenue this year, its highest total in three years, the firm says. Additionally, programming such as “Shark Tank” reruns and original shows like “The Profit” and “Jay Leno’s Garage” have led to ratings growth in CNBC’s once dormant prime-time lineup.And for the debate, CNBC is attracting unusually high levels of attention from advertisers.“This is a substantial, historic sort of one-off,” said Mark Hoffman, the chairman of CNBC.The network has been asking for — and, in some cases, receiving — about $250,000 for 30-second commercial spots during the debate, according to an NBCUniversal executive who spoke on the condition of anonymity. That significantly exceeds what CNBC normally asks for in its prime-time hours.AdvertisementThough the debate will almost certainly set records for CNBC — its highest viewership came from Olympics coverage in 2002, when 3.9 million people tuned in — network executives are not anticipating numbers as high as Fox News (24 million viewers) or CNN (23 million) got for the Republican debates. CNBC’s audience is decidedly more niche, and it is a less intuitive home for such an event — and the debate will also air opposite Game 2 of the World Series on Fox. The 2011 Republican debate on CNBC received 3.3 million viewers. (Fox Business will broadcast the next Republican debate, on Nov. 10.)Viewers should expect a steady diet of questions about the economy, personal finance and business. “It’s something we live and breathe every day,” said Nikhil Deogun, the editor in chief of CNBC.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The network is certainly familiar with the Republican candidate who will be center stage: Donald J. Trump. Mr. Trump has been a frequent guest on CNBC, and he used to appear in a regular segment called “Trump Tuesdays” on the channel’s morning show “Squawk Box.” Another candidate, Carly Fiorina, used to be a CNBC contributor.“There are some people who have a business background, and they’ll be the two who will be most well versed in this,” Ms. Quick said. “We realize that walking into it. Look, Donald Trump knows taxes inside and out.”Aides for Mr. Trump and the other leading Republican presidential candidate, Ben Carson, led a push to keep the debate to two hours and to provide all the candidates 30 seconds for opening and closing remarks. CNBC bristled at the notion that it had caved to any pressure from the candidates. “It was a discussion, and that’s fairly standard for these types of things,” Mr. Steel said.All three moderators are former reporters at The Wall Street Journal — and Mr. Harwood is a contributor to The New York Times. Ms. Quick and Mr. Quintanilla focus on markets and business; Mr. Harwood’s area of concentration is the intersection of Washington and economic policy.Mr. Harwood has been here before. He found himself at the center of one of the most memorable debate moments from the last presidential election cycle. During CNBC’s broadcast of the Republican debate in November 2011, Rick Perry froze onstage when trying to name one of the three government agencies he proposed cutting. And that moment — punctuated by Mr. Perry’s “Oops” — almost did not happen.“I was worried the thing was a little boring up until then,” Mr. Harwood said. “Perry starts doing that riff, he stops, and there was a moment when the audience was laughing and the whole thing was diffusing. Maria Bartiromo started to ask another question, and a producer, Sandy Cannold, came in my ear and said, ‘Stay with this. Don’t leave it.’ That’s when I asked him again, and it became clear it wasn’t just a momentary funny thing.”Those moments are pay dirt for moderators, but they are, by nature, unpredictable. CNBC’s top priority, all the anchors said, will be to be substantive while keeping the financial jargon to a minimum.“You’re not going to hear us talking about credit-default swaps, which we were talking about this morning on ‘Squawk Box,’ ” Ms. Quick said.AdvertisementOr as Ms. Epperson, CNBC’s personal finance correspondent, put it: “This is a CNBC debate that’s not just for CNBC. It’s not just for the people in our war room or for the people who watch us every day. It’s for the electorate; it’s for millions of people.”An article on Wednesday about the Republican debate on the cable channel CNBC described the channel’s average audience last year incorrectly in some editions. It was 131,000 viewers at any given moment during the day, not 131,000 per day.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Debate CNBC Plans to Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.