JULY 19, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday. At the close of the New York cash market Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.02 percent. The six-month rate was 0.11 percent, and the four-week rate was 0.02 percent. The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYColumbia Water & Light, Mo., $53.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation, $216.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYMiami-Dade County School District, $199.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Nashville, $347.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Mexico, $214.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAnacortes, Wash., School District, $106 million of debt securities. Competitive.Rochester, N.Y., $59.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAustin, Tex., Independent School District, $147.9 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementCalifornia Educational Facilities Authority, $77 million of Pepperdine University revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementChattanooga, Tenn., $252 million of electric system revenue bonds. Bank of America.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $160 million of mortgage finance program debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Corpus Christi, Tex., Independent School District, $100 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. FTN Financial Capital Markets.Dayton, Tex., Independent School District, $77.9 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Coastal Securities.Harris County, Tex., $109.5 million of toll road revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Harris County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $300 million of hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America.Hayward, Calif., Unified School District, $213 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Hillsborough County, Fla., Aviation Authority, $334 million of airport revenue bonds. Bank of America.Honolulu, $688 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. Bank of America.Port of Houston, Tex., $141 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementHuntsville, Ala., Utilities Commission, $106.3 million of water and sewer revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lafayette, La., $92.8 million of communication system revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Lake County, Ohio, $67.3 million of hospital refinancing revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Marshall, Tex., Independent School District, $90.2 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Middlebury School Building Corporation, Ind., $52 million of first mortgage refinancing and improvement bonds. City Securities Corporation.New York Dormitory Authority, $1.17 billion of sales tax revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York Dormitory Authority, $50 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation, $110 million of revolving funds revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $500 million of transportation revenue refinancing bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Rhode Island, $145.7 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Port of Seattle, $592.6 million of debt obligations. Morgan Stanley.Tarrant County Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $113.6 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.AdvertisementUnited Independent School District, Tex., $100 million of unlimited tax bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Texas, $220 million of Permanent University Fund bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $148.3 million of housing revenue bonds. Ziegler.Woodburn School District, Ore., $65 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.A version of this article appears in print on July 20, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.