AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Joyce LauGuillaume Deglise  has been chief executive of Vinexpo, a wine fair, since 2013. The fair, which alternates each year between Bordeaux and Hong Kong, wrapped up its latest French edition in June, having drawn 2,300 exhibitors and 48,000 visitors from 151 countries.Q. Did you grow up with wine culture? How did you become interested in the industry?A. I was born in Nancy in northeast France, quite close to Germany. It’s not wine country. It was when I went to Dijon to study business and marketing at the age of 18 that I caught the wine virus. I traveled around France and was so impressed by Bordeaux — the vineyards, and the fashionable people who worked in an industry that seemed both luxurious and relaxed. I loved the way they talked about wine, the land, the terroir.Q. The first part of your career was spent in Champagne exports for brands like Bollinger and Laurent-Perrier. Did that experience made you more globally minded?A. When I started, I’d traveled around Europe, but I didn’t know the world. Suddenly, I was traveling the world for Bollinger. When you’re 22, 23, it’s a lovely job to have.I went three or four times a year to Asia, when the market was not as big as it is now. And this is the nice thing about traveling bearing Champagne — people are always happy to see you.When I went to Laurent-Perrier, I did some work in the Americas, in Spanish-speaking countries. It was amazing seeing these places with my own eyes.Q. Do you remember your introduction to China?A. I did my first trip to China in 1998 for Bollinger. At that time, it was really an emerging country — it has of course expanded greatly in 15 years. It was so exciting for me to go to the Forbidden City in Beijing, and to see a very new market. There was nothing else like it in the world.Q. You speak French, English, Spanish, German, Italian and Portuguese. How did you learn them all?A. Each language has its own story. German was my first foreign language, because I grew up so close to the border. I had a summer job in Italy when I was young, so I learned that myself. My wife is Spanish, and I learned from her.But I did also have to study them. I took Spanish and Portuguese lessons. If you really want to learn a language, you have to study — there’s no secret to it. I don’t mean knowing just enough to order food in a restaurant — I mean speaking it and writing it properly, talking about your job, being able to hold a wine tasting.These are all European languages. My wish is to speak Mandarin Chinese or Russian or Arabic. Perhaps my young daughter will have the chance to learn Chinese.Q. You became chief executive of Vinexpo at the age of 39. Was that young to become a C.E.O. in the wine business?A. It was pretty young, but I had a good deal of experience.Q. Your Vinexpo job started with an event in Asia, not Europe. What was that like?A. I was excited to start with Vinexpo Hong Kong in 2014. It’s very important to keep a sense of leadership for our events outside France — and Hong Kong is our second home. It was a big challenge. We grew by 50 percent in one year, taking over two floors of the convention center for the first time.Q. Last year, Vinexpo canceled an event in Beijing at a time when the Chinese market is flourishing. Why was this?A. There was an idea, before my time, to do a smaller fair in Beijing, but there was some problem with the dates. Then last year, there was a downturn in the market, especially on luxury goods, after the crackdown on corruption by the government. I believe Hong Kong is the place to be in Asia, even for the China market. The Chinese — as well as Singaporeans, Malaysians and people from other parts of Asia — really enjoy flying into Hong Kong to spend a few days.Q. Instead, Vinexpo held a second Asian fair in Tokyo. Do you see potential growth in Japan?A. In November of last year, we did a smaller, very premium fair in Japan. When you launch a new project, there’s always uncertainty. Many people in the business have their eyes on China. But don’t forget that Japan is the second-largest wine market in Asia, and the only market with such sophistication and maturity.Q. How do you cater to a more developed wine market like Japan’s?A. The Japanese like to welcome visitors to their country, so we decided to do an event just for one country, as opposed to the Hong Kong fair, which is regional. It was very, very upmarket. In Japan, you must be very professional. The Japanese are very receptive to seeing real stars of the wine world, so we had master classes of Château Mouton Rothschild and Almaviva, Chile’s iconic wine, which is a joint venture between Baron Philippe de Rothschild and Concha y Toro. Both winemakers came.We also held a wine auction for the first time, at a very special gala that was also a charity event for earthquake relief. We hope to repeat Vinexpo Nippon next year.Q. The June event in Bordeaux was your homecoming, as your first Vinexpo in your native France. How did you put your personal mark on it?A. Bordeaux was my biggest challenge. There were high expectations — people wanted to see changes. So we invited top chefs and sommeliers for the first time, and really focused on pairing wines with foods. We worked with Wine Spectator magazine. We provided better access. We held conferences for the first time on topics like selling wine in Africa, which could be a potentially big market with a large population and an emerging middle class.Q. Was it more relaxed than past years?A. We threw networking parties until 2 a.m. We wanted people to meet after the show in a casual atmosphere, to drink a few glasses. We wanted it to be more than a trade show — something you remember, something that someone in the industry cannot miss. This is where you launch your vintage, you launch your latest cuvée.In 2003, I met my wife at Vinexpo. You see? You can do any kind of business there.Q. What’s your next step?A. There are so many Americans who fly to Bordeaux for Vinexpo. In terms of consumption, the United States is the top wine market in the world. And there is nothing like Vinexpo in the U.S. So that is my next dream, to bring our expo to America.Advertisement