AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — Federal Reserve officials, wrapping up a two-day policy meeting on Wednesday, are still thinking about raising the Fed’s benchmark interest rate in 2015, in part because they see strategic advantages in moving earlier than necessary.The Fed is widely expected to announce that it will continue for now to hold its benchmark rate near zero. The case for liftoff has weakened since the summer. The rest of the world is struggling and there are worrying signs of slower domestic growth.But Fed officials are unlikely to rule out an increase at their final meeting of the year, in December, in part because they are still waiting to see whether economic growth weakened in recent months, and in part because they want to start raising rates early so they can raise them slowly.“An advantage to beginning a little bit earlier is that we might have a more gradual path of rate increases,” the Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, told Congress this summer. She explained that moving slowly was prudent, while moving more quickly might be disruptive.Early does not necessarily mean December. Analysts and investors increasingly are betting the Fed will not move until next year. Economists, including several former Obama administration appointees, say the Fed should not move this year, and a small but significant minority of Fed officials have said in recent weeks that they, too, are not yet ready to start raising interest rates.Early does mean, however, that the Fed eventually plans to curtail its stimulus campaign even if the economy might still benefit from a little more help. By holding rates near zero since December 2008, the Fed has encouraged borrowing and risk-taking, stimulating economic activity that has helped to increase job growth. Raising rates will begin to weigh on the pace of growth.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.Monetary policy makers and academics have long debated the value of moving early and slowly.Central banks, including the Fed, typically raise and lower rates in small steps, at regular intervals, over long periods of time. The Fed, for example, raised rates by exactly 0.25 percentage point at each of its scheduled meetings from June 2004 to June 2006.The result is that monetary policy often changes more slowly than economic conditions, particularly during periods of turbulence, opening a gap between the actual level of interest rates and the level recommended by economic theories and policy rules.Some economists have argued that the Fed could have constrained financial speculation by raising rates more quickly during the last decade, perhaps limiting the scope of the 2008 crisis. Similarly, the Fed has been criticized for cutting rates too slowly during the crisis. Ben S. Bernanke, the former Fed chairman, said in his recent memoir that the Fed sometimes should have moved more quickly.Policy makers often cite uncertainty as the most obvious justification for these lags.“A number of the recessions that have occurred in the past have been in situations where we have tightened too rapidly and slowed down the economy much more than we expected,” Eric Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, said in an interview earlier this month. “I’m a little more concerned than maybe some academics that we have enough certainty about how the economy works or how monetary policy works that we can move in large increments and be confident that we won’t end up slowing down the economy much more than we expected.”Policy makers also have an aversion to disrupting financial markets. Fed officials cited market volatility as a reason they decided not to raise rates in September.Mr. Rosengren noted that academic models tend to assume markets adjust rationally and smoothly to changes in Fed policy. History tells a different story, and Mr. Rosengren said there was particular reason for caution in raising rates from near zero for the first time since December 2008.“Particularly after being at the zero lower bound for a long time, I think moving in large discrete amounts would be a risky strategy,” Mr. Rosengren said.Officials said the economy was strong enough to keep growing with a little less help from the central bank. They said rates would rise slowly, but borrowing costs already have started to climb.Other academics argue the Fed should cultivate a higher tolerance for market volatility. Jeremy Stein, a Harvard economist and former Fed governor, wrote in a June paper that moving slowly to maintain market calm was often ineffective because investors assume that the central bank eventually will need to compensate by raising rates more quickly. “Society would be better off appointing a central banker who cares less about the bond market,” he wrote.Central bankers also like to move slowly because they prize predictability. The Fed, like other central banks, increasingly has focused on managing expectations about the evolution of interest rates, because those expectations shape borrowing and investment decisions. People do not just care about the level of rates right now; they also care where rates are likely to be next year.And moving slowly reduces the chances the Fed would need to reverse course abruptly. The focus on the longer term also lets the Fed exert significant influence on economic conditions without adjusting current rates sharply, by shifting expectations about future rates.“What matters for overall financial conditions is the entire trajectory of short-term interest rates that is anticipated by markets and the public,” Ms. Yellen said in September.Frederic Mishkin, a Columbia University economist and a former Fed governor, has sat on both sides of the divide between academics and practitioners of monetary policy. He said there was theoretically a clear case for the Fed to wait until tangible signs of inflationary pressure emerge. Practically, however, he said the Fed might need to raise rates before then, at least once, just to demonstrate to investors that it is willing and able to do so.“From a pure monetary policy viewpoint, it’s completely reasonable for the Fed to keep rates at zero and not move for a long time,” he said. “But one of the problems that Janet faces is that people in the markets think that she’s very dovish and that she won’t do the hard things she needs to when inflation goes up. So there’s a perception issue that the Fed will never pull the trigger.” He added, however, that he saw little reason to do it in December.Mr. Mishkin said the Fed should abandon its earlier predictions and wait. “If they did move by the end of this year,” he said, “it’s an indication that they really are focused on dates rather than data.”Advertisement