AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedFirst Data Corporation, the object of one of the last big leveraged buyouts struck before the financial crisis of 2008, is finally coming back to the stock markets.The company, a credit card and payments processor, filed on Monday for an initial public offering, paving the way for its majority owner, the private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, to eventually sell off its holdings eight years after buying the company for $29 billion.Should First Data succeed in going public, its stock sale is likely to be one of the biggest of the year, one that has so far been relatively quiet for I.P.O.s. Renaissance Capital on Monday estimated that the company could raise $5 billion or more. First Data said it planned to use proceeds from the stock sale to repay some of its roughly $20 billion in long-term debt.K.K.R. is finally seeking an exit from one of its most debt-laden deals in recent years. The firm and its peers — spurred on by a flood of cheap, available debt — rushed to strike ever-bigger deals, setting records for their industry in the process. But after the financial crisis, many of these deals took years to realize profitable exits. As the stock markets have improved, however, many private equity shops have rushed to stage I.P.O.s for their properties. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has nearly doubled over the last five years, while the Nasdaq has risen nearly 140 percent.Another lengthy and tough private equity investment, the Spanish-language broadcaster Univision, filed to go public this month, providing what will be at best a mediocre return for its consortium of owners.Still, some other huge buyouts still remain in the hands of their private equity owners. Among them are Clear Channel Communications, the broadcaster now rebranded as iHeartMedia, and Toys “R” Us, which K.K.R. bought with Bain Capital and Vornado. (The private equity firm has written off its investment in another major portfolio company, the Texas power utility Energy Future Holdings, after it filed for bankruptcy last year.)K.K.R. pursued First Data hard in the spring of 2007, eventually paying a significant premium over the company’s stock price and handing over one of the biggest equity checks in the history of the private equity firm.Now First Data claims some 4,000 financial institutions around the world as clients, processing more than 2,300 transactions a second.“We love the hand that we have — we have millions of clients, we know how to innovate and collaborate, our leadership bench is deep, and being in business with K.K.R. has been great,” Frank Bisignano, First Data’s chief executive, wrote in a letter included in the I.P.O. filing. “We have much work to do, and we know First Data has not yet truly arrived. We know we are on the right path, and we know we will get there.”The company said that it lost $265 million last year, narrowing a multiyear string of losses, even as its revenue climbed to $11.1 billion.Yet as First Data moves beyond processing credit card transactions into a broader array of payment services, it is facing an increasingly crowded field of competitors, including PayPal and a longtime competitor, Total System Services.According to the prospectus, K.K.R. still owns 74 percent of the company. Mr. Bisignano, who before joining First Data was a top executive at JPMorgan Chase, owns 1 percent.Still, Monday’s filing left out main elements of the pending stock sale, including how many shares will be sold and on which exchange they will trade. It also didn’t list which banks will underwrite the I.P.O.Even the amount of money First Data is seeking to raise has yet to be determined.Advertisement