AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsA&P, a former titan of the grocery industry, has filed for bankruptcy protection for the second time in five years and is trying to sell more than 100 of its stores.The company, which owns Pathmark, Food Emporium and other food retailers clustered primarily in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, said on Sunday that a restructuring in 2010 had failed to put it on secure enough financial footing to keep up with a shifting grocery landscape.A&P, less commonly referred to as the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company, has lost market share to competing stores like ShopRite and Stop & Shop Supermarket Company, as well Walmart and Target, retail giants that have spent the last few years expanding their offerings in the grocery aisles. A&P has debts of about $2.3 billion, court filings show, and assets of $1.6 billion.The grocery chain is in talks with Key Food Stores Co-Operative, Stop & Shop and Acme Markets to sell 120 stores, which employ 12,500 of A&P’s approximately 28,500 workers, for nearly $600 million, according to the company.But none of the bidders have agreed to assume the employees’ collective bargaining agreements and pensions, A&P said in its court filings. The company said it was “committed to engaging in direct and comprehensive negotiations” with its unions.In 2010, union representatives agreed to help A&P secure financing by cutting their members’ vacation days, wages and other benefits — a package of concessions worth about $625 million, according to John T. Niccollai, the president of Local 464A, which represents about 7,000 A&P workers.“Everyone that loaned the company money and gave concessions did so with the hope and understanding that we could turn this company around,” Mr. Niccollai said. “And though we weren’t successful in turning the company around, people have been working for the past five years.”The company, based in Montvale, N.J., plans to close 25 stores as part of its latest bankruptcy plan. It has not disclosed how many workers will be laid off as a result, according to a spokesman, Dan Gagnier.Founded in 1859 as a mail-order tea business, A&P evolved into a discount food retailer that operated 16,000 stores by the mid-1930s and remained a dominant player in America’s grocery landscape into the second half of the century.“It was truly a powerhouse,” said Marc Levinson, an independent historian and the author of “The Great A&P and the Struggle for Small Business in America.” “In those days, independent grocers were every bit as afraid of A&P as mom-and-pop retailers are today of Walmart.”In 1912, A&P opened its first discount store in Jersey City. The idea of a retailer focused on low-cost groceries was novel at the time, and a reputation for rock-bottom prices helped the company flourish.“They were opening stores literally more than one a day during World War I,” Mr. Levinson said.Over time, however, A&P lost its reputation as a discount retailer. While it had traditionally focused on urban areas like New York City, competitors were taking away customers in the suburbs.“Competition simply put too much pressure on too many stores, and sales started dropping because of that,” said David Marcotte, a senior vice president of retail insights for the research firm Kantar Retail.Between 2008 and 2014, A&P lost nearly half its market share, according to Kurt Jetta, the head of consumer and retail analytics firm Tabs Group Inc., citing data from Metro Market Studies. Analysts describe a company that fell out of step with shoppers, who increasingly wanted bigger stores and steeper discounts.“They didn’t adapt their store formats the way consumers wanted to shop,” Mr. Jetta said. “They were just so slow and cumbersome.”In 2010, A&P filed for bankruptcy, emerging two years later as a private company with backers including the Yucaipa Companies, a money management firm affiliated with the supermarket magnate Ron Burkle. The company offered temporary price cuts to help bring customers back, advertising new promotions in print, on TV and the radio.But despite emerging from bankruptcy with $93.3 million in cash on the balance sheet, A&P struggled to invest in a new strategy at a time when its competitors were redesigning stores, opening new locations and experimenting with technology.In the first six months of the 2012 fiscal year, A&P was losing about $28 million a month, according to court filings. From February 2014 through February this year, it lost more than $300 million.A&P also said that labor costs were taking a heavy toll, pointing to so-called bumping provisions that required layoffs to be conducted by seniority so that younger employees were terminated first. Those provisions, the company said, could make it more expensive to close an unprofitable store than to leave it open.Advertisement