AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Protess and Jessica Silver-GreenbergWhen an executive at one of Wall Street’s top consulting firms testified before Congress two years ago, he stressed the importance of independence in reviewing bank misdeeds, declaring, “If we merely told our clients what they want to hear, we would lose credibility.”A long-running New York State investigation into potential conflicts of interest at the firm, Promontory Financial Group, is now calling some of that credibility into question, according to lawyers briefed on the matter. And in an escalation of the investigation, state authorities recently subpoenaed several of the firm’s employees, including the executive who testified before Congress.The subpoenas from New York’s financial regulator, the latest step in a two-year inquiry, require that at least six Promontory employees sit for depositions beginning on Tuesday, the lawyers said. The development signals that the investigation, which at times grew bitter as Promontory resisted the regulator’s requests for documents, has reached its final stages and could soon yield a punishment.The scrutiny threatens the reputation of Promontory, a firm staffed with so many former federal officials that it is known as Wall Street’s shadow regulator. The consultant, whose founder and chief executive, Eugene A. Ludwig, is a onetime banking regulator and a law school friend of Bill Clinton, occupies a position of trust on Wall Street, providing regulators with what is supposed to be an impartial window into misconduct like money laundering and sanctions violations.The New York investigation centers on one such assignment Promontory performed for the British bank Standard Chartered, which was suspected of processing billions of dollars on behalf of Iran. The bank hired Promontory to review its transactions with Iranian entities, as well as other sanctioned countries, and report the findings to regulators.After reviewing drafts of the report and internal emails, the New York regulator has questioned whether Promontory helped obscure some of the same misconduct it was supposed to unearth, according to lawyers briefed on the investigation. The regulator examined whether Promontory, under pressure from Standard Chartered and its lawyers, sanitized the report to play down the scope of the illicit transactions. As the investigation progressed, Promontory offered to have some executives meet with state investigators, an offer that led to the recent subpoenas.“We have sought for nearly two years to provide N.Y.D.F.S. with a complete understanding of the facts in this matter and, to that end, recently encouraged it to meet with our professionals,” the firm said in a statement, referring to the New York Department of Financial Services. “We stand behind our work on this engagement and the integrity of the Promontory professionals who did that work, and share the department’s commitment to consultant independence.”Mr. Ludwig, the chief executive, is not being deposed and is not suspected of wrongdoing. Although the regulator expects to depose Konrad Alt, the firm’s chief operating officer and the man who testified before Congress in 2013, Mr. Alt is not suspected of wrongdoing.Still, the investigation into Promontory is the latest threat to Wall Street’s consulting industry, whose influence has come under the microscope after prominent missteps.The firm’s rivals, PricewaterhouseCoopers and Deloitte, have already settled as a result of similar investigations by the New York regulator, paying fines and accepting temporary suspensions from certain assignments.Those settlements — PricewaterhouseCoopers paid $25 million, while Deloitte paid $10 million — could provide a template for a possible settlement with Promontory, although negotiations would not begin until after the depositions. The negotiations could ultimately break down, leading the New York regulator to file a legal action against the firm.The regulator need not prove a legal violation to punish the firm, only that it lacked the objectivity expected of consultants. Thanks to a quirk in an obscure state law dating to the end of the 19th century, the regulator has the authority to withhold documents that consultants need to advise a bank, effectively hamstringing their business.The crackdown on consultants — which began under Benjamin M. Lawsky, New York’s former financial regulator, and is now being overseen by Anthony Albanese, his interim successor and previous chief of staff — stems from a concern that the industry’s business model is rife with conflicts of interest. While consultants often claim that they provide an impartial assessment of a bank’s problems, they are also handpicked and paid by those same banks.Despite those conflicts, regulators have leaned on consultants to conduct the sort of large-scale examinations the government cannot afford to undertake. But after recent concerns arose about PricewaterhouseCoopers and Deloitte succumbing to pressure from banking clients, regulators began to reconsider that reliance, prompting them to release new guidelines for the use of consultants.Faced with criticism, the consulting industry has defended its work. Some firms also emphasized that, at least in certain cases, they do not claim to operate as “independent consultants.”Even so, consultants typically promise government authorities that they adhere to industry standards requiring impartiality.Promontory has done just that. During his congressional testimony, Mr. Alt, Promontory’s chief operating officer, stated that the firm’s “business model requires us to bring a high level of independent judgment to all of our engagements, not just when we are formally designated as independent consultants.”In the depositions this week, the New York regulator is expected to question Mr. Alt about those assertions, according to the lawyers briefed on the matter who were not authorized to speak publicly.The regulator will most likely contrast those statements with concerns about the objectivity of the firm’s 2011 report regarding Standard Chartered, even though Mr. Alt was not involved in the report. The depositions represent an escalation of an investigation that was already hostile.When the New York regulator requested Promontory’s correspondence with Standard Chartered, the firm balked, according to the lawyers briefed on the matter. Promontory contended that it was hired by the bank’s lawyers, an arrangement that might have shielded those records under attorney-client privilege.That argument spurred an unusually contentious debate that threatened to stall, or even derail, the investigation. After the regulator threatened to take Promontory to court, Standard Chartered agreed to produce the documents for the sole purposes of the investigation into Promontory.The regulator’s interactions with Standard Chartered have been even more difficult.In 2012, the bank agreed to pay $667 million to several agencies, including the New York regulator, the Justice Department and the Manhattan district attorney’s office.That did not end its problems. Two years later, the New York regulator took action once again, forcing the bank to pay a $300 million fine and suspend an important business activity because of its failure to weed out transactions prone to money laundering.The bank, which recently overhauled its top management, is now once again under criminal investigation. The Justice Department is examining whether it committed sanctions violations beyond those covered in the 2012 deal, which centered on what the bank called “Project Gazelle,” an effort to forge “new relationships with Iranian companies.”Advertisement