
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

JULY 20, 2015
Speculation that the British publisher Pearson might sell The Financial Times could soon be stemmed with a deal.The global newspaper looks increasingly out of place at a company with a core focus on education, not financial journalism, in the United States. A healthy merger market might encourage potential buyers to bid a price that is acceptable to the publisher, which has a market value of $16 billion.It has become a guessing game as to whether Pearson will put the pink-hued newspaper on the block — and if so, when. Possible buyers include the German publisher Axel Springer, according to a Bloomberg report. Bloomberg also says an auction might fetch as much as $1.6 billion for the asset, if not more — though Pearson’s price expectations may have interfered with a rumored deal in 2012.It is easy to see why rumors persist. Pearson had restructured itself to the point that North America represented 61 percent of its $7.5 billion revenue last year.AdvertisementPearson’s recent moves include splitting off its Penguin Books unit into a joint venture with Bertelsmann-owned Random House in 2013. It also sold Mergermarket, a financial news service, for $624 million in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pearson doesn’t share details of The Financial Times’s financial performance, but circulation increased 10 percent last year, to 720,000, and digital subscriptions now represent 70 percent of the paying audience. Those numbers suggest The Financial Times has done a good job of moving away from its dependence on paper. It could help spur buyers’ interest.The fate of The Economist, which is privately held and half owned by The Financial Times, may add complications. Still, handsome media assets like these are highly prized. Rupert Murdoch paid a 67 percent premium to pry The Wall Street Journal from the hands of the Bancroft family in 2007.AdvertisementThe value of merger and acquisition deals worldwide almost set a record in the second quarter, according to Thomson Reuters data. Perhaps Pearson is reading about this activity in the pages of the “Pink ‘Un,” as the newspaper is sometimes called,and hopes to follow the money.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »