AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — President Obama said Monday that he would nominate Kathryn M. Dominguez, a professor of economics at the University of Michigan, to a seat on the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors.Ms. Dominguez, an expert on the behavior of currency markets, fits the mold of a modern central banker. These days the Fed is dominated by academic economists, including its chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen.But her confirmation prospects are uncertain. Republicans, who control the Senate, have not set a hearing for Allan R. Landon, a bank executive Mr. Obama nominated to the Fed’s board in January. Ms. Dominguez will now join Mr. Landon in awaiting Senate action.As a member of the Fed’s seven-seat board, Ms. Dominguez would help to oversee its role as the nation’s most important financial regulator, and to set monetary policy in conjunction with the presidents of the Fed’s 12 regional banks.The White House also highlighted her knowledge of global markets as particularly valuable as the Fed grapples with the international impact of its own decisions and the strain of weak growth in other developed nations on the American economy.“Dr. Dominguez has the proven experience, judgment, and deep knowledge of the financial system, monetary policy, and international capital markets to serve at the Federal Reserve during this important time for our economy,” Mr. Obama said in a statement on the nomination.Ms. Dominguez has spent her career in academia, although she has consulted for several institutions, including the Fed and the International Monetary Fund. A Vassar College graduate, she earned a doctorate in economics at Yale University and then taught at the Kennedy School at Harvard before moving to Michigan in 1997.She has not held a job in government since she spent an academic year as a researcher at the Fed in the mid-1980s while working on her doctorate.Ms. Dominguez has written extensively on the movement of exchange rates, including research showing the influence of interventions by central banks. Her limited public comments about current policy issues suggest she broadly shares the view that the Fed is properly engaged in a necessary response to the economic crisis.In a 2013 paper, she described the slow pace of economic growth in recent years as a result of “self-inflicted wounds from the political stalemate over the U.S. fiscal situation,” along with the unexpected impact of the European debt crisis.Last year, in an interview with Bankrate.com, she expressed support for the slow pace of the Fed’s retreat from its stimulus policy. “They’re nervous about putting the brakes on what is a very muted recovery relative to what we’ve seen after past recessions,” she said.Adela Pinch, an English professor at Michigan, struck up a partnership with Ms. Dominguez about a decade ago after a student asked her to translate into modern terms the financial circumstances of the characters in Jane Austen’s novels.Ms. Pinch knew that Ms. Dominguez was an Austen fan and invited her to give a guest lecture addressing that question. That went so well they decided to create a course called “Jane Austen and Economics,” using the popular novels to introduce Michigan first-year students to the worlds of literary theory and economic theory.“The students love Professor Dominguez because she has the gift of explaining complex, theoretical economic concepts very clearly,” Ms. Pinch said.They have taught the class twice, in 2010 and 2013, and are scheduled to teach it again next year. Now, Ms. Pinch said, “I may just have to teach Austen.”If both Ms. Dominguez and Mr. Landon are confirmed (and no current members leave), the Fed would have a full seven-member board for the first time since August 2013. That has become increasingly unusual. Since 1980, the Fed has had a full board less than 45 percent of the time.Advertisement