By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 20, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — PayPal has returned to the public stock markets for the first time in more than a decade in a rousing start.Shares in the payments giant closed up more than 5 percent, to $40.48, giving the company a market value of nearly $50 billion. The company trades on the Nasdaq stock market under the ticker “PYPL.”The move, prompted in part by investor pressure, separates PayPal from eBay. PayPal is now free to pursue its own corporate strategy, unencumbered by potential conflicts with its onetime parent. Its stock value is now more than eBay and several other technology firms.Analysts have speculated that the company may link up with any number of potential partners, including the Alibaba Group in China as well as merchants in the United States that compete with eBay.AdvertisementThe mission, according to the company’s chief executive, Dan Schulman, is to expand PayPal beyond simply processing payments online into providing a range of services for both retailers and consumers.“We’re moving beyond being a proprietary button on a website to being a full-service partner to merchants across the world,” he told DealBook in a telephone interview.AdvertisementPart of that strategy will inevitably encompass buying new technologies. This month, PayPal bought Xoom, a player in the business of sending money abroad, for about $890 million in an effort to move into the growing market for international remittances.Mr. Schulman said that his company had no debt and had roughly $6.6 billion in cash on its balance sheet. And having its own stock means that the payments services provider has an additional form of currency that it can use in future deal-making.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That allows us the ability to look across a very dynamic payments industry and look for companies with unique capabilities,” he said.Although PayPal’s independence was rooted in part by agitation from shareholders like Carl C. Icahn, Mr. Schulman said that he was not concerned about the pressure that activist investors might bring to bear on the company. He said that in a road show to hundreds of soon-to-be shareholders over the last week, he explained the company’s mission and vision and received strong support.“This is about all of our shareholders,” he said. “Having that dialogue with our investors has been incredibly helpful.”A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: PayPal’s Debut.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.