
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JULY 20, 2015
New challenges are being made about whether the Securities and Exchange Commission has too much of a “home court” advantage when it pursues cases before its own in-house judges rather than in federal court.It was the Dodd-Frank Act — passed by Congress five years ago in the wake of the financial crisis — that gave the S.E.C. the option to file cases in which it sought monetary penalties in its own internal administrative proceeding rather than going to a Federal District Court. More cases that would have been filed in a Federal District Court, like insider trading and investor fraud charges, are now being pursued in administrative proceedings.On the public relations front, however, the S.E.C. may not be faring as well over its use of administrative hearings. Last November, Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York said in a speech that “while a claim to greater efficiency by any federal bureaucracy suggests a certain chutzpah, it is hard to find a better example of what is sometimes disparagingly called ‘administrative creep’ than this expansion of the S.E.C.’s internal enforcement power.”The latest criticism comes from the United States Chamber of Commerce, which issued a report last week that included calling for a number of changes to how administrative cases are pursued. The main recommendation is to provide so-called discovery rights — which allow a defendant to obtain documents and compel witnesses to give pretrial testimony — in administrative proceedings to more closely resemble those provided in a federal-court case. In addition, the chamber called for giving defendants the right to move a case to a federal court if they wanted to have a jury decide their fate.AdvertisementThe response from the S.E.C., as you might expect, was hostile. Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the enforcement division, who has been the most vocal proponent of using administrative proceedings for a wide range of cases, responded  that the Chamber of Commerce’s suggestions “would significantly weaken the commission’s ability to protect investors through strong and effective enforcement of the federal securities laws.”AdvertisementAdding to the furor is that the S.E.C. does quite well in its administrative proceedings, winning almost all contested cases over the last few years. The Wall Street Journal reported that the S.E.C. won more than 90 percent of its administrative cases over a five-year period, compared with a 69 percent success rate in federal district courts.Do those statistics prove the deck is stacked against defendants accused of violations? The answer is maybe not, because the S.E.C. began a shift to filing complex administrative cases in just the past three years for matters taking place after the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act. Thus, the numbers may not reflect more recent win-loss trends.But this battle is more about the perception that the administrative process is flawed, not whether there is actually a significant home court advantage.The administrative process is quite different from federal court cases because there are no broad discovery rights. In addition, the initial decision is made by a judge hired by the S.E.C., not by a jury. Any appeal is initially heard by the five commissioners who authorized the case before it can go to a federal appeals court, which is required to defer to the S.E.C.’s expertise in reviewing the matter. The structure has fueled the perception that this is a closed system in which the agency acts as both prosecutor and judge over the case.Administrative cases rely largely on the information gathered by the S.E.C. during its investigation, with little opportunity for a defendant to require witnesses to give depositions or to compel the production of records. The time frame for a case is quite limited, usually requiring an initial decision in less than a year from when it was filed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.William E. Gladstone, the onetime British prime minister, once observed that “justice delayed is justice denied,” but the accelerated pace of an administrative proceeding seems to be closer to a rush to judgment for a defendant. So far, the S.E.C. has won a number of legal challenges to its authority to pursue administrative cases. However, one Federal District Court judge in Atlanta recently ruled that the process for appointing the in-house judges violated the Constitution. As a result of that decision, more defendants are trying claim that their constitutional rights are being violated in an attempt to stop in-house cases that would have been filed in a federal court before the Dodd-Frank Act.So far, though, the prospects for any judicial overhaul of the process look to be fairly low. Still, the S.E.C. may want to look at its procedures for administrative cases if it wants to respond to some of the criticism.The Chamber of Commerce’s suggestion that defendants be allowed to take a case to federal court is unlikely to gain any support from the S.E.C. Virtually every defendant facing potential administrative charges would threaten to use that option as a lever to gain a more favorable settlement.AdvertisementCases filed in federal court are much more complicated because of the extensive rights afforded to the parties to obtain evidence. That means that there is a greater strain on the S.E.C.’s resources when it has to pursue cases in that forum.Even the Chamber of Commerce has been critical of the broad discovery afforded in federal courts, with its Institute for Legal Reform once arguing that they allow for “open-ended fishing expeditions in search of a quick settlement.”A modest expansion of discovery rights in administrative cases looks like a much more attractive option for blunting claims of unfairness. Defense lawyers are naturally suspicious when the only evidence they can use in a case is what their opponent provided. The notion that the S.E.C. has gathered all the relevant information, and that a defendant cannot question witnesses in advance of a trial, goes against the view that the each side should have the same opportunity to put on its case.The S.E.C. controls the procedures for administrative cases through its rules of practice, so changes could be put in place fairly easily. Most of the prominent defense lawyers for securities cases worked at the agency at one time, so obtaining their input on how to broaden discovery rights is certainly a possibility.If the S.E.C. is unwilling to compromise by altering how an administrative case will unfold, the danger is that the steady drumbeat of criticism will lead Congress to rethink the agency’s authority in this regard.There is already growing pressure from Republicans on Capitol Hill to roll back parts of the Dodd-Frank Act. So what Congress giveth, it can easily taketh away — if the perception grows that the S.E.C. is unfairly using its authority to pick a favorable legal forum for its proceedings.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »