By LIZ MOYEROCT. 27, 2015
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company reported a steep third-quarter loss on Tuesday as a late summer swoon in the market dealt a blow to the value of its investment holdings.The private equity giant, led by Henry R. Kravis and George R. Roberts, also said it would buy back $500 million of its shares, which it calls units, and make fixed distributions to shareholders of 16 cents a quarter rather than the variable distributions it had been making.The fixed payments represent an effort to free up cash to make investments in the business or buy back stock.K.K.R. said its first-ever share buyback and fixed-distribution plans are aimed to bolster the company’s market capitalization by making its stock more attractive to investors, about 45 percent of whom are its own employees.Advertisement“We believe the best way for us to create equity value is to invest more in everything that we do, including our units,” the company said in a presentation accompanying its earnings release.AdvertisementWith $14 billion of assets on its balance sheet, the new fixed distribution, effective in the fourth quarter, would result in a 3.6 percent yield, it said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The firm’s economic net loss for the third quarter, a measure that includes unrealized gains or losses, was $286 million, a big swing from economic net income of $508.7 million in the same period a year earlier.In after-hours trading, shares of K.K.R. fell almost 7 percent.The results were in keeping with the struggles of other private equity firms in the same period. Blackstone Group also reported a loss for the third quarter two weeks ago because of the market volatility. K.K.R. shares, however, have lagged those of rival firms.K.K.R. said it had losses in its private and public markets segments because of drops in the value of portfolio investments. It had a $74.6 million loss in its private equity portfolio compared with revenue of $631.6 million in last year’s third quarter, and a loss of $163.6 million in its public markets investments, compared with revenue of $93.6 million last year.The quarter’s results were a sharp contrast to the second quarter, when markets were stronger and the fund-raising environment was favorable. Private equity firms have generated large sums of investor money over the last year as big investors seek higher returns.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Quarterly Loss at K.K.R. as Private Equity Struggles.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.