AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham BowleyBill Cosby’s lawyers fought back Tuesday, asserting in a legal filing that he has been damaged by news media accounts that they said inaccurately portrayed him as having testified that he used powerful sedatives to drug women so he could molest them.In Mr. Cosby’s first public defense since parts of his deposition in a 2005 lawsuit became public this month, his lawyers said he had actually “admitted to nothing more than being one of the many people who introduced Quaaludes into their consensual sex life in the 1970s.”“Quaaludes were a highly popular recreational drug in the 1970s, labeled in slang as ‘disco biscuits,’ and known for their capacity to increase sexual arousal,” the court filing said.The lawyers cited several news articles that they contended had misconstrued Mr. Cosby’s testimony, and they blamed the woman who had accused him of drugging and molesting her in 2005, Andrea Constand, a Temple University basketball manager. The case was settled in 2006, and the parties agreed to keep documents from the case confidential as part of the settlement.Ms. Constand, the lawyers said, was now trying to “smear the defendant.” The comments came in a motion filed in United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania to block the further release of his full deposition, which became available last week from the court reporting service that transcribed it a decade ago.Earlier this month, the federal judge in the case unsealed a memorandum in the court file that contained excerpts from the deposition, including parts of Mr. Cosby’s testimony in which he acknowledged that he had given quaaludes to women he had sex with. While some news articles suggested that Mr. Cosby had been “drugging” women, many others presented Mr. Cosby’s side that, while he was using drugs in sexual encounters, the drug-taking and sex had, in his words, been consensual.More than two dozen women have said they have been sexually assaulted. He has not been charged with any crimes. A few weeks ago, a lawyer for Ms. Constand asked the judge to release the entire deposition, arguing that Mr. Cosby and his team had done so much to violate the confidentiality agreement that the parties should no longer be bound by it. The court reporting service said in a letter filed in the court that it had released the entire transcript to The New York Times and other news media, beginning last week, because it believed the judge’s order had made the deposition public.Mr. Cosby’s lawyers argued Tuesday, though, that the court reporting service’s decision was in error and that Ms. Constand had been required, as part of the settlement, to ensure that the court reporters understood the documents remained confidential.In his testimony taken over four days in 2005 and 2006, Mr. Cosby said he had obtained seven prescriptions for quaaludes from a Los Angeles doctor in the 1970s as part of an effort to have sex with women. He said he never took the quaaludes himself. Mr. Cosby lawyers said that Ms. Constand’s side was taking advantage of the misleading reporting to seek the release of all the testimony.“Emboldened by the media’s one-sided reporting, plaintiff has now filed a motion that is a barely-veiled attempt to continue her and her counsel’s campaign against him in the public eye,” the papers said. They also pointed to a recent interview that Ms. Constand had given to The Toronto Sun and to recent comments on social media by Ms. Constand, where they said she had posted on Twitter “Yes!” and “Sir!” in response to the unsealing of some documents.The papers filed by Mr. Cosby acknowledged that Ms. Constand had been paid a sum of money as part of the settlement and suggested that Mr. Cosby would not have agreed to pay money except for believing the dispute would remain a private matter. Now, the lawyers argued, Ms. Constand wanted to publicize everything and keep the money, calling it an “obvious attempt to have her cake and eat it, too.”The papers said Mr. Cosby will seek “relief for Plaintiff’s violations” but did not detail what he would seek.The court reporting service, Kaplan Leaman & Wolfe, in its letter to the judge, Eduardo C. Robreno, sought advice on whether it could continue to release the transcripts. It said it had received an email from Mr. Cosby’s law firm, Cozen O’Connor, in which the law firm had said, “Please ensure that any further releasing of the deposition ceases immediately.”In a letter to Cozen O’Connor, Ms. Constand’s lawyer, Dolores M. Troiani, said she had “had nothing to do with the release of the deposition.” It argued that the judge in the case had already allowed the release of partial testimony and found that Mr. Cosby had “diminished his right to privacy” by responding to allegations against him.Ms. Troiani said the court reporter involved in the decision to release the deposition had an “impeccable reputation.”She said she wanted a courteous discussion about amending the settlement agreement, and they should not argue about testimony that has already been released.“You cannot close the barn door,” she said.Advertisement