AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Richard BealesTheranos, the Silicon Valley blood-analysis upstart founded by Elizabeth Holmes, is under fire.The Wall Street Journal and others have questioned the company’s technology, which is supposed to require only a tiny sample of blood to deliver accurate, quick and cheap test results. Ms. Holmes and Theranos have fired back with counterclaims and additional information, but the company’s purported $9 billion valuation now looks overestimated.In addressing the questions, Ms. Holmes has made much of her intention to have all Theranos procedures approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and of the importance of its first F.D.A. test approval, which was received in July.The company last Thursday released information intended to rebut the criticism. And on Monday Ms. Holmes said the company would publish data validating the accuracy and reliability of its tests.On Friday, though, The Journal reported that a Theranos partner, the pharmacy chain Walgreens Boots Alliance, was postponing its introduction of the company’s testing centers. That suggests that even after 12 years of development, Ms. Holmes’s approach is far from proven. In any case, the promised tiny finger-stick blood samples and proprietary equipment aren’t yet being used for most tests. That makes Theranos look more like a small, cut-price version of testing incumbents like Quest Diagnostics and LabCorp than a disruptive force.It was all going so well. Ms. Holmes – whose intensity and black turtleneck uniform have brought comparisons with Steve Jobs – persuaded a clutch of bigwigs to join her board, tapping six members from the roster of the Hoover Institution, a Stanford University research firm. Two of them are former secretaries of state, 94-year-old George Shultz and Henry Kissinger, who is 92.Then Theranos’s headline valuation shot skyward. The 31-year-old Ms. Holmes was feted not just for the intensity of her commitment but for her self-made multibillionaire status at the helm of a company set to reshape medical testing.Now that Ms. Holmes is on the back foot, though, the old-wise-men board strategy is looking flawed. One common red flag for investors with a young founder – Ms. Holmes started Theranos as a 19-year-old Stanford dropout – is the need for experienced oversight to attach some reality to lofty goals. That’s why, for example, Google brought the tech industry veteran Eric Schmidt on board alongside the Stanford student founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page about three years after the company’s incorporation.Ms. Holmes’s current board members, though, don’t look like a group that would challenge her much on the Theranos model. There are 10 of them, aside from Ms. Holmes and her chief operating officer. Six are the ex-government and ex-military figures associated with the Stanford institution named after the Depression-era, one-term President Herbert Hoover. Also on the list are a former chief executive of Wells Fargo and the chairman of Bechtel, a big private engineering company.Bill Frist, a practicing physician before serving in the United States Senate from 1994 to 2006, can’t have much time even if his medical knowledge is up-to-date. The biography of Mr. Frist, 63, lists three public company board seats, seven at private firms and six at nonprofits. Only the 79-year-old William Foege, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may offer relatively recent health-related knowledge.The board composition also looks odd given Ms. Holmes’s public support for the advancement of women in technology. All the other directors are men, even though attracting people with qualifications specific to the Theranos technology, which could have limited the field, doesn’t seem to have been a requirement. The New York Times reported this week that David Boies, a veteran lawyer who has been advising Theranos, would be joining the board, as well.At least luminaries like Mr. Shultz might carry some weight in the current debate. But current directors have said little, if anything, on the controversy. The same might be said of investors. Steve Jurvetson, a partner at DFJ, an early venture capital investor, told Bloomberg TV last week that while DFJ wants the company to succeed, “We don’t have the answers to the questions that are swirling around right now.” DFJ isn’t represented on the board.Larry Ellison, executive chairman of Oracle, who is hardly shy, was a big investor at one stage, too. A September 2013 Oracle filing lists Theranos among the companies doing business with the software group in which Mr. Ellison “directly or indirectly has or had a controlling interest.” Ms. Holmes raised fresh money in 2014, according to news reports, and Oracle isn’t saying any more about the billionaire Mr. Ellison’s interest, or lack thereof, in Theranos.The hype around Theranos’s worth, though, is another reason for media scrutiny. It’s among the highest-valued so-called unicorns – private companies worth $1 billion or more – emerging from Silicon Valley, behind only a handful of even bigger names like Uber. Many of these valuations are, however, calculated based on only a sliver of cash investment.In his annual letter to shareholders this year, Prem Watsa, the chief of the insurer and investment manager Fairfax Financial Holdings, compared the promoted valuations of unicorns to the capital actually raised. With a price tag outstripping its $400 million of funding more than 22-fold, Theranos was second only to China’s Xiaomi. Uber boasted a 15 multiplier of about 15, in line with the data analytics firm Palantir Technologies, arguably in the same league as Theranos when it comes to secrecy.Mr. Watsa suggested that most of this would end “very badly” for investors. Among traditional health-testing companies, Quest is worth $9 billion and LabCorp $11 billion in market capitalization. They are direct targets of the disruptive threat Theranos could pose. Their shares have roughly kept pace with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index this year. That may indicate that the smart money hasn’t yet fallen for Ms. Holmes’ vision.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement