By STEPHEN J. LUBBENJULY 21, 2015
It makes perfect sense, of course, that a fight between a Bahamian resort and a Chinese-owned construction company, being litigated in London, would end up in the United States Bankruptcy Court in Delaware.The bankruptcy case involves Baha Mar, a $3.5 billion resort development in the Bahamas, that has repeatedly delayed its planned opening, much to the dismay of workers and the disappointment of tourist industry officials there.The corporate group struggling to build the resort — the debtor in this case — is made up mostly of Bahamian companies. But one of those companies, Northshore Mainland Services, is incorporated in Delaware (even if its address is in Florida), and that provided the basis for the entire group to file its bankruptcy petition in Wilmington.In the filing, under Chapter 11 of the United States bankruptcy code, Baha Mar blamed CCA Bahamas Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and the general contractor for the Baha Mar resort project. China’s export finance bank has provided $2.4 billion in funding for the project.AdvertisementBaha Mar said that the contractor was woefully behind schedule, and has since accused it of trying to steal documents from the construction site after cutting the power.AdvertisementBaha Mar has also sued China State in London.And now things are getting interesting. Baha Mar got approval in Delaware for a new loan to keep it operating during the bankruptcy proceedings. But the loan is contingent on the Bahamian court acknowledging that the American court has primary jurisdiction over the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Bahamian court has yet to act on that request. In the meantime, the Bahamian government has filed a petition against Baha Mar seeking to put the management of the project under the jurisdiction of a government-appointed trustee.Let’s recap:We have a Chapter 11 bankruptcy case in Delaware, which is supposed to be supported by an ancillary case in the Bahamas. The second half of that plan is still a work in progress.We also have ongoing litigation in London.And now we have the potential for management in the Bahamas to be ousted in favor of a trustee, while the current management is still the “debtor in possession” in the Chapter 11 case in Delaware.The Delaware court has a claim on being the first court to handle this issue, but the court in the Bahamas might argue that all of the real estate of interest is under its jurisdiction.This is increasingly looking to be a fight between the Bahamian government and the property developers. That will make it harder for the Delaware court to continue to play a role, especially given that the Delaware court will never have jurisdiction over the government of another country.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.