AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Richard BealesThe acquisition of First Data by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts looked to be a $29 billion mistake right after it closed in late 2007.K.K.R., the buyout firm led by Henry Kravis, nevertheless may turn a modest profit after all. First Data, a credit card processing pioneer, has filed to go public again, and its turnaround seems to be on track.The remaking of the company started in earnest in 2013 under its new chief executive, Frank Bisignano, formerly a top executive at JPMorgan. K.K.R. liked what it saw, and last year, doubled down on the investment by adding $1.2 billion more of equity as part of a $3.5 billion financing round. A Breakingviews analysis at the time concluded the owners stood a good chance of turning a disaster into a decent profit.A year on, Mr. Bisignano’s numbers are on the right path. Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization were $2.7 billion in 2014. That was a 9 percent improvement on the year before. The firm also reported narrower losses, as it did in the first quarter of this year.The roughly $40 billion enterprise value that seemed feasible last year looks about right. With $21 billion of net debt stripped out, the equity could be worth nearly $20 billion. That would mean an annualized internal rate of return of about 9 percent, before fees, for K.K.R., according to Breakingviews calculations.In remarks in the prospectus, the chief executive makes a big deal of First Data’s past – and continuing – ability to innovate, an important factor in the technology-driven payments world. In particular, Mr. Bisignano points to the acquisition and nurturing of Clover, a Silicon Valley payments start-up.Yet First Data is also part of the old guard. It was the first processor of Visa and MasterCard bank-issued credit cards in the 1970s, according to its website. Before its last turn as a listed company, starting in 1992, First Data belonged to American Express for a decade.It’s not yet obvious that the company will be able to reinvent itself again. First Data seems ready for a second public life. The challenge in this latest phase will be to disrupt, not be disrupted.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement