By RICHARD SANDOMIRJULY 21, 2015
In just over two months, ESPN has lost three major personalities — a drain of renowned talent that is unusual in its suddenness.First, Bill Simmons’s contract was not renewed in early May.Then, Keith Olbermann was told to turn in his microphone two years after being wooed back to the network by its president, John Skipper.And last week, Colin Cowherd, the host of a popular midday show on ESPN Radio, decided to leave for Fox Sports 1.In a company with more than 1,000 on-air reporters, hosts and commentators, the three were the type of breakout personalities that ESPN, or any network, does not often produce.AdvertisementMr. Simmons seemed critical to ESPN, especially in the digital age where content is distributed across a variety of platforms: He was a columnist, podcaster, an executive producer of the ESPN documentary series “30 for 30” and the editor in chief of Grantland, the sports and culture website.AdvertisementMr. Olbermann, after years of hosting political talk shows at MSNBC and Current TV, was the idiosyncratic and opinionated host of a daily show on ESPN2. And Mr. Cowherd had developed a loyal following — nearly 2.5 million listeners age 12 and over as of last fall, according to Nielsen — even when many people are at work.While different factors contributed to their departures, they come at a time when ESPN is coping with rising production costs and soaring rights fees. ESPN paid $7.3 billion for the college football playoff, which made its debut earlier this year, and $15.2 billion for National Football League rights.In each of the last four quarters, those big investments cut into operating profits of the cable networks division at the Walt Disney Company.And, like other cable networks, ESPN is losing subscribers as customers leave their pay-TV providers and seek out unbundled viewing options like Netflix.In a statement, Mr. Skipper implied that the sudden talent loss was little more than business as usual and not an indication of any vulnerability at ESPN.“We are confident in our relationship with fans and comfortable with change,” he said in a statement. “We have a deep bench and a bright future.”ESPN said that it bid competitively to keep Mr. Cowherd and, in a farewell to him, Mr. Skipper breezily said: “Endings also bring new beginnings, for ESPN and Colin, and we thank him and wish him the best."AdvertisementIt is not unusual for networks to lose stars — just not this quickly. Comedy Central has had much more time to absorb the departures of two of its biggest names within a matter of months. Stephen Colbert left “The Colbert Report” last December to prepare to take over David Letterman’s late-night slot at CBS on Sept. 8. And Jon Stewart will leave “The Daily Show” next month.ESPN has watched some of its own people leave for other networks over the last 35 years, like Rich Eisen, Craig Kilborn, Dan Patrick, Erin Andrews and Mr. Olbermann, who left angrily in 1997 to join Fox Sports Net.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps to show that it is still a powerhouse, ESPN has gone out of its way in the last year or so to announce contract extensions with prominent on-air personalities like the anchors Bob Ley, a stalwart almost since the start of the network, and Scott Van Pelt, as well as the analysts Jay Bilas and Jon Gruden.Mark Shapiro, a former ESPN executive vice president, said it was coincidental that the three stars’ contracts were expiring as ESPN was “likely evolving its cost strategy in a climate of escalating rights fees and challenging margins, which is smart.”Mr. Shapiro, now the chief content officer at IMG, added: “Only must-have talent will get the big-ticket deals, and the definition of must-have is shrinking.”Who is or is not “must-have” can be seen in the divergent fates of Mr. Olbermann and Stephen A. Smith, co-host of “First Take,” the morning debate show on ESPN2. In the second quarter this year, the audience for Mr. Olbermann’s program was 147,000 viewers — not enough to induce ESPN to keep him. But over the same period, the audience for “First Take” averaged 387,000, and Mr. Smith recently signed a deal worth about $3 million a year.James Andrew Miller, co-author of “Those Guys Have All the Fun,” an oral history of ESPN, said that the exits of Mr. Simmons, Mr. Olbermann and Mr. Cowherd could not be viewed simply as a direct consequence of cost-cutting.According to Mr. Miller, ESPN and Mr. Simmons, who was believed to be earning about $5 million a year, had not yet discussed the financial terms of a new contract before Mr. Skipper said that he was not extending his deal — news that Mr. Simmons learned about on Twitter.“They may have a sense of what he wanted from the marketplace, but he was still waiting for what they were going to offer,” Mr. Miller said. Many analysts believe that Mr. Simmons’s harsh criticism of Roger Goodell, the commissioner of the N.F.L., contributed to the network’s decision not to re-sign him.AdvertisementMr. Olbermann’s program was not drawing enough viewers to “justify his salary and the production costs in New York,” Mr. Miller said. Also, a plan to have him anchor “SportsCenter” during major news events — announced when his show was shifted from 11 p.m. to the less enviable 5 p.m. slot — never materialized.Appearances on “SportsCenter” would have returned Mr. Olbermann to the show that elevated him to stardom more than 20 years ago. “The thought was to have him back in the chair and let it possibly be a return to the 1990s,” Mr. Miller said. “It would not have been an outlandish idea, particularly since ‘SportsCenter’ has been emanating from its new digital center in a huge studio — and some of the anchors are not filling the space. Keith Olbermann fills up space.”Mr. Olbermann was also told not to do commentary, according to two people briefed on the instructions, eliminating a feature that was as central to his sports show as it was to the political news program he hosted on MSNBC. ESPN has denied it instructed him to refrain from commentary.Mr. Cowherd’s Sunday morning program, “Colin’s New Football Show,” was not renewed by ESPN for the coming season, but he found a compelling creative option by heading to two-year-old Fox Sports 1, which is trying to build its audience, especially in mornings and afternoons when live games are not carried. Mr. Cowherd’s contract — he makes $3 million a year — runs through the end of the year, but he could leave sooner.At Fox, Mr. Cowherd will be reunited with Jamie Horowitz, the president of Fox Sports National Networks, who was a producer, then executive, at ESPN from 2006 to 2014 (he then went to the “Today” show at NBC, where he was fired after 10 weeks). While at ESPN, he produced or was responsible for several shows, including “SportsNation,” which Mr. Cowherd once hosted, and “Colin’s New Football Show,” as well as “First Take” and “Olbermann.”A version of this article appears in print on July 22, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ESPN, Already Battling Rising Production Costs, Is Also Facing a Talent Drain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.