By LIZ MOYEROCT. 27, 2015
David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital clashed for years with St. Joe Company, a WaterSound, Fla., real estate developer, about whether it was overvaluing its land holdings, and now the Securities and Exchange Commission has weighed in — on his side.The regulator announced on Tuesday a civil settlement with St. Joe and five former company executives over accusations that they improperly accounted for the declining value of the firm’s residential real estate developments during the financial crisis.In addition to the company’s $2.75 million settlement, the executives agreed to pay a combined $335,000 in penalties and $640,000 in disgorgement, plus prejudgment interest. The company and executives neither admitted nor denied the findings, and the S.E.C. says its investigation is in progress.The improper accounting led to a material overstatement of earnings and assets in 2009 and 2010, the S.E.C. said.AdvertisementMr. Einhorn, an activist investor also known for his blistering criticism of Lehman Brothers’ accounting just months before that investment bank’s bankruptcy filing, first presented his bearish case on St. Joe at an investor conference in 2007, updating his thesis in a more prominent presentation in 2010.AdvertisementSince that presentation, Mr. Einhorn, a well-known short-seller who benefits when a company’s stock falls, closed out his trade in St. Joe’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokesman for Greenlight declined to comment. A spokesman for St. Joe could not immediately be reached.Mr. Einhorn’s multiyear battle also pitted him against the hedge fund manager Bruce R. Berkowitz, whose Fairholme Capital Management began buying St. Joe stock soon after Mr. Einhorn had started shorting it. Fairholme now holds about 24 million shares of the company, according to its most recent regulatory filing, and Mr. Berkowitz is its board chairman.The settlement came in an administrative case. The S.E.C. said the firm’s former chief executive, chief financial officer and top accounting executives failed to properly apply generally accepted accounting practices, and in doing so failed to write down the value of certain properties that were hit hard during the financial crisis.Four of the former executives agreed to be suspended from practicing as an accountant before the S.E.C. for a period of time.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.