By AMIE TSANGJULY 21, 2015
HONG KONG — Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, the private equity firm, announced on Tuesday that it had helped a vaccine company in the Philippines get a credit line of $1 million.The loan from BDO Unibank, a Philippine lender, will help Glovax Biotech, which imports low-cost vaccines directly from manufacturers, to expand, with the aim of distributing about 3.5 million more doses of vaccines to lower- to middle-income Filipinos by 2018.K.K.R. teamed up with Impact Investment Exchange Asia, which specializes in so-called impact investment, where social returns are accounted for in addition to financial benefits. K.K.R. provided technical assistance with financial planning and steered Glovax’s chief executive, Giovanni Alingog, toward getting a loan rather than raising equity and diluting the ownership. The company opened its first vaccination clinic in 2003 and has several retail distribution centers across Manila.“Without this project, we may still be struggling to raise equity,” Mr. Alingog said. “Now, we are investing and growing.”AdvertisementSteven R. Okun, the director of public affairs at K.K.R. Asia-Pacific, said in a statement, “This is what K.K.R.’s technical assistance program is all about — finding ways to help social enterprises get the capital that is available to them to increase their financial and social return.”AdvertisementThe risk is relatively low for K.K.R.: It was a philanthropic project, and the firm did not contribute its own capital. But its involvement in the project reflects a growing interest in this small-asset class.There are a number of firms focused specifically on social impact investment, and investors are seeing the appeal not just of socially responsible benefits, but also of increasing returns in the long run. LeapFrog Investments, the private equity firm backed by George Soros and focused on “profit with purpose,” raised $400 million in its last round of funding by offering the prospect of strong returns from financial services in Africa and Asia.The number of private equity firms involved in the broader area of environmental, social and governance investment has increased since 2006, with the amount of capital raised more than doubling to $3.2 billion so far this year from $1.5 billion in 2006, according to data from Preqin, a research group.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the small sums of money are low — K.K.R. earlier this month announced that it had raised $3.1 billion by itself for an infrastructure fund.The performance of these smaller investments can vary.Cambridge Associates, an investment adviser, and the Global Impact Investing Network, a nonprofit, have created the Impact Investing Benchmark to quantify the returns on such projects. Funds in their benchmark posted an internal rate of return of 6.9 percent between 1998 and 2010. Compared with that, private investment funds with no social impact objectives returned 8.1 percent in the same years.Within that period, the rate of return for impact investments has fluctuated. It climbed as high as 15.6 percent from 1998 to 2001 but dropped as low as 0.9 percent for 2005 to 2007. Because the data set in the benchmark is still small, some larger funds dragged it down when they did not perform as well.Despite the variations, Jessica Matthews, managing director at Cambridge Associates, said that the benchmark “was holding up to the hypothesis that you shouldn’t have to sacrifice returns.”Alex Lykken, a financial writer at the private equity and venture capital research firm PitchBook, said private equity was taking an interest in impact investment in China because it could wield more influence over how a company is run. “Because the Chinese government has so much say over how the economy is structured, a lot of these companies are doing it from the bottom up rather than the top down,” he said.Mr. Lykken also notes that although impact investing may come under the umbrella of responsible investment, it is far from just an altruistic endeavor.Advertisement“I think there is less risk involved than a lot of them are saying,” he said. “If you have an emerging middle class that’s growing in the billions of people, even if you do these things for the ‘right reason,’ there’s money to be made off it. You’re not going to see the same rush to impact investing in Europe and the United States.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.