By CHAD BRAYJULY 23, 2015
Michael Mack, chief executive of Syngenta, says that Monsanto’s takeover bid “failed in every dimension” for it to be a success.LONDON — Monsanto continued to press its case on Thursday for a merger with the Swiss agricultural and chemical giant Syngenta, saying its rival doesn’t have “a long-term vision or plan” that would create the same value as Monsanto’s $45 billion offer.Syngenta, which reported its first-half results on Thursday, fired back, with its chief executive, Michael Mack, telling CNBC Europe that Monsanto’s proposal was “woefully short” of addressing its concerns about the deal.Syngenta has rejected several takeover approaches from its American rival this year, in part by citing potential regulatory concerns and saying Monsanto’s most recent offer undervalues Syngenta’s prospects.Monsanto has been unswayed and has continued to press for a deal, including traveling to Europe to meet with Syngenta investors and undertaking a public relations blitz in the media to try to pressure Syngenta to continue discussions.Advertisement“We’ve made a serious proposal at full and fair value that would provide their shareholders with a 43 percent premium and significant further upside potential through ownership in the combined company,” Hugh Grant, the Monsanto chairman and chief executive, said in a news release on Thursday.’AdvertisementSyngenta previously said that it did not believe that Monsanto had done enough to address regulatory concerns, calling a proposed $2 billion breakup fee inadequate.It also has said that those concerns would not be addressed by “a pre-agreed and pre-announced package of horizontal divestitures, which is Monsanto’s proposed approach.”Monsanto has said that it would sell Syngenta’s seed business and other overlapping businesses.On Thursday, Syngenta’s chief executive told CNBC Europe that Monsanto had not done enough for Syngenta to give a potential merger “further serious consideration.”“The regulatory risks are high and they are unaddressed with this proposal. The transaction risks are high,” Mr. Mack said in the interview. “And that’s before looking at the underlying offer, which was completely inadequate.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Grant, the Monsanto chief executive, said on Thursday that Monsanto had made “substantial commitments” to address regulatory issues.“Monsanto remains ready to discuss with Syngenta a combination that would provide highly attractive returns to shareholders and would represent a transformational opportunity for global agriculture to meet the needs of farmers and broader society,” Mr. Grant said. “The ball remains in their court.”Monsanto had offered to pay 449 Swiss francs, or about $467.94, for each share of Syngenta; 45 percent of the payment would be in cash.The deal, if consummated, would create an agricultural behemoth, combining Monsanto, the world leader in seeds and genetically engineered traits, such as herbicide resistance, with Syngenta, the largest producer of agricultural chemicals.AdvertisementSyngenta, based in Basel, Switzerland, manufactures insecticides, fungicides, herbicides and seeds. The company reported sales of $15.1 billion in 2014 and employs more than 28,000 people in more than 90 countries.On Thursday, Syngenta said its profit in the first six months of 2015 declined 12 percent to $1.22 billion on revenue of $7.6 billion. The company said its results were impacted by the depreciation of currencies against the United States dollar.“The progress made by our new products and our expanded pipeline underpin our confidence in delivering sustained sales growth accompanied by market share gains,” Mr. Mack said in a news release.Based in St. Louis, Monsanto manufactures seeds and chemicals used in crop protection, including insecticides. It reported sales of $15.9 billion in 2014 and employs more than 21,000 people in 66 countries.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.