AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryBank of America, which has struggled to generate consistent profits even as other banks have begun to prosper, is broadly overhauling its top leadership, including the abrupt replacement of its chief financial officer, Bruce Thompson. Mr. Thompson, who has been mentioned as a possible heir to the bank’s chief, Brian T. Moynihan, is stepping down at the end of the month, Bank of America announced on Wednesday evening in a memo to employees. Mr. Thompson served as chief risk and chief financial officer for five and a half years.The overhaul is sure to set off a parlor game among Wall Street investors about who could succeed Mr. Moynihan, who has guided the bank through some of its darkest moments since the financial crisis. His memo seemed to provide little clue as to who might step into his shoes.Mr. Moynihan has been under pressure recently because of regulatory slip-ups and lackluster financial results. The bank’s share price has been trailing that of many of its competitors as it struggles to increase revenue and cut expenses. The management changes appear to signal to investors that Mr. Moynihan is moving quickly to bolster his oversight of vital businesses. Mr. Moynihan sought to portray the moves, which came after the bank reported solid earnings last week, in positive terms rather than coming out of a crisis. In the last two years, mistakes in the bank’s dealings with regulators have proved costly. Last year, the bank discovered errors in how some capital had been calculated, resulting in a $4 billion overstatement. The mistakes prompted the Federal Reserve to tell the bank to suspend its share buybacks and an increase in its dividend.This year, the Fed cited problems with the bank’s internal controls in how it had projected losses and revenue in its stress test, but allowed it to pass anyway.The bank’s second-quarter results provided some relief. Helped by a rise in interest rates and some cost-cutting measures, Bank of America’s profit surpassed analysts’ expectations.In the memo to employees, Mr. Moynihan said the second-quarter results “showed once again how far we have come on our journey over the past few years.”Paul Donofrio, a longtime Bank of America executive who has served as Mr. Thompson’s deputy, will take over as chief financial officer on Aug. 1.Mr. Thompson might stay on at the bank in a different role, or he may leave by the end of the year, a person briefed on the matter said.“I am confident in saying that no finance executive in the world in the past decade has contended with greater challenges and discharged his responsibilities with as much skill and grit as Bruce Thompson,” Mr. Moynihan said. “He has put our company on a strong, stable financial foundation, and for that we are enormously grateful.”There also were changes in the oversight of Bank of America’s wealth management division, which includes Merrill Lynch, a vital profit center for the bank.Terry Laughlin, who is one of Mr. Moynihan’s trusted lieutenants, is taking over as vice chairman in charge of global wealth and investment management. He replaces David C. Darnell, who is retiring.Mr. Laughlin, who was an executive at Merrill Lynch before it was acquired by Bank of America, has been a sort of fix-it man for Mr. Moynihan. He oversaw the winding down of the bank’s legacy mortgage portfolio, which included thousands of soured Countrywide Financial loans that Bank of America inherited in its acquisition of the troubled lender in 2008.More recently, Mr. Laughlin has been focusing on the bank’s resubmission of its capital plan to the Fed, and he will continue to work on efforts to pass the stress test in 2016.Andrea B. Smith, the bank’s global human resources executive, has been appointed chief administrative officer. She will take over the legacy mortgage operations and work with Mr. Laughlin on the stress test resubmission.In the memo, Mr. Moynihan said that some of the leadership changes were designed to “bolster, and in some cases, reposition members of the management team.”But he also singled out several executives, and their departments, that would not face any leadership overhaul, including Thomas K. Montag, the powerful chief operating officer, who runs investment banking operations.Mr. Moynihan also praised the work of Dean Athanasia and Thong M. Nguyen, younger executives who together lead the consumer banking division and have been rising through the ranks.Also as part of the management overhaul, Mr. Moynihan promoted the longtime head of the bank’s marketing and strategy efforts, Anne M. Finucane, to vice chairwoman.Ms. Finucane has taken on the additional role of overseeing corporate governance issues, particularly related to shareholder activism involving social and environmental issues.Advertisement