By JACKIE CALMESJULY 22, 2015
WASHINGTON —  President Obama on Wednesday met with small exporters to make his case that Congress should quickly reauthorize the Export-Import Bank, even as legislative turmoil in the Senate threatened supporters’ strategy for reviving the bank, which helps finance sales of American products abroad.“For us to be the only country that leaves these outstanding companies high and dry makes absolutely no sense,” the president told reporters who were briefly admitted to his White House meeting with 10 business owners, two mayors and several Democratic lawmakers. “This should be a no-brainer,” he added.The Ex-Im Bank, as it is called, has been the nation’s lender of last resort for eight decades, providing loans, loan guarantees and insurance for foreign customers without commercial credit. Congress had extended its charter 16 times with bipartisan support, but this year it allowed the charter to expire after June 30.The reauthorization was blocked by populist Republicans, aligned with free-market conservative groups, who say the bank is the embodiment of corruption, “corporate welfare” and “crony capitalism.” The bank can continue to manage and wind down its portfolio of loans, but cannot enter into new deals.AdvertisementProponents, including business groups and majorities in both chambers of Congress, hoped to add an amendment in support of the Ex-Im Bank to a bipartisan highway construction bill. That measure was expected to clear Congress and be signed by Mr. Obama before lawmakers depart for their August recess.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yet this week when the Senate turned to the highway bill, the measure stalled in the face of several legislative fights, including over potential amendments against Planned Parenthood, from Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, and against the bank from Senator Ted Cruz of Texas; both senators are Republican presidential candidates who are courting conservative voters. Even if the Senate passes the highway bill with a bank amendment, the delay leaves little time for the House to act before August. So the bank would remain in limbo.While opponents contend that most of the bank’s money benefits corporate giants like Boeing, General Electric and Caterpillar, the small-business owners invited to the White House underscored supporters’ counterargument that most of the bank’s beneficiaries are smaller companies. Mr. Obama’s guests included the owners of Love & Quiches Gourmet in New York, Ferra Coffee in Texas and Bob’s Red Mill in Oregon.Advertisement“The Export-Import Bank makes money for the U.S. government,” Mr. Obama said, referring to the loan repayments and proceeds from borrowers. “This is not a situation in which taxpayers are subsidizing these companies.”A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Small Exporters Join Obama in Supporting Ex-Im Bank .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.