By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 22, 2015
Several analysts and investors were surprised last month when Abbott Laboratories said that as a shareholder in Mylan it would support its fellow drug maker’s quest to buy a rival and avoid a takeover by another company.Now, even more unusually, the chief executive of Abbott elaborated a little on why his firm was making that move.In an earnings call with analysts on Wednesday, Miles D. White, the chief executive, spoke twice about why his pharmaceutical company was inclined to vote its 14.5 percent stake in support of Mylan’s bid for the drug maker Perrigo. By extension, that means he is against Teva’s proposed takeover of Mylan, an offer worth more than $40 billion.“I like the strategy that Mylan’s pursuing, and I support it and endorse it as a shareholder,” Mr. White said in response to an analyst’s question. “So from that perspective, I think that this is, right now, as long as we are a shareholder, we’re going to vote in our interest.”AdvertisementAbbott’s support could prove important as Mylan seeks to fend off its unwanted suitor while pursuing its own takeover of the unwilling target, Perrigo. Teva has said that its proposed acquisition is dependent on Mylan calling off its effort to buy Perrigo.The three-way battle has gotten heated over time, with Mylan’s executive chairman trading sharply worded barbs with his counterpart at Teva. And Perrigo has steadfastly rebuffed multiple offers by its pursuer.AdvertisementAbbott gained its stake when Mylan bought its overseas generic drug business for about $5.3 billion worth of stock. Though Abbott has made it clear that it has no plans to be a long-term holder — it has already sold down some of the shares it received from the earlier transaction — the company thinks it will collect a higher return on its investment by retaining those remaining shares and betting they will rise in the future rather than simply selling them now.While Mr. White suggested some people might make too much of his decision to speak publicly about his views, he said in response to a second analyst’s question that doing so could help inform other investors about the issues involved in the attempted deal-making.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among those issues are the complex legal defenses  against a takeover that Mylan has set up in its legal home of the Netherlands.“I wanted to make it clear where the largest investor in Mylan stood because I think that will influence other investors to take a closer look,” Mr. White said, indicating he did not think the Teva takeover bid would succeed..We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.