By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 22, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Americans bought homes in June at the fastest rate in over eight years, pushing prices higher as buyer demand eclipsed the availability of houses on the market.The National Association of Realtors said Wednesday that sales of existing homes rose 3.2 percent last month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5.49 million, the highest rate since February 2007. Sales have increased 9.6 percent over the last 12 months, while the number of listings has risen just 0.4 percent.Median home prices climbed 6.5 percent over the last 12 months to $236,400, the highest level reported by the association, not adjusted for inflation.Home buying has recently surged as more buyers have entered the market. Robust hiring over the last 21 months and an economic recovery now in its sixth year have enabled more Americans to set aside money for down payments. But the rising demand has failed to draw more sellers into the market, causing tight inventories and escalating prices that could cap sales growth.Advertisement“The recent pace can’t be sustained, but it points clearly to upside potential,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics.AdvertisementA mere five months’ supply of homes was on the market in June, compared with 5.5 months a year ago and an average of six months in a healthy market.Some markets are barely adding listings. The condominium market in Massachusetts contains just 1.8 months’ supply, according to a Federal Reserve report this month. The majority of real estate agents in the Atlanta Fed region, which ranges from Alabama to Florida, said that inventories were flat or fell over the last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some of the recent increase in sales appears to have come from the prospect of mortgage rates beginning to rise as the Federal Reserve considers raising an important interest rate from its near-zero level this year. That possibility is prompting buyers to complete sales before higher rates make borrowing more expensive, noted Daren Blomquist, a vice president at RealtyTrac, a housing analytics firm.The premiums that the Federal Housing Administration charges to insure mortgages are also lower this year, further propelling buying activity, Mr. Blomquist said.Properties typically sold last month in 34 days, the shortest time since the Realtors began tracking the figure in May 2011. There were fewer all-cash, individual investor and distressed home sales in the market, as more traditional buyers have returned.Sales improved in all four geographical regions: Northeast, Midwest, South and West.Still, the limited supplies could eventually prove to be a drag on sales growth in the coming months.Low mortgage rates have also helped, although rates are starting to climb to levels that could slow buying activity.Average 30-year fixed rates were 4.09 percent last week, according to the mortgage company Freddie Mac. The average has risen from a 52-week low of 3.59 percent.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Home Sales Jump in June as Demand Exceeds Supply.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.