
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JULY 22, 2015
John A. Thain is leading the way for regional bank deal making in the United States.Mr. Thain, the chairman and chief executive of the CIT Group – and the former chief executive of both Merrill Lynch and the New York Stock Exchange – on Tuesday secured regulatory approval to buy OneWest Bank for $3.4 billion. The deal is the first to transform a run-of-the-mill financial institution into a systemically important one since the financial crisis. That should clear the way for more deals.Most banks have been concerned about regulatory opprobrium for any significant mergers since the financial crisis. The Federal Reserve only narrowly approved Capital One’s 2010 takeover of ING Direct and has been sitting on M&T’s proposed $3.7 billion acquisition of Hudson City Bancorp for nearly three years.BB&T, a lender based in North Carolina, helped grease the gears for more deal activity this year. The bank, with $184 billion in assets, received approval for a couple of small purchases – Bank of Kentucky and its $2 billion balance sheet and 41 branches of Citigroup in Texas – and the larger takeover of the $19 billion Susquehanna Bancshares.All three received the thumbs-up from Washington within eight months. The Susquehanna deal, in particular, will already have sent bank bosses scurrying back to their spreadsheets, as it allowed a relatively big lender to become bigger.CIT should further embolden investment bankers and their clients. The magic number here is $50 billion. It is the amount of assets that sets off a bank’s designation as a potential systemic risk. Although it falls short of the more important $250 billion threshold — where mergers are all but barred — it also has become something of a psychological barrier for bank mergers in an ultraconservative, postcrisis regulatory atmosphere.Mr. Thain has broken through, however, meaning that his peers will probably test the $50 billion boundary, too. With lenders facing low interest rates, so-so growth and fewer avenues for cost cutting, having the merger option available again will be something of a blessing.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »