By CHRISTINE HAUSERJULY 22, 2015

            Silicon Valley US: @Twitter is having a #Frat party for employees. #Lovewhereyouwork #diversitymatters #brogrammers. pic.twitter.com/WkX4aHHl6g At a time when women are struggling for an equal place in Silicon Valley, Twitter has acknowledged that a “Twitter Frat House” party was not the best idea.A team of Twitter employees in San Francisco hosted the happy-hour event for its staff this week, complete with beer pong, red plastic Solo cups and kegs.As images of the company-funded, self-proclaimed “frat” party circulated on social media in messages highlighting the tech industry’s lack of diversity and a recent gender-discrimination lawsuit, Jim Prosser, a spokesman for Twitter, responded with a statement published in Fusion.“This social event organized by one team was in poor taste at best, and not reflective of the culture we are building here at Twitter,” Mr. Prosser said. “We’ve had discussions internally with the organizing team, and they recognize that this theme was ill-chosen.”AdvertisementThe party took place as Twitter faces a lawsuit filed by a former engineer, Tina Huang, who claims that the process for promotion is not clear and is biased in favor of men. The lawsuit seeks class-action status.AdvertisementIn response to those accusations, Twitter said in a statement that it was committed “to a diverse and supportive workplace.”Other high-profile cases have also drawn attention to concerns about the lack of diversity in the technology industry.Chia Hong, a former manager, brought a suit against Facebook charging that she was “discriminated against, harassed, and retaliated against.”In a court case in March, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, one of Silicon Valley’s top venture capital firms, prevailed over accusations of discrimination by a former partner, Ellen Pao.In a statement last year that said men comprised 70 percent of Twitter’s work force, Janet Van Huysse, the vice president for diversity and inclusion, noted employee-led peer groups designed to increase diversity, such as WomEng, for women in engineering, and SWAT, for Super Women at Twitter. She said the company wants to build a business it can be proud of.“And like our peers, we have a lot of work to do,” she said.Many of the social media platform’s users agreed. They reacted — Where else? — on Twitter.
            Watch what He does, not what He says. Twitter hosts 'frat party' in middle of gender discrimination lawsuit http://t.co/AAcn3OjAx9 
            So on the heels of discrimination suit, @twitter throws a Frat-themed company party? @3CinnovateHER: they need you. https://t.co/hfZUtSB7Ps 
            Twitter has a @girlswhocode class graduating THIS WEEK, and THIS is the example they’re sending about what as career in tech looks like?        We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.