AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BraySt. Jude Medical said on Wednesday that it had agreed to buy a fellow medical device maker, the Thoratec Corporation, for about $3.4 billion in cash.The transaction would bolster St. Jude Medical’s business in treating heart failures by adding products and technologies, the company said.Under the terms of the deal, St. Jude Medical will pay $63.50 a share in cash, a 35.4 percent premium to Thoratec’s closing price on July 17.“Thoratec’s strong core business and rich portfolio of new products complement St. Jude Medical’s innovation-based growth strategy and will benefit patients, customers, employees and shareholders of both companies,” Daniel J. Starks, the St. Jude Medical chairman, president and chief executive, said in a news release.In a conference call with analysts on Wednesday, Mr. Starks said that St. Jude Medical viewed products to treat heart failure as a “major growth opportunity” and that the Thoratec transaction would give it access to new, fast-growing product lines.In recent years, St. Jude has had problems with its medical devices. In 2011, the company was forced to recall the wire leads that connect one of its defibrillators to a patient’s heart because of erosion of the wires’ insulation. The problem caused unnecessary jolts to the heart in some cases, and in other cases prevented the device from working properly.The company has been closely scrutinized by the Food and Drug Administration over a new version of the leads, including a warning letter in 2013 after an inspection at the California plant that made leads turned up questionable procedures.Mr. Starks said that Thoratec held a 60 percent market share in what is known as the ventricular assist device market for heart failure patients. The devices are used to sustain or improve blood low in patients with weakened hearts. St. Jude Medical estimates the devices will account for $750 million in revenue worldwide in 2016 and grow at a mid- to upper- single-digit rate.Thoratec also recently received approval for use of its “percutaneous heart pump” products in Europe, Mr. Starks said. That market is expected to exceed $300 million in revenue in 2016 and grow at a “robust double-digit rate,” Mr. Starks said.According to Thoratec’s website, the pump, called the HeartMate PHP system, is designed to provide short-term circulatory support for patients in or at risk of acute heart failure.“This acquisition, therefore, positions St. Jude Medical to enter new markets totaling more than $1 billion that are expected to grow approximately 10 percent annually,” Mr. Starks said.The deal is also expected to lead to sales, marketing development and operating cost savings because the companies now often call on the same cardiologists and doctors, Mr. Starks said.The Thoratec transaction is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval. It is expected to close in the fourth quarter.Thoratec, based in Pleasanton, Calif., posted sales of $477.5 million in 2014 and had about 1,000 employees as of the beginning of this year.On Wednesday, Thoratec said that it expected second-quarter revenue of $128 million to $129 million.“Thoratec is pleased to join St. Jude Medical as we create a company that’s uniquely positioned to advance treatment options for patients living with heart failure,” D. Keith Grossman, the president and chief executive of Thoratec, said in a news release. “By combining the capabilities and leading technologies of both companies, we will be able to expand access, reduce costs and advance heart failure therapies on a global basis.”As part of the deal, Thoratec will be allowed to actively solicit alternative proposals from third parties for the next 30 days and will have to pay a termination fee of up to $111 million to St. Jude Medical if it accepted another offer.St. Jude Medical intends to finance the transaction through debt.Bank of America Merrill Lynch and the law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher advised St. Jude Medical; Guggenheim Securities and the law firm Latham & Watkins advised Thoratec.Founded in 1976, St. Jude Medical, based in St. Paul, manufactures medical technology to treat a number of conditions, including heart disease, vascular disease and chronic pain. The company posted sales of $5.6 billion in 2014 and has more than 16,000 employees.Separately, St. Jude Medical said on Wednesday that its second-quarter profit rose to $290 million, from $270 million in the period a year earlier. Its sales declined 3 percent to $1.41 billion in the quarter.OpinionRita F. Redberg and Sanket S. DhruvaAdvertisement