AdvertisementSupported byBy Alina TugendFor Lisa Freemantle, a 53-year-old former teacher, reflexology seemed like the perfect second career.She credits reflexology, the ancient practice of using pressure points in the body to relieve health problems, with easing her migraine headaches.So it was with great enthusiasm that she undertook the more than 200 hours of training as part of the certification process and opened a practice near her Westchester County home 10 years ago. By any measure, the practice has been a success — she has a steady stream of clients and earns as much as she did as a substitute teacher. But increasingly, Ms. Freemantle and other reflexologists are finding their businesses under pressure on two fronts.On one side is the rising number of storefront foot spas that employ practitioners who offer what they call reflexology at less than half the usual cost — sometimes as little as $25 an hour, which can be a quarter of the cost of a trained reflexologist, who might charge as much as $100, depending on the location.In a number of states, including Massachusetts, Maryland, Oregon and Washington, some of these storefront spas have been found to be fronts for human trafficking.On the other side are complicated state laws. Although Ms. Freemantle is fully accredited by the American Reflexology Certification Board, frequently attends continuing education seminars and volunteers her service at hospitals, what she is doing technically violates New York State law.That is because in New York, Florida, Hawaii and a number of other states, anyone who wants to practice reflexology must be licensed as a trained massage therapist.This confusing web of state licensing requirements has made it easier for illegitimate reflexology salons to flourish, while it has sometimes made it more difficult for legitimate practitioners to operate.Although similar in some respects, reflexology and massage are very different. While both can reduce anxiety or stress, massage therapy is aimed at soothing or healing the specific part of the body being touched. Reflexology, on the other hand, involves applying pressure to parts of the body, usually the feet, hands or outer ears, that correspond to internal organs and systems, like the digestive system or the circulatory systemResearch by the National Cancer Institute has shown that reflexology may benefit cancer patients by reducing shortness of breath, a common symptom of breast cancer patients. Another study found that it could reduce preoperative anxiety. As the practice has become more accepted, like acupuncture, the number of reflexologists nationwide has grown.The Reflexology Association of America, a trade organization, has 645 individual members, a number that has grown every year since the organization started in 1995, said Brenda Makowsky, president of the association. That does not include the many reflexologists who have not joined the association.The New York State Education Department, which oversees licensing of massage therapists and the state massage therapists organization, supports the practice of reflexology, but as a specialization under the auspices of massage therapy.“If you want to be a podiatrist, you go to medical school and then specialize in podiatry,” said Nicholas Bodkin, second vice president of the New York chapter of the American Massage Therapy Association. “If you want to do reflexology, you should first get a massage therapists’ license and then do reflexology.”Ms. Freemantle said her objection to getting a massage therapy license was not just the time and expense involved — under New York law prospective massage therapists must take least 1,000 hours of approved instruction and do mandatory continuing education — but also a lack of interest in doing massages.“I am a reflexologist,” she said. “I’ve trained to be one and continue to train. Why should I have to do massage?” To be certified in foot reflexology by the American Reflexology Certification Board, Ms. Freemantle, among other things, passed a 300-question written exam covering anatomy, physiology and ethical business practices and saw 30 clients for three sessions each for at least 45 minutes.Requiring her to learn massage therapy to do reflexology “would be like making me learn to drive a truck because I want to drive a car,” she added.Many massage therapists learn reflexology as part of their training, although usually not as intensively as a certified reflexologist, said Elizabeth Willoughby, vice president of the New York State Reflexology Association. An uncertified reflexologist might have far less training.Sorting out the laws governing massage and reflexology can be complicated. According to the American Massage Therapy Association, 45 states have massage therapy laws and only nine offer exemptions for reflexologists.That is, “based on our interpretation of the laws those are the numbers we’ve come up with,” said Michelle Zenz, a spokeswoman for the association. “However, the state regulatory boards and attorneys general office have ultimate authority over how licenses are governed, and this could change from state to state and board to board.”Ms. Makowsky suggested that those concerned about their status as a reflexologist check with the state office that regulates massage.“This is very hard to keep track of because laws and exemptions can change annually,” she said.Ms. Willoughby said she still practiced reflexology in New York, but stopped teaching it because her students could not practice legally without a massage therapy license.Sandy Jansen, a reflexologist in Honolulu, said that when she moved to Hawaii from Washington, she had to get a massage therapy license because the state laws differed.“It took a year and was expensive,” she said. “I now can offer massage as well, but if I didn’t have to do it, I wouldn’t have.”The confusing licensing situations in many states has also led to the growth of storefront foot care businesses that offer reflexology for $25 to $30 an hour, compared with the $80 to $100 an hour typically charged by those like Ms. Freemantle.But many reflexologists, like Christine Issel, a co-founder of the American Reflexology Certification Board, say in most cases the reflexology offered at these places amounts to little more than foot massages.“You can almost bet if it’s a storefront, it’s probably not legitimate,” she said.A job analysis done by the board last year found that most trained and certified reflexologists work out of their homes, a spa or a chiropractor’s office, she said, not stores.Julia Dollinger, a reflexologist who works in Naples, Fla., and got a massage therapy license to comply with state laws, said she advertised her services for $80 an hour in a local newspaper.“It was right next to one advertising $39.95 an hour,” she said. When people ask her why she is more expensive than the cheap salons, she said, “I politely look at them and tell them, ‘I am a nationally certified reflexologist.’ ”Two foot care salons in Westchester County that advertise foot reflexology for $28 an hour did not have training certificates displayed openly. Each had a large poster taped to the front window defining foot reflexology and showing a diagram of a pair of feet that identified specific parts of the feet and the corresponding body parts.At one, the workers did not speak English well enough to talk about their training. At the other, a man said that all of the workers had been trained in China, and then refused to give his name or respond to more questions.Training aside, states are finding that as they have passed more rigorous laws pertaining to massage parlors to combat prostitution, the problem has moved to the more unregulated fields of reflexology, acupressure and other types of body work.“We’ve already seen this happen in some jurisdictions,” said Bradley Myles, executive officer of Polaris, which runs the National Human Trafficking Resource Center.States are trying to address the problem. Washington State, for example, has passed several laws, the most recent in April, aimed at ensuring that reflexologists are running a legitimate business.New Hampshire, North Dakota and Tennessee have also passed reflexology laws, according to the Reflexology Association of America. The laws vary but generally require that reflexologists be licensed or certified after training for a set number of hours.Ms. Makowsky said that while reflexologists want their profession to be regulated to protect public health, they do not want the laws to impose such heavy fees or requirements that it becomes too burdensome to practice.Ms. Freemantle tells all her clients about the licensing situation and has them sign a contract saying she has formal permission to touch them.“I want everything to be as legal as possible,” she said.Advertisement