By ANDREW POLLACKJULY 22, 2015
New data released on Wednesday raised hopes somewhat that an experimental Alzheimer’s drug from Eli Lilly & Company might be effective. At the same time, other results were released on Wednesday that could reduce expectations a bit for a similar drug being developed by Biogen.The drugs aim to prevent or remove so-called amyloid plaques in the brain. The buildup of the plaques has become a leading hypothesis about the cause of Alzheimer’s disease.But so far in clinical trials, drugs aimed at reducing the plaques have failed to stem the decline in cognition that is a sign of the disease, which afflicts more than five million Americans.“Now all of a sudden we have a number of pieces of information that all point in the same direction — that there really is something to this amyloid hypothesis,” said Dr. Eric Siemers, a neurologist at Lilly. Data about the drugs was presented at the Alzheimer’s Association International Conference in Washington.AdvertisementLilly reported in 2012 that its drug, solanezumab, had not worked in two large 18-month clinical trials involving patients in mild or moderate stages of the disease. But the company said it had an effect in the subset of patients with mild symptoms. As a result, it has started a third big trial restricted to patients with mild disease. Results are expected by early 2017.AdvertisementThe data announced Wednesday is not from the new study, but from an extension of the two older ones, in which all patients in the trial were given the option of receiving solanezumab for another two years.That meant that those originally in the placebo group would be switching to the drug, but starting on it 18 months later than those who had been receiving the drug all along. Neither the patients nor the doctors knew which group the patients had been in originally.The idea behind such a “delayed start” study is that if the drug was truly slowing the mental deterioration caused by the disease, the patients who were new to the drug would not be able to catch up in cognitive ability with the patients who had been taking the drug all along.That was what was seen among patients with mild disease in the study, which was also published  in the journal Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions.The gap in cognition and ability to carry out daily tasks that existed between the drug and placebo groups at the end of the initial 18-month study persisted for another year. There was also a gap two years out, though it was no longer statistically significant.Still, the “delayed start” clinical trial design is new and not universally accepted, and some experts not involved in the study were cautious.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The statistical analysis reported today does not provide any information on efficacy or on the amyloid hypothesis,” said Dr. Lon Schneider, a professor at the University of Southern California.Vamil K. Divan, an analyst at Credit Suisse, said in a note on Wednesday that it was hard to draw major conclusions from the data, but that “today’s results at least allow investors to maintain hope that this potentially transformative product may make it to the market.”AdvertisementBiogen generated great interest in March when it released results of an early-stage study showing that its anti-amyloid drug, aducanumab, sharply slowed the decline in cognition compared to a placebo. Still, the most effective dose, the highest one, had a high rate of a side effect, localized swelling in the brain.The new data presented Wednesday was from 30 patients who got a medium dose. Ideally, it would be nearly as effective as the high dose but with fewer side effects.That turned out to be only partly the case. The middle dose did not reduce cognitive decline by a statistically significant amount on either of two measures after a year of treatment. On one of those measures, the middle dose was actually worse than a lower dose. And the side-effect rate was relatively high.However, the middle dose results fell between those of the lower and higher doses on the other measure of cognitive decline and on a measure of plaques in the brain. Such a relationship, where a drug works better with an increasing dose, is often a sign that the drug has a true effect.Dr. Jeffrey Sevigny, senior director of clinical development for Biogen, said that given the small numbers of patients involved, “One ought not to be surprised about data points that don’t perfectly line up.”He said the results over all were “fantastic” and that Biogen had started two late-stage trials aimed at winning approval of the drug in several years. The doses being used in those trials have not been disclosed.Wall Street analysts were divided on whether Biogen’s results were good or disappointing. Biogen’s shares fell about 4 percent Wednesday. Lilly’s shares rose about 1 percent.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New Data on 2 Alzheimer’s Drugs Alter Hope and Expectation for Treatments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.