By RUTH LA FERLAJULY 21, 2015
Elio Fiorucci, the fashion designer and retail visionary whose stores in Milan, London and New York encapsulated the flamboyance of the disco era and anticipated many later retail innovations, died on Monday at his home in Milan. He was 80.His death was confirmed by the Italian news agency ANSA. No cause was specified.Widely regarded — indeed mythologized — as a radical thinker and mercantile guru, Mr. Fiorucci was baptized young in the retail trade, going to work in his father’s shoe boutique at 17. A seeker of wider pastures, he opened his own store in Milan in the mid-1960s, a distinctive, splashy outpost for all things “swinging London.”The shop, which Mr. Fiorucci ebulliently characterized as “an amusement park of novelties,” sold fluorescent hair tints, rag rugs, teapots, gold Lurex cowboy boots and the disco-spangled glad rags in which patrons danced the night away. At its inception it also served as a raucously colorful showcase for the quirky, inventive and darkly romantic designs of Biba, Ossie Clark and other British avant-gardists.Mr. Fiorucci soon extended his reach beyond conventional ready-to-wear, transforming his shop into an eccentric, all-encompassing lifestyle emporium, modeled in part on the Biba store in London, a pop-culture emblem of its day.AdvertisementRestlessly inventive, Mr. Fiorucci was quick to make his name. In 1970 he introduced his namesake fashion label, built largely on stretch jeans — among the first — and T-shirts decorated with the twin winged cherubs that would become the brand logo. Pink-cheeked and smiling coyly, or peeking from behind dark glasses, they appeared not just on T-shirts but also on key chains, coffee mugs and shopping bags.AdvertisementThat logo soon became a highly collectible fixture in fashion capitals where Mr. Fiorucci set up new stores, including, perhaps most famously, a New York flagship on East 59th Street that opened in 1976.The store, a pebble’s toss from Bloomingdale’s, was a breeding ground for fledgling designers and upstarts of the fashion and art worlds, among them Betsey Johnson and Anna Sui, to whom Mr. Fiorucci rented concessions, and the painters Keith Haring and Kenny Scharf, whose works were ostentatiously displayed. The windows were styled by the then little-known illustrator Antonio Lopez.The Manhattan store soon forged a reputation as a funky temple of retail innovation. Its touches continue to reverberate in the malls of today.“Elio was such an enthusiast,” recalled the performance artist Joey Arias, who managed the Fiorucci store in the late 1970s and ’80s. “He had a very open mind. For him every day was like Christmas.”Fiorucci shops represented “a pinnacle moment,” said Kim Hastreiter, a founder of Paper magazine, who sold her first issue at the New York Fiorucci store in 1984. “It was culture, it was music, it was lifestyle, all in one, and everybody came: Greta Garbo, Andy Warhol and the king of Spain.”Before turntables were commonplace at trendsetting boutiques, Mr. Fiorucci enlisted D.J.s to spin at his store. He was the first to hire a cadre of young fashion scouts to scour the world for the latest trends. They returned to New York bearing samples of items they had spied on the street or at the clubs where their contemporaries reveled by night.The store developed a reputation as a daytime Studio 54, drawing a raffish mix of fashion insiders and would-be insiders of entertainment and society, including an almost-famous Madonna as well as Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Lauren Bacall, Yves Saint Laurent and, of course, Warhol, who stopped by almost daily.Advertisement“When I was 15, instead of going to sleepaway camp I spent the whole summer hanging out in the store,” the designer Marc Jacobs reminisced to The New York Times in 2001. “I had this wide-eyed glamour about these beautiful young people that globetrotted from club to club dressing in these fabulous clothes. It was like a living, breathing fashion show that I wanted so much to be a part of.”The clothes, mostly restyled hits from the 1950s and ’60s, were rendered dazzling in Day-Glo colors and materials as varied as Lurex and plastic and animal prints. The inventory changed from month to month, Ms. Hastreiter recalled: “One day everything — button-down shirts, luggage and lipstick — was all fluorescent. The next months it would all be zebra and leopard.”In 2001, Ms. Johnson recalled: “In 1978 I came out with my first collection, and Fiorucci was the only store that wanted it. It was all the stuff from the movie ‘Rock ’n’ Roll High School,’ and I guess it was just too out there for the other stores.”Renegade merchant that he was, Mr. Fiorucci embraced a self-effacing personal style that ran counter to the flashy image of his stores. A vegetarian and animal-rights activist, he usually dressed in plain sweaters and trousers. As he put it on the eve of his Manhattan opening, “I am a merchant, not a man of fashion.”In 1990, he sold his company to the Japanese clothing brand Edwin. It was a move he came to regret. “He thought something good was going to happen, and it really passed him up,” Mr. Arias said. “He was disappointed.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Hastreiter explained: “Fiorucci was a disco moment; it worked because of its nightclub environment. But a disco is only as good as its crowd.”More than a dozen years later, after an ill-fated attempt to reopen his New York emporium, he shuttered his business and closed his original flagship in Milan.Eleven years ago he embarked on a new venture, introducing Love Therapy, a ready-to-wear line, and eventually signing a licensing agreement with the Italian retailer Gruppo Coin for the production and distribution of Love Therapy women’s and children’s collections.Mr. Fiorucci was born in Milan on June 10, 1935. Information on survivors was not immediately available.He discussed his retailing philosophy this year in an interview with i-D magazine. “I wanted people to find what they came for, to be happy and spend little money to get exactly what they wanted,” he said. “Because in the end the best thing in the world is to be loved. The greatest need of man is to be loved.”A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Elio Fiorucci, Whose Disco-Era Temple of Fashion Changed Retail, Dies at 80.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.