By LANDON THOMAS Jr. and MIKE ISAACJULY 23, 2015
Airbnb, the highly valued house rental start-up, is currently in talks with a top executive at the investment firm Blackstone Group, Laurence A. Tosi, to be its chief financial officer, according to a person briefed on the matter.The hire, if it pans out, would be a coup for Airbnb as it continues to expand its fast-growing rental business. Mr. Tosi, who is 47, has been Blackstone’s finance chief since 2008, a period during which the investment firm’s assets soared to $330 billion from $102 billion, and is well regarded within the firm.Airbnb has had discussions with investors to raise more than $1 billion in cash, which would attach a valuation of around $24 billion to the company. That estimate, which would rank the company among the most richly assessed start-ups in Silicon Valley, is most likely fueled by the company’s ambitious growth prospects both domestically and abroad. The valuation would place it behind Uber and surpassing Snapchat, among its tech peers.Airbnb has said its business program for professionals has grown 700 percent since it began the initiative a year ago. It has even recently expanded into Cuba after the easing of restrictions between the island and the United States.AdvertisementStill, Airbnb, which began in 2008, has faced hurdles in certain states, and some political leaders have sought more regulation of their services. Airbnb has also had to go up against major hotel chains that see the young company as a growing threat in the market for both business and consumer travelers.Airbnb did not respond to a request for comment on Thursday. Bloomberg News first reported that Airbnb was nearing a deal to hire Mr. Tosi.If hired, Mr. Tosi’s finance expertise is likely to add to the speculation that Airbnb may try to go public soon, especially as Wall Street banks jockey for any potential Uber initial public offering. However, many of the start-ups that have successfully raised money from venture capitalists tend to stay private longer, as they build their brands outside the scrutiny of the public markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It would also be at least the third recent move by a Wall Street professional to oversee finances at a technology company. Twitter hired Anthony J. Noto, formerly of Goldman Sachs, last year. And Google made a similar move in March by poaching Ruth Porat from Morgan Stanley, a hire that has helped the tech giant’s stock value balloon.AdvertisementIn addition to handling Blackstone’s complex finances, Mr. Tosi is a valuable point man for Blackstone in terms of communicating with outside investors.Along with Joseph Baratta, Bennett J. Goodman and Jonathan D. Gray, Mr. Tosi is among a core of influential young executives at the investment firm that have played a crucial role in transforming the firm from a deal-driven private equity shop to a diversified asset management company.Blackstone, with its smaller size and tight-knit culture, prides itself on its low turnover of top executives, so a move by Mr. Tosi to another firm will be deeply felt within the firm.Before Blackstone, Mr. Tosi held senior positions at Merrill Lynch and General Electric.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Blackstone C.F.O. Is Said to Be Headed to Airbnb.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.