AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioThe music licensing group Sesac has settled an antitrust lawsuit with the radio industry that will for the first time subject Sesac to arbitration over the royalty rates it charges stations.The Radio Music Licensing Committee, which represents thousands of stations, sued Sesac in 2012 over what the R.M.L.C. said were anticompetitive practices in how that group licenses music. Sesac, known as a performing rights organization, collects royalties whenever the 400,000 songs it represents — including the work of major songwriters like Bob Dylan, Neil Diamond and Kurt Cobain — are played on the radio or television, streamed online or performed in public. Sesac competes with the much larger performing groups Ascap and BMI, which are subject to regulatory agreements with the federal government over their licensing processes. Sesac, which is privately owned, is not subject to those agreements. But in the radio licensing committee’s complaint three years ago, it accused Sesac of being “a cartel that has illegally monopolized an essential repertory of copyrighted music.” The settlement, announced on Thursday by both groups, said that if Sesac cannot come to an agreement with the committee, its royalty fees will be set by a third-party arbitration panel. Sesac must also pay the radio group $3.6 million in legal costs. The agreement covers 22 years, starting in 2016. “This settlement effectively bars Sesac from arbitrarily seeking unreasonably high rates from a radio operator at the risk of copyright infringement exposure,” John VerStandig, the radio licensing committee’s vice chairman, said in a statement. As a result of the settlement, the licensing committee agreed to withdraw its suit, Sesac said in a statement.In October, Sesac agreed to pay $58.5 million to television stations as part of a settlement in a separate antitrust case filed by the Television Music Licensing Committee. That agreement also subjects Sesac and the television stations to arbitration if they cannot agree on royalty terms.Sesac, which was founded in 1930, also recently announced a deal to buy the Harry Fox Agency from the National Music Publishers’ Association for around $20 million. That deal would allow Sesac to process a different kind of royalty, for the so-called “mechanical” rights of songs, in addition to the performing rights it already handles. That may give the company an advantage over its competitors when it comes to digital services, which often require multiple kinds of rights to the music they play.Advertisement