AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshTwo years ago, lawmakers in Puerto Rico faced the soaring cost of government pensions and did what lawmakers across the United States have been doing: They cut the pensions.Lawsuits followed, with curious results. When the first three cases reached the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico, the pension cuts were affirmed. But months later, when two more cases arrived, the court halted them as “unreasonable and, therefore, unconstitutional.” The same justice wrote both decisions.“It was very unfair,” said Ismael Rivera, a 44-year-old police officer in the first group. “The government has a double standard.” Mr. Rivera still has 14 years to go before he can collect his pension but said it was no longer worth staying on the job. He has been looking for other work in Florida, Tennessee and Texas.“Honestly, I don’t want to retire from the police,” he said, “because I know I can’t survive on that pension.”When to retire is one of the most important decisions a worker can make, but as more and more public workers approach that milestone, the certainties that would have once guided their thinking are fading. For decades, public pensions have been portrayed as guaranteed by state laws and constitutions, but lately, that certainty has been turned on its head. As states and cities have taken steps to rein in the cost of their pension plans, they have unleashed a tide of worker litigation, with vexing and sometimes contradictory results.“It’s a real hodgepodge, and in a lot of states, I don’t think it’s completely clear,” said David Skeel, a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania.The issue is especially critical in Puerto Rico, where the government is running out of cash and has called for a “negotiated moratorium” on its enormous debts, pitting the interests of its public workers and retirees against those of its bondholders. “The judicial system is not something that we can put our trust in,” said Mercedes Martínez, head of the Puerto Rican teachers’ union. Her members received the more favorable Supreme Court decision, but they are girding for more battles this summer and fall. “We are talking about a class struggle. The rich people want to get richer and the poor people are getting poorer, unless they’re willing to take to the streets.”The issue has also reached a critical stage in Illinois — where a judge in Chicago is expected to rule on Friday on planned pension cuts — and in New Jersey.With companies, outcomes are much more predictable because they are governed by a single federal pension law, enacted in 1974. It has been litigated extensively over the last 40 years, so ample precedent has been established. In general, companies can freeze pension plans at will as long as they do not take back the pension credits a worker has already earned. But for constitutional reasons, the federal law is not binding on states or cities, which has led to a patchwork of litigation and outcomes.“It’s hard to keep it all straight,” said Josh B. McGee, vice president for public accountability at the Arnold Foundation, which tracks the litigation on a public website.Pensions can be cut in any number of ways, and challenges are brought on a variety of legal theories. A winning argument in one state may fail in another. To some extent, outcomes can be handicapped along red-state and blue-state lines — but not with pinpoint accuracy.State supreme courts in traditionally blue California, New York and Oregon, but also in red Arizona, have ruled that public workers’ pensions are set in stone from the first day on the job and cannot be reduced.But state courts in red South Dakota, blue Minnesota and variable Colorado and New Mexico have ruled that public pensions can lawfully be cut — even for people who have already retired. In the past, existing retirees’ benefits were considered inviolate.A plethora of rulings by lower state courts, federal courts and bankruptcy courts adds nuance and confusion. Seven firefighters in Alabama challenged pension cuts in federal court there, hoping to dodge what they thought would be a negative outcome in state court. But the gambit failed when the judge rejected the claim that there was a binding contract, even though the same argument had been used successfully in cases in states like Arizona and California.“I don’t understand all the details, just that we lost,” said Lecil Harrelson, one of the firefighters, who works for the city of Gadsden. As soon as Gadsden’s cuts were affirmed on appeal, other Alabama cities cut their own workers’ pensions.“It is a mess. Alabama politics is horrible,” he said.Administrative judges have been weighing in, too. Soon after Detroit went bankrupt in 2013, Doyle O’Connor, an administrative law judge in Michigan, ruled that the city had acted improperly two years earlier when it stopped making end-of-year bonus pension payouts known as 13th checks.“The city’s conduct was unlawful and constitutes a refusal to bargain in good faith,” he wrote. Given the bankruptcy, he continued, he knew the ruling would bring “little more solace than assurance of a full-ticket-price refund offered while still on the sharply tilting deck of the Titanic.”Add-on benefits, like 13th checks and cost-of-living adjustments, are posing especially thorny legal problems. Companies seldom offer these, but they are widespread in the public sector.In New Jersey, the courts are still grappling with whether yearly cost-of-living adjustments can be lawfully suspended, four years after Gov. Chris Christie did so. In the meantime, the state Supreme Court also struck down a requirement that New Jersey fully fund its pension promises within seven years. That means if the courts eventually order New Jersey to make good on the yearly increases, the money may not be available.“The law is a crude tool when it comes to dealing with this kind of problem,” said Karol K. Denniston, a lawyer at Squire Patton Boggs in San Francisco, who has been advising California municipalities on pension matters. “It doesn’t matter what the court order is if there’s no money to pay it.”Illinois already faces that predicament. In May, its Supreme Court ruled that all public pensions must be paid in full, even though the pension system is more than $100 billion short. Last year, the same court ruled that Illinois must also keep a $35 billion promise to provide health care to retired public workers.“The states can’t print money,” Ms. Denniston said. “There is a complete disconnect between economic conditions and the monetary cost of pensions.”Mr. Skeel, the law professor, said public pension disputes were usually litigated as a matter of contract law. State and federal constitutional provisions make it hard to alter contracts outside of bankruptcy.“But there’s a crisis exception,” he said. In a financial emergency, states can alter contracts if they satisfy a judge that the crisis is real, that the alterations can fix it and that they do the least possible harm in the process.That is, in fact, what led to the incongruous outcomes in Puerto Rico. The government had little trouble showing that it had a real financial crisis; its pension system is a critical mainstay for tens of thousands of people, and it was running out of money.That led to the question of whether pension cuts would help. The island’s Supreme Court said it was up to employees to show they would not, and the first group’s evidence fell short.The first group’s cuts inadvertently helped the second group. When lawmakers decided to cut the pension system, they gave the workers a break: Their pensions would be cut, but anyone who retired immediately could receive a smaller cut. There was a dash for the exits as public workers tried to save as much of their pensions as they could. With many more retirees than expected, the pension overhaul didn’t save money; it drained the pension fund even more.That gave lawyers for the second group, teachers and judges, the proof they needed that cutting pensions would not solve the financial problem, so the cuts were rejected.But winning in court is not the same as winning on the ground. Puerto Rico’s financial situation has continued to worsen, and when Gov. Alejandro García Padilla called for a debt moratorium, he said there would be “shared sacrifice.” The teachers think that means them. Juliana Soto, 27, a social worker at a school, said she must work about 30 more years before she can draw her pension, making mandatory contributions to the fund with each paycheck. She fears the fund will collapse in the meantime and all the money she put in will be gone.Ms. Martínez, the union leader, said there were plans to close 580 schools, lay off recent hires, reduce paid sick leave and charge people who have taught on the mainland tens of thousands of dollars to transfer their pension credits to the Puerto Rican system. One teacher, Mysabel Vázquez Gómez, said she must pay $36,000 to transfer three years of pension credits; otherwise, she must keep working.“By August, you can expect to see a lot of protests,” Ms. Martínez said. “The only thing that will stop this is letting people take the trouble to the streets.”Advertisement