AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieLazard and Evercore are doing more with less in the continuing mergers-and-acquisition boom. Second-quarter results reported this week show that the two independent advisers have not reaped as much benefit as much larger rivals from the recent deal-making surge. But they leave more of the gains for shareholders.Revenue from deals increased 11 percent in the first half of this year at Lazard and almost 13 percent at Evercore. Both lag their large rivals: Citigroup and Goldman Sachs both posted 50 percent increases in merger and acquisition fees. Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase and Morgan Stanley all did better, too.That is another sign of Wall Street’s big companies recouping in recent months some of the market share lost to independent and boutique firms over the last decade. It is too early, though, to call it a long-term trend. Bank of America and Citi, for instance, are recovering from a slump after the 2008 crisis.In any event, smaller firms do a better job of passing on gains to their owners. That is partly because they have simpler business models. Advisory firms require very little capital, unlike trading businesses. Nor are they systemically important financial institutions, a designation that comes with elevated capital charges, which make it harder to deliver decent returns.That means that even less spectacular M.&A. fee growth can have more impact. Lazard, which also has a well-run asset management unit, is the best performing Wall Street stock this year, up 16 percent, with Evercore second at 12 percent. Only Citi can match that, at 12 percent, because of its better control on expenses. Hopes of interest-rate increases have helped other big banks but by smaller percentages.Lazard might hope for even more recognition from investors. The firm, which is run by Ken Jacobs, had an operating margin of more than 26 percent in the second quarter, according to results announced on Thursday. That is better than Evercore’s 22 percent, adjusted for costs from last year’s acquisition of Institutional Strategy & Investment, a research brokerage firm.Yet Evercore trades at almost 19 times this year’s estimated earnings, despite building a capital-intensive equities business that has an operating-margin target for the next couple of years of just 17 percent. At 16 times earnings, Lazard may have more room to run.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement