AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaNikkei, the Japanese media company, is taking a bold step with its purchase of The Financial Times and is receiving accolades for making the $1.3 billion deal. But the financial logic behind the deal to buy the newspaper from the British publishing company Pearson, raises questions — if cold economics are the only consideration. Nikkei paid 35 times The Financial Times’s adjusted operating income, about three times the newspaper’s worth.Publicly traded European media companies trade at an average multiple of 12 Ebitda, or earnings before interest taxes, depreciation and amortization. One might expect a buyer to pay some sort of premium for control. But The Financial Times is being bought on a multiple around twice the size of the one that Jeff Bezos, chief executive of Amazon, paid the Graham family to secure The Washington Post in 2013. (Mr. Bezos paid an estimated 17 times Ebitda.)The Financial Times’s premium price is even more astonishing because the financial outlook for print media is insecure. To date, across the industry, readers and advertisers are leaving in masses, and digital efforts do not pay nearly the same dividends as in print. If it is able to overcome this digital obstacle, The Financial Times may find itself on a clear path to steadily improved revenue.The Financial Times was one of the first newspapers to embrace digital subscriptions, which now represent 70 percent of its audience of 720,000. Also, revenue from the FT Group was about $518 million in 2014, with operating income of $37 million. What is not revealed is if The Financial Times has increased its revenue or operating income. Pearson did not provide these details.The sale means Pearson can now fully focus on the education market, leaving Nikkei to tackle the problems news organizations are facing.For its part, Nikkei is getting a highly respected global brand and the chance to reach English-speaking readers. The Financial Times might provide Nikkei with routes to new markets and opportunities to explore markets in which Nikkei already operates. At such a lofty price, however, Nikkei will have to work extraordinarily hard to make the numbers stack up. Nikkei might also try to recover some of the money through cost cuts. But that, in the long term, might diminish The Financial Times’s reputation, which Nikkei has paid so much money for.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement