By RAPHAEL MINDERJULY 23, 2015
MADRID — The Cierco family, which owned Banca Privada d’Andorra, said on Thursday that it would start a lawsuit against Andorra to be compensated for the loss of its banking assets after the United States Treasury Department had identified the bank as a likely hub for the laundering of hundreds of millions of dollars on behalf of criminal gangs.The Ciercos, who had 75 percent of the equity of Banca Privada d’Andorra, or B.P.A., said in a statement that their pending lawsuit would seek damages from Andorra for the “indiscriminate and unilateral expropriation” of the bank.The authorities in Andorra intervened after criminal investigators from the Treasury Department released a report last March that singled out B.P.A., one of Andorra’s five privately held banks, as an “institution of primary money laundering concern” for worldwide criminals, from corrupt Venezuelan government officials to Russian and Chinese criminal rings and the Mexican Sinaloa drug cartel.The American report led the government to ring-fence B.P.A. and impose limits on money withdrawals in order to avoid the collapse of a banking sector that has been a cornerstone of the economy of Andorra, a tiny principality wedged between France and Spain.AdvertisementThe B.P.A. scandal also dealt a blow to the image of a country that was not removed until 2009 from a list of “uncooperative tax havens” drawn up by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.AdvertisementAfter also setting up an emergency credit line for B.P.A.’s corporate clients, the Andorran authorities started a process intended to split its legitimate assets from the toxic assets linked to criminal activities. Andorra’s plan is to then find a buyer for the sound assets of B.P.A.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As part of its emergency measures, Andorra ousted the board of B.P.A., including its co-chairmen, Higini and Ramon Cierco. But neither brother has since been charged, and the American report never named any specific B.P.A. executive as part of its claims of criminal wrongdoing.The Andorran authorities arrested B.P.A.’s chief executive, Joan Pau Miquel Prats, shortly after the scandal broke. He remains in prison awaiting trial, although details of possible charges have not been disclosed, as his case remains under investigation.The Cierco family did not detail the content of its lawsuit, and a spokeswoman would not confirm how much money the family might seek in compensation. In their statement, however, the Ciercos suggested separate legal action could be taken against Andorra over the authorities’ administrative decisions to take over and split up their banking assets. Earlier this month, Andorra officially put into law the restructuring of B.P.A., which is to be followed by the sale of its viable assets.B.P.A.’s problems have led a Spanish subsidiary, Banco Madrid, to seek protection from creditors. In 2011, B.P.A. became the first Andorran bank to get a Spanish banking license when it took over Banco Madrid.The government of Andorra and its banking authorities said they had no immediate comment on the planned lawsuit. Besides B.P.A., the Ciercos also own gas stations, hotels and other real estate inside and outside of Andorra.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.