By REUTERSJULY 23, 2015
The number of Americans filing new applications for unemployment benefits last week dropped to its lowest level in more than 41 years, suggesting that the labor market maintained a sturdy pace of job growth in July.Other data on Thursday also offered an upbeat assessment of the economy. A gauge of future economic activity increased solidly in June, and another measure suggested that growth picked up slightly last month.The bullish jobs picture, together with a firming housing market, brings the Federal Reserve a step closer to raising its benchmark interest rate this year.“This should reassure policy makers that their objective of maximum employment is coming closer into view,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York.AdvertisementInitial claims for state unemployment benefits fell 26,000 to a seasonally adjusted 255,000 for the week ended July 18, the lowest level since November 1973, the Labor Department said.AdvertisementLast week’s drop probably exaggerates the strength of the labor market because claims are volatile during summer, when automakers usually shut assembly plants for annual retooling.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000FMAMJJJULY 23, 2015
Some companies keep production lines running, which can throw off a model the government uses to smooth the data for seasonal variations. A Labor Department analyst, however, said there were no special factors influencing the data.Still, the decline unwound the increase in claims in June.Fed officials meet next week, but they are not expected to tighten monetary policy before September. The Fed has kept its short-term lending rate near zero since December 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it smooths out week-to-week volatility, fell 4,000 to 278,500 last week.“We believe that retooling shutdowns were likely much smaller in 2015 than in previous years due to lower auto inventories and very strong vehicle sales,” said Cheng Chen, an economist at TD Securities in New York.The four-week moving average of claims has been below the key 300,000 mark, which is normally associated with sturdy job gains, for 17 straight weeks – an unusually long stretch.Payrolls increased by 223,000 in June after rising 254,000 in May. Job growth has exceeded 200,000 in 14 of the last 16 months. At 5.3 percent, the unemployment rate is close to the 5 percent to 5.2 percent range that most Fed officials consider consistent with full employment.In a separate report, the Conference Board said its Leading Economic Index rose 0.6 percent last month after advancing 0.8 percent in May. The increase reflected the strengthening housing market, which has been characterized by a surge in housing starts and building permits, as well as very strong sales.The upbeat growth picture was also supported by a report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, which showed its National Activity Index rising to 0.08 in June after five consecutive months of negative readings. The gain was led by improvements in production and employment-related indicators.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: New Claims for Jobless Benefits Fall to a 41-Year Low.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.