AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromIt’s going to take more than a better chicken sandwich to lift sales at McDonald’s.The burger titan on Thursday reported that sales in its stores open at least one year dropped 0.7 percent, extending a string of sales declines that neither promotions, new products nor changes in the executive suite have been able to reverse.In the troubled United States market, same-store sales dropped 2 percent, reflecting weak promotions and declining customer traffic.For the quarter that ended June 30, the company’s profit sank 13 percent, to $1.2 billion, or $1.26 a share, from $1.4 billion, or $1.40 a share, in the same period last year. Revenue dropped 10 percent, to $6.5 billion, compared with $7.2 billion a year earlier.Sales would have been positive, however, without the stronger dollar, which made the company’s overseas revenue look smaller in dollar terms.Steve Easterbrook, chief executive of McDonald’s, sought to strike a positive note in a conference call with investment analysts on Thursday, emphasizing the strong performance in international markets like Australia, Canada and Britain that he described as a “strong catalyst for our business.”He warned, however, that reviving McDonald’s lagging business in its home market would take time.McDonald’s has eliminated some items from its drive-through menu boards and begun experimenting with two-lane drive-throughs, which account for roughly two-thirds of its sales, in an effort to simplify and speed up service. Half of the restaurants also are retraining workers to improve the accuracy of orders, and kitchens are using a new method of searing beef.The company has introduced Oreo Frappés in some markets for a limited time, and it has added sirloin burgers and an “artisan” grilled chicken sandwich to the menu. It is also encouraging regional innovation, like the lobster rolls that franchisees in New England are offering this summer.How much those tweaks will move the needle remains to be seen. “McDonald’s has upgraded some of its products in the U.S. Its artisan chicken sandwich, for instance, is an improvement over the prior iteration,” said Mark Kalinowski, an analyst who has followed the company. “But customers — if they care, it’s really hard to tell, and that goes to the health of the brand, which is the big challenge for McDonald’s right now.”Mr. Easterbrook said that McDonald’s was working on multiple ways of reducing complexity and streamlining tasks for its franchisees, like taking steps out of assembling menu items, changing the way packaging is laid out and changing technology to improve communication between the counter and the kitchen. “Adding one thing and taking one thing off is not simplification,” he said.A summer promotion offering a double cheeseburger and fries for $2.50 also has had mixed results, according to a survey of some McDonald’s franchisees that was conducted by Mr. Kalinowski. The most recent survey, reflecting the responses of franchisees who own more than 200 restaurants in the United States and internationally, found that their outlook for the business was the worst in the survey’s history.Mr. Easterbrook himself said the promotion “was not the answer,” and that it had been poorly executed, coming at a time when regions were working on their own value propositions for the summer.He said that it was critical in the United States for McDonald’s to reinvigorate its business during the day, which dropped off after the company replaced its popular Dollar Menu, featuring items for $1, with its “Dollar Menu and More” with items at a variety of prices. “We didn’t replace it with offers of equivalent value, and customers have voted with their feet,” Mr. Easterbrook said.Changing the Dollar Menu had a significant effect on McDonald’s. “Fast-food sales are up in general 2 or 2.5 percent, with Burger King doing even better than that, and they have even a worse quality score than McDonald’s,” said David Palmer, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets. “The value thing is really the first thing they have to look at if they’re really going to change the situation.”Franchisees have been grappling with the company’s demands that they invest in new equipment and technology, store renovations and other moves meant to spur business at the same time that sales are falling. A decision by McDonald’s to raise wages in the stores it controls also made franchisees angry because they now feel pressure to do the same whether or not they believe they can afford greater labor costs.Wall Street has been more forgiving. It is eagerly awaiting McDonald’s all-day breakfast, which is being tested in some markets. Breakfast has become the best part of the day for McDonald’s, despite an increase in competition. “We’re trying to prove out the consumer business case and consumer demand for all-day breakfast,” Mr. Easterbrook said.Advertisement