AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeWomen have represented a majority of college graduates for over 30 years and outperform men at all ages, in all subjects. They remain, however, significantly underrepresented at the top of corporations and the highest paid professions, as well as within the ranks of elected officials. The persistence of this incongruity suggests that our economy and society have been leaving a lot of value on the table for a long time.This simple observation animated Sheryl Sandberg’s 2013 best seller, “Lean In: Women, Work and the Will to Lead” (Knopf). Although the observation is simple, Ms. Sandberg made clear that the solutions were not and that the optimal strategies for individual women would vary based on their positions and their desires. Ms. Sandberg also acknowledged that parts of the book were “most relevant to women fortunate enough to have choices” rather than those “struggling to make ends meet.”The real achievement of “Lean In,” however, is its success in synthesizing, in an accessible and actionable way, a wide swath of social science research touching on multiple distinct impediments to progress for women. Its practical recommendations are addressed to employers, policy makers and life partners as much as to women themselves.Shortly before the publication of “Lean In,” Anne-Marie Slaughter wrote an article for The Atlantic called “Why Women Still Can’t Have it All” that became one of the magazine’s most read. In her telling, many of the most significant obstacles to progress generally highlighted by Ms. Sandberg were not major issues for Ms. Slaughter personally.Her essay was prompted by her decision to return to work at Princeton from a two-year stint at the State Department – a choice many academics have made, Ms. Slaughter points out, to avoid losing tenure. She notes that her husband, who had remained behind with the children in New Jersey, willingly took on the majority of care responsibilities, and she insists that Hillary Rodham Clinton was a sensitive and accommodating boss. And Ms. Slaughter leaves no doubt that she has no problem “leaning in.”What instead infuriated Ms. Slaughter – she describes it as triggering a “blind fury” – were the judgmental and patronizing reactions she confronted on her departure from Washington. These apparently treated her choice as not only “sad or unfortunate” but suggested that her parenting or commitment to her profession “were somehow substandard.”Ms. Slaughter has turned The Atlantic article into a book: “Unfinished Business: Women Men Work Family” (Random House). If Ms. Sandberg was primarily focused on actions, Ms. Slaughter is still preoccupied with attitudes.Although there are plenty of policy recommendations, mostly seen before elsewhere, the emphasis is on changing minds, not laws. An entire chapter, for instance, is devoted to the way we talk, which includes a discussion of whether the terms “juggling” and “balance” are offensive and concludes with Ms. Slaughter’s preference for the awkward phrase “work/life fit.” Ms. Slaughter describes the book’s ambition as making us “come together as women and men” to “change how we think, how we talk, how we plan and work and vote.”“Unfinished Business” retains the form and tone of the shorter original but adds extensive excerpts from the “thousands of readers” who Ms. Slaughter says either wrote her directly or otherwise commented on the article. In addition, Ms. Slaughter went on a “listening tour,” giving hundreds of speeches she describes as a form of “call and response research.”Given its genesis and aspirations, “Unfinished Business” is surprisingly condescending toward other women’s views and efforts. Ms. Slaughter’s treatment of Ms. Sandberg, whose perspective is largely complementary to Ms. Slaughter’s, is indicative.Ms. Slaughter complains that “Lean In” tells women “that the fate of their careers and families is within their control,” which is ”just not true.” The difficulty with the critique is that “Lean In” doesn’t make this claim in the first place. Ms. Slaughter also understates the influence of Ms. Sandberg’s book, which has led many chief executives and husbands (including me) I have encountered to reconsider the extent to which they have been part of the problem.The first third of Ms. Slaughter’s book is devoted to demolishing this and other straw men (or women as the case may be). In place of these “half truths” thus vanquished, she suggests that she alone has seen the “whole truth.” Ms. Slaughter goes on to forgive Ms. Sandberg her youth and inexperience: “I would have written a very similar book to ‘Lean In' at 43.”Ms. Slaughter, who is in her mid-50s, reserves her greatest condescension for those in their 60s and 70s. It is this “increasingly judgmental” group, in her view, that is most responsible for perpetuating false assumptions about the ease and importance of “having it all.”For an author whose expertise is international relations, the lack of diplomacy in “Unfinished Business” feels strange and gratuitous. Where Ms. Slaughter has opportunity to make common cause, she goes out of her way to create division.Even when promoting well-worn and sensible policy ideas on topics like flexible work schedules and valuing care work, Ms. Slaughter manages to position herself as an innovator. This is likely to grate on those who have spent decades in the trenches working to make these reforms a reality. Establishing “having it all” as a target in the first place – a phrase about which she now manages to express “ambivalence”– seemed intended to generate artificial conflict.After all, as Ms. Sandberg pointed out in her book, without mentioning Ms. Slaughter, “the very concept … flies in the face of the basic laws of economics and common sense.”Toward the end of “Lean In,” Ms. Sandberg reviewed the social psychology literature around the tendency of women themselves in certain environments to perpetuate gender bias and recommended some ways to avoid falling into this trap. The institutional tendency to use minor disagreements among women as an excuse to do nothing, she argues, requires women to choose their battles carefully.“We should resolve our differences quickly, and when we disagree, stay focused on our shared goals. This is not a plea for less debate, but for more constructive debate,” Ms. Sandberg wrote. Based on Ms. Slaughter’s book, it would seem that persuading other powerful women to respond positively to Ms. Sandberg’s appeal is another piece of unfinished business.Jonathan A. Knee is a professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.OpinionAnne-Marie SlaughterAdvertisement