AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — General Motors reported on Thursday that its second-quarter earnings were five times as large as a year ago, despite charges taken for currency fluctuations and asset write-downs in foreign markets.G.M., the nation’s largest automaker, said it earned $1.12 billion during the quarter, compared with $190 million in the same period in 2014. The performance exceeded analysts’ expectations and underscored the continuing strength of the automaker’s core North American operations.Wall Street welcomed the result, pushing G.M. stock up about 4 percent to close at $31.50.The company took charges of $1.11 billion during the quarter, including about $600 million for a currency devaluation in Venezuela and about $400 million for asset impairments in Thailand and other international operations.In the second quarter of 2014, G.M. recorded special charges of $1.28 billion, primarily to pay for vehicle recalls, including the recall of millions of small cars with defective ignition switches tied to at least 124 deaths.Mary T. Barra, G.M.’s chief executive, said the strong earnings in this year’s second quarter reflected the company’s continued success in the United States market.G.M. also managed to earn a pretax profit in China, despite weaker economic conditions there. The company narrowed its losses in Europe, but did worse in South America than in the same period in 2014.“The first two quarters of the year were strong as we fully capitalized on a robust North American industry and maintained our strength in China, despite the challenging conditions in that market,” Ms. Barra said.G.M. said it had a pretax profit of $2.78 billion in North America, compared with $1.39 billion in the second quarter of last year.Its international division, which includes China, reported a pretax profit of $349 million, up from $315 million in the same period of 2014.In Europe, G.M. lost $45 million during the quarter, which was an improvement from a $305 million loss in the region last year. It reported a pretax loss of $144 million in South America, compared with an $81 million loss during the same period in 2014.Over all, G.M.’s global revenue for the quarter was $38.2 billion, down from $39.6 billion in the second quarter of 2014. Company officials attributed the drop to the negative impact of foreign currency changes.Industry analysts predict that G.M. could be facing pressure on profits in China, where vehicle sales are falling.But the company’s chief financial officer, Chuck Stevens, expressed confidence that G.M. could maintain its profit margins in both North America and China, its two largest markets. “We expect continued strong performance in these key markets,” Mr. Stevens said.Mr. Stevens said G.M. expected its financial performance in the second half of this year to be better than in the first six months.He said the company would try to reduce material costs in China to balance slower sales. But G.M. will not cut back on investments in new products for the Chinese market.“We are going to continue to invest,” he told reporters at company headquarters. “Over the next 10 to 15 years that market is going to be a 35 million-unit industry.”Besides the charges taken for international operations, G.M. also took a charge of $75 million during the quarter to bolster its compensation program for victims of faulty ignition switches.With the charge, G.M. has now set aside $625 million to fund the program, which has been administered by the compensation expert Kenneth R. Feinberg. Mr. Feinberg expects to conclude his evaluation of claims this summer.The company still faces numerous investigations related to the long-delayed recall of cars with defective switches. The Justice Department is expected to seek criminal charges against the company, and 50 state attorneys general are also investigating.On Thursday, G.M. said in a regulatory filing that the Federal Trade Commission notified it of an investigation related to “certified pre-owned vehicle advertising where dealers had certified vehicles allegedly needing recall repairs.”Last year, G.M. recalled more than 30 million vehicles worldwide, including 2.6 million small cars equipped with defective ignitions that can cause the vehicles to suddenly lose engine power and disable airbags.Advertisement