By EMILY STEELJULY 23, 2015
Dinosaurs, fast cars and an a cappella singing group helped propel a 7.3 percent rise in earnings at Comcast during the second quarter as the media conglomerate benefited from the release of a blockbuster slate of films in its entertainment division.Total revenue increased 11.3 percent to $18.7 billion during the quarter compared with the same period last year, the company said on Thursday. In its filmed entertainment group, second-quarter revenue surged 92.7 percent to $2.3 billion, driven by the box-office success of movies like “Jurassic World,” “Furious 7” and “Pitch Perfect 2.”Net income attributable to Comcast was $2.1 billion for the quarter, up 7.3 percent from the same period last year.The results show how Comcast, the country’s largest cable operator, is focusing on its businesses and moving on after it abandoned its $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable in April because of intense regulatory scrutiny. Costs related to the deal came to $79 million during the second quarter. That brings the total costs related to the transaction to $415 million since the deal was announced in February 2014.Advertisement“A quarter ago, we mused that in the go-go world of cable M&A, and in the wake of its own thwarted merger with Time Warner Cable, Comcast might just need a new story,” Craig Moffett, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research, said in a note. “Well, they seem to have found one. It has dinosaurs and foul-mouthed teddy bears, furious car crashes, train wrecks and a bunch of little yellow Minions in it. It turns out it’s a really, really good story.”Mr. Moffett’s comments were in reference to the slate of movies out of Comcast’s film group, including “Jurassic World,” “Ted 2” and “Minions.”AdvertisementEven though Comcast stepped away from the megamerger with Time Warner, a wave of deal activity continues to sweep across the industry, and is likely to add pressure to the company’s dominant position in the media landscape.Regulators are expected to approve AT&T’s $48.5 billion takeover of DirecTV with conditions. That deal would create the country’s largest television distributor, with about 26 million subscribers, surpassing Comcast, the current leader.Regulators also are scrutinizing a pair of deals by Charter Communications totaling $67.1 billion that, if approved, would create a new force in the country’s video and broadband market.Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, said in a conference call on Thursday that in the face of new competitive pressure, the company was committed to following its road map and improving its offerings and customer service.“It’s a competitive market as we’ve always said, and we’re learning to compete better all the time,” Mr. Roberts said. “We’re very prepared to compete in the future.”The Comcast results point to the continued transformation of the media business, where broadband now stands as an important gateway to entertainment and information. A milestone occurred during the second quarter at Comcast, where the number of people who subscribe to the company’s high-speed Internet service surpassed its total cable TV subscribers for the first time. Comcast now counts 22.5 million high-speed Internet subscribers and 22.3 million video subscribers.AdvertisementTo that end, Comcast recently announced a new service called Stream that offers a bundle of broadcast networks and the premium channel HBO for an extra $15 a month added to a Comcast Internet subscription. Viewers will have access to live and on-demand programming on computers and mobile devices.Mr. Roberts called the new service an entry platform, upon which the company was hoping to “upsell” customers to other video services.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s part of the whole panoply of having a range of offerings, which is very, very different from where we were a few years ago,” he said.During the quarter, revenue in Comcast’s cable group increased 6.3 percent to $11.7 billion. The company lost 69,000 video subscribers for the quarter, an improvement from the same period last year, when the company lost 144,000. At the same time, it gained 180,000 high-speed Internet subscribers.Revenue in the NBCUniversal entertainment group at Comcast increased 20.2 percent during the quarter to $7.2 billion. In addition to the growth in the filmed entertainment group, revenue in the theme parks division climbed 25.7 percent to $773 million.Offsetting those gains was lackluster performance at the NBCUniversal cable and broadcast television units. Cable network revenue declined 1 percent to $2.5 billion, and broadcast revenue was essentially flat at $1.8 billion.A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Comcast Results Are Buoyed by Strength in Films .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.