By CHAD BRAYJULY 23, 2015
The results bolstered the position of Tidjane Thiam, the new Credit Suisse chief executive, as he prepares to put his stamp on the Swiss bank.LONDON —  The Swiss bank Credit Suisse said on Thursday that it had returned to profit in the second quarter as it benefited from stronger results in the Asia-Pacific region, despite weakness in its investment bank.Credit Suisse, based in Zurich, reported earnings of 1.05 billion Swiss francs, or about $1.09 billion. That compared with a loss of 700 million francs in the period a year earlier, when earnings were hurt by a litigation charge of 1.6 billion francs related to the settlement of a tax evasion case in the United States.The results handily beat analyst estimates of a profit of 783 million francs in the second quarter, according to a survey by Reuters. Investors cheered the news and shares of Credit Suisse closed up 6.2 percent in Zurich.Revenue rose 8 percent to 6.94 billion francs, from 6.43 billion francs. Operating expenses plummeted 23 percent to 5.24 billion francs.AdvertisementThe results bolstered the position of Tidjane Thiam, who became Credit Suisse’s chief executive earlier this month, as he prepares to put his stamp on the company and move away from past issues.AdvertisementThe bank agreed in May 2014 to plead guilty to one count of conspiring to aid tax evasion and to pay $2.6 billion in penalties for helping Americans hide their money in Swiss accounts.Mr. Thiam announced on Thursday that the bank had begun an “in-depth strategic review” of its operations and would look to make its portfolio of businesses “less capital-intensive.”After his hiring, analysts had suggested that he might further increase the company’s emphasis on its wealth management operations, perhaps through the acquisition of an asset manager.“Before the end of the year, we will set out a strategy and business model that will allow us to achieve profitable and sustainable growth,” Mr. Thiam said in a news release.Mr. Thiam, the former chief executive at the British insurer Prudential, took the top job at Credit Suisse on July 1, succeeding Brady W. Dougan, an American who had led the Swiss bank since before the financial crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dougan announced plans to step down in March in the face of several recent stumbles at the bank, including the tax settlement last year in the United States. He also had been criticized for not shrinking the investment bank as aggressively as some of the bank’s rivals, like UBS.The investment bank reported a pretax profit of 615 million francs in the second quarter, down more than 18 percent from the same period a year earlier.In a conference call with analysts on Thursday, Mr. Thiam said that it was early in the review, but that he would look to invest more resources in business lines that are “comfortably above the cost of capital through an economic cycle.”AdvertisementThat would likely include allocating more capital to the wealth management business, while being “more selective” in the investment bank, Mr. Thiam said.Mr. Thiam declined to address a report in The Financial Times on Wednesday that Credit Suisse had spoken to large investors about potentially pursuing an acquisition to expand its asset management business.Credit Suisse said that equity sales and trading were strong in the quarter, driven primarily by increased activity in the Asia-Pacific region.Momentum in the region, as well as in Credit Suisse’s wealth management and equities businesses, has continued into the third quarter, the bank said, though the fixed-income environment has remained weak.Mr. Thiam said that Asia would continue to be an important driver for Credit Suisse, given its growth potential. The region accounts for 70 percent of the world’s population, and there are “huge” opportunities to attract business from ultra high-net-worth and high-net-worth clients there, he said.A company that doesn’t provide service to 70 percent of the world’s population, Mr. Thiam said, “is on a trip to nowhere.”A version of this article appears in print on July 24, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Credit Suisse Chief Looks to Asia and Wealth Unit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.