AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxIngrid Sischy, a writer, editor and cultural critic known for her long, authoritative associations with Interview magazine, The New Yorker and Vanity Fair, died on Friday in Manhattan. She was 63.Her death, at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, was from breast cancer, a friend, Ed Filipowski, said.For nearly 40 years, Ms. Sischy (pronounced SEE-shee) was an influential chronicler of the cultural orbit — in particular the avant-garde orbit — of New York, the country and the world. A fixture at fashion shows and gallery openings around the globe, she knew seemingly everyone on the cutting edge of creative life and was considered a formidable handicapper of talent.Ms. Sischy counted among her friends the fashion designer Gianni Versace, who was murdered in 1997; she served, with her spouse, Sandra Brant, as godmother to the infant son of Elton John and his husband, David Furnish.At her death Ms. Sischy was a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, a post she had held for nearly two decades. With Ms. Brant, she also shared the title international editor of Condé Nast, contributing to German Vogue and to Vanity Fair’s French, Spanish and Italian editions.In 2011, The Evening Standard of London described Ms. Sischy and Ms. Brant as “the very model of a modern media couple, a two-woman magazine writing-editing-publishing phenomenon,” adding, “They occupy a cultural nexus where art, fashion, celebrity and money intersect.”In a tribute to Ms. Sischy published on Vanity Fair’s website on Friday, the magazine’s editor, Graydon Carter, wrote: “She could write about anything, but what interested her most were art and fashion, and she traversed those two hothouses like a bemused empress. She had a crisp mind and an almost uncanny focus when she sat down to write. She was a fun, conspiratorial gossip, but never with malice or envy — the working tools of so many gossips.”Ms. Sischy first came to wide public attention in 1979, when, at 27, she was named the editor of Artforum, a perch she occupied until 1988. There, she helped secure the prominence of emerging young artists — and daring older ones — including Joseph Beuys, Cindy Sherman, Jean-Michel Basquiat and Julian Schnabel.Ms. Sischy also broadened Artforum’s purview to encompass the place where visual art and couture intersect — a place she esteemed. For the February 1982 issue, for instance, she featured on the cover an image formerly thought to be the sole province of fashion: a model clad in a rattan bodice by the Japanese designer Issey Miyake. Her decision to do so provoked wide public comment pro and con.“The idea that an art magazine could be an object that could do something nothing else could do: That was what drove us,” Ms. Sischy, recalling her tenure there, said in an interview with Artforum in 2012. “By making a magazine into a kind of object that gave you primary art, that gave you sound — well, I’m nervous to say it because I don’t want it to sound sentimental, but it was a real love letter to what an art magazine is.”In bestowing the title on a long profile of Ms. Sischy, by Janet Malcolm, published over two consecutive weeks in October 1986, The New Yorker called her “A Girl of the Zeitgeist.”Ms. Sischy soon became a regular contributor to The New Yorker herself, writing from 1988 to 1996 on photography and fashion. Her work there included articles about the Corcoran Gallery of Art’s hotly debated decision, in 1989, to cancel a retrospective of stark, often unsettling work by the gay photographer Robert Mapplethorpe. She also wrote early profiles of the designers Miuccia Prada, Alexander McQueen and Azzedine Alaïa.In 1990, Ms. Sischy was named the editor in chief of Interview, which had been founded in 1969 by Andy Warhol and John Wilcock. At the magazine, where she remained until 2008, she began her long professional and personal association with Ms. Brant, its president and publisher.During her years there, Ms. Sischy “became the public face of Interview,” The New York Times wrote in 2008, as she helped expand the magazine’s circulation and advertising sales.For Vanity Fair, which she joined in 1997, Ms. Sischy wrote cover articles about celebrities including Madonna, Nicole Kidman and Kristen Stewart, as well as long profiles of Mr. McQueen and the artists Keith Haring and Jeff Koons.One of her most talked-about articles for Vanity Fair was a long profile of the designer John Galliano that appeared in the July 2013 issue. In 2011, Mr. Galliano had been dismissed by the House of Dior as its lead designer after a video of him loosing a torrent of anti-Semitic invective became public.Ms. Sischy, who was Jewish, spent a year helping to persuade Mr. Galliano to sit for an interview. The resulting article, “Galliano in the Wilderness,” was, Mr. Carter wrote on Friday, “a marvel of empathy and disclosure.”In it, Ms. Sischy recounted not only Mr. Galliano’s addiction to pills and alcohol, but also, in a raw, surprising disclosure toward the end, the similar struggles of her brother Mark.“Unlike Galliano, he did not come through to the other side, and died an alcoholic,” Ms. Sischy wrote. “During that Paris fashion season two years ago, on March 6, 2011, the day of the Galliano fall/winter women’s ready-to-wear show, I couldn’t be there because I had flown to Edinburgh to be at the stone-setting for my brother’s grave.”Ingrid Barbara Sischy was born in Johannesburg on March 3, 1952. Her father, Benjamin, was a noted radiation oncologist; her mother, Claire, was a speech therapist. Public opponents of apartheid, the family fled South Africa in 1961 after receiving a tip that Mrs. Sischy was about to be arrested. They lived for some years in Edinburgh and moved to Rochester when Ingrid was a teenager.After earning a bachelor’s degree from Sarah Lawrence College in 1973, Ms. Sischy worked as an intern under the eminent photography curator John Szarkowski at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.She had homes in Greenwich Village and in Montauk, on Long Island. Besides Ms. Brant, her partner of a quarter-century, whom she married a few weeks ago, survivors include her mother and a brother, David.In an interview with Women’s Wear Daily in 2013, Ms. Sischy described her modus operandi in interviewing Mr. Galliano.“When you begin a story, your instinct leads you into the person,” she said. “You don’t have any preset plans. It’s when you’re there and fully present that the story writes itself.”She added: “It’s a good red flag when someone isn’t genuine, your stomach kind of tells you. My stomach was saying, ‘This is the real thing.’ ”Advertisement