AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy David ZaringCarmen M. Segarra, a former bank examiner, made waves when she claimed that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had gone soft in its supervision of Goldman Sachs.She secretly recorded meetings between regulators and the bank to try to prove it. The resulting uproar prompted hearings in the Senate and widespread media coverage. She arguably influenced the policy debate more than you would think any low-level, briefly employed bank examiner ever could.Ms. Segarra also filed a lawsuit, arguing that after raising concerns about a transaction between Goldman Sachs and Banco Santander, and about whether Goldman Sachs had a conflict-of-interest code in place, she was fired by the New York Fed. She filed the claim under the bank whistle-blower statute.The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the suit, a decision that was affirmed last month by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Neither court offered very persuasive reasons for doing so.Financial whistle-blowers are enjoying something of a moment, with the Securities and Exchange Commission’s new program paying out big rewards, and Congress seemingly happy to pass laws protecting them. Ms. Segarra may consider herself an unlucky outlier in this trend.The bank whistle-blower statute was part of the changes passed after the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, when hundreds of financial institutions had to be “resolved” – that’s bank terminology for taken through a quick bankruptcy – by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The statute covers a “person who is performing, directly or indirectly, any function or service on behalf” of the F.D.I.C. The appeals court said that it was “frankly silly” to suggest that Fed employees were working for the F.D.I.C.But I don’t think it is frankly silly. The purpose of the statute is to protect whistle-blowers who work at, among other places, Federal Reserve banks who bring information to light about mismanagement in a way that performs a service to the F.D.I.C. Moreover, the statute is supposed to be broadly construed.Goldman Sachs is a bank holding company, but it does not have depositors.Nonetheless, the F.D.I.C. is a full voting member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which has designated Goldman a systemically important financial institution, subject to heightened supervision and its particular attention. Moreover, the F.D.I.C. would play a role in resolving Goldman, if it came to that, under the Dodd-Frank law’s overhaul of the government’s resolution powers.So I do think that supervising Goldman counts as performing a service to the F.D.I.C.The other main argument against Ms. Segarra’s case is that her concerns about Goldman’s conflict-of-interest policy would mean that, at most, the bank would be ignoring a recommendation from supervisors that banks have elaborate versions of these in place.Ignoring a recommendation is not the same thing as a bank violating the law, and the trial court relied on this distinction. But banking regulation is generally informal – it mostly consists of recommendations that banks must, in fact, take seriously. It isn’t clear to me that Congress didn’t want whistle-blowers to police this sort of supervision.There may be less to Ms. Segarra’s case than meets the eye (I’m not sure if she named the right defendants, but one of them is the New York Fed, and I don’t know about her other legal claims), but you wouldn’t know it from the appelate court’s decision, which did not have the support of all three judges. One issued a terse, “I concur in the result.”Courts do not like to second-guess bank supervisors. They suspect, with reason, that they may not be good at it. And one of Ms. Segarra’s claims – she has said that Goldman Sachs did not have a conflict-of-interest policy at all – must have struck the judges as implausible, to say nothing of only marginally related to the stability of the bank, which is what the F.D.I.C. cares about.The courts must also worry about construing the whistle-blower statute too capaciously. No one wants every bank examiner reporting, quitting and suing, in the hopes of a payout of millions for doing their job – a phenomenon that may be a concern, given the reports of corporate compliance officers benefiting from the S.E.C.’s whistle-blower program.But Ms. Segarra was entitled to a more careful hearing from the courts.David Zaring is associate professor of legal studies at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.Advertisement