By EMILY STEELJULY 24, 2015
Federal regulators have approved AT&T’s $48.5 billion takeover of the satellite company DirecTV, creating a major new force in the communications industry.The Federal Communications Commission announced its approval of the acquisition on Friday, attaching conditions intended to address the potential harms of the merger. Earlier this week, the Justice Department announced that it would not challenge the acquisition. The regulators were reviewing whether the deal would serve the public interest or stifle competition.The combination of AT&T, one of the country’s largest telephone and Internet providers, with DirecTV, the country’s largest satellite provider, is the biggest media merger this year and will create the country’s largest television distributor with about 26 million subscribers, surpassing Comcast, the current leader.The deal comes during a period of intense merger activity in the media sector, when some of the country’s largest cable, satellite and telecom companies are seeking to get even larger as they face new forms of digital disruption and adapt to changing viewer habits.AdvertisementOther mergers waiting in the wings for regulatory approval include Charter Communication’s proposed acquisition of Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks — deals that together total $67.1 billion. The European telecommunications company Altice has proposed a $9.1 billion deal that would give it a controlling stake in Suddenlink Communications, a regional cable provider. And Verizon Communications recently closed a $4.4 billion deal for AOL.AdvertisementFriday’s regulatory green light left some industry observers more optimistic about the potential for future deals. Many had been wary after Comcast’s proposed $45 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable collapsed under regulatory pressure.“The fact that this deal closed with probably pretty reasonable conditions gives a little bit more confidence that Charter and Time Warner Cable would close, and maybe down the road opens the door for other deals,” said Amy Yong, a media analyst with Macquarie Group.Some public interest groups, though, were disappointed. “I thought after the Comcast-Time Warner Cable deal that maybe the commission was going to travel down a little different road in consolidation and begin to say no to some of these deals,” said Michael Copps, a former Democratic member of the F.C.C. and a special adviser to the Common Cause public interest group.Approval came with a number of conditions, including some aimed at introducing more competition into the broadband Internet market, an issue emphasized by Tom Wheeler, the F.C.C. commissioner, in comments earlier this week.The commission is requiring AT&T to expand its high-speed, fiber-optic broadband Internet service to 12.5 million customer locations and eligible schools and libraries. That’s about 10 times its current size. The F.C.C. said this addresses the concern that the merger would eliminate one choice for television service in the areas where AT&T and DirecTV previously competed. By expanding Internet service, the commission said, consumers will have more options to use services that rely on broadband to deliver video, such as Netflix, Amazon and Hulu.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.AT&T also will be required to offer broadband services to people with low incomes at discounted rates.Mr. Copps questioned whether the conditions were sufficient, saying that the commission did not have a good track record in making sure that they are fulfilled. “I have seen so many lofty merger commitments before and seen the companies find loopholes in them and weasel their way out of them,” Mr. Copps said.But one of the commissioners, Mignon L. Clyburn, defended the broadband rationale. Ms. Clyburn noted that while she thought the public interest benefits were significant, she had concerns about the deal’s impact on smaller cable companies and independent programmers. To that end, she asked the F.C.C. chairman to start a proceeding to look at the “challenges and barriers to independent and diverse programming.”AdvertisementAnother concern about the deal is that AT&T is the only major Internet service provider whose customers face “data caps” for broadband service. The merger could increase the incentive of AT&T to deploy such usage-based pricing to limit access to online video in favor of its own traditional television service. As a condition of the deal, regulators forbade AT&T from deploying discriminatory practices that would disadvantage online video services.“What they are basically saying is you have to treat everybody like you treat yourself, and so I think that is probably the most important protection against anticompetitive practices,” said Gene Kimmelman, the chief executive of Public Knowledge, a consumer advocacy group, and a former antitrust official at the Justice Department.The company also will be required to submit its so-called interconnection agreements for review by the F.C.C. Those agreements allow a company like Netflix to pay a fee to a distributor, like Comcast or AT&T, for better service, when they create a lot of traffic for the network. The commission said that the condition recognized the importance of those agreements to online video service and said that it would monitor them to make sure that AT&T would not deny or impede access to its networks in anticompetitive ways.The conditions remain in effect for four years after the merger closes. AT&T also is required to retain an internal compliance officer and an independent, external compliance officer to make sure that the company abides by the deal conditions.“We’ll now be able to meet consumers’ future entertainment preferences, whether they want traditional TV service with premier programming, their favorite content on a mobile device, or video streamed over the Internet to any screen,” Randall Stephenson, chairman and chief executive of AT&T, said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: F.C.C. Clears Way for AT&T; and DirecTV to Merge, With Conditions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.