By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJULY 24, 2015
Staff economists at the Federal Reserve are more pessimistic about the nation’s economic prospects than the senior Fed officials who set monetary policy, according to an internal document the central bank mistakenly put online.The release of the staff economic forecast — presented to officials at the Fed’s June policy meeting but scheduled to remain confidential until 2021 — is at least the fourth time in recent years that the Fed has sprung an embarrassing leak.Representative Jeb Hensarling, the Texas Republican who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, said it showed that the Fed needed to improve the way that it safeguarded confidential information. Mr. Hensarling’s committee is investigating a 2012 leak of Fed information to a private firm.“It regrettably appears once again that proper internal controls are not in place to safeguard confidential Federal Reserve information,” he said in a statement.AdvertisementThe Fed said on Friday that the forecast went online in late June in a form that was readable only with special computer software. It said a staff member noticed the mistake earlier this week, and that it was now publicizing the problem in part to level the playing field by making the information available to the general public.AdvertisementIn a further twist, the Fed said Friday evening that some of the information it published inadvertently in June — and republished intentionally Friday morning — was inaccurate. It released a second version which it said accurately reflected the contents of the staff forecast presented to officials at the June meeting.The Fed also said that it had asked its inspector general to investigate.“We have already implemented procedures to prevent an inadvertent posting of these materials,” a Fed spokeswoman said in a statement. The Fed in recent years has sought to provide more information about its decision-making. Last year it published the “FRB/US” model — basically a set of equations — that its staff uses to forecast economic activity, allowing anyone with sufficient expertise to produce their own forecasts using the Fed’s tools.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Fed said on Friday that the most recent update, published June 29, inadvertently included the June round of staff forecasts.The Fed published the minutes of its June meeting on July 8, in keeping with its normal procedures, including a summary of the staff forecast.The minutes said the staff moved its forecast for 2015 growth “a little lower.” The detailed data showed the staff predicted the economy would expand by 1.55 percent in 2015.The minutes also described the staff forecast as predicting that inflation will return to a 2 percent annual pace by 2018. The staff actually forecast that inflation would average 1.92 percent in 2018, and that it would not reach the Fed’s 2 percent target in the next five years, rising to 1.97 in 2020.Fed officials serving on the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee have said that they plan to raise interest rates later this year, and investors are eager for information about the exact timing. Analysts cautioned that the new disclosures reflected the views of staff members, and that the forecasts of Fed officials, published in June, were more optimistic.A version of this article appears in print on July 25, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Leaked Fed Staff Forecast Reflects Gloomier Expectations for U.S. Economy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.