AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Chad BrayTwo more of the nation’s biggest health insurers are moving to merge, raising the possibility of a potential fight with antitrust regulators.Anthem said on Friday that it had agreed to buy Cigna for $48.3 billion, finally striking a deal after a nearly yearlong pursuit. Buying its rival, Anthem intends to create a new giant in the sector, gaining greater scale and considerably cutting costs. But the proposed transaction, coming three weeks after Aetna said it would to buy Humana for $37 billion, could shrink the number of major companies in the health insurance industry from five to just three. And that could mean fewer options and higher rates for consumers and the employers that provide health insurance. The question now is whether government officials will allow that level of consolidation to pass. The United States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have become more assertive about challenging merger combinations in recent years, analysts and industry experts have noted. “Economic evidence shows that with fewer competitors, insurance premiums tend to be higher,” said Thomas L. Greaney, an expert on health and antitrust law at Saint Louis University. “Less competition among insurers produces higher prices for consumers.”The Obama administration has not always approved of consolidations that create industry behemoths. For example, after much consumer and industry outcry, the long-planned $45 billion merger of Comcast and Time Warner Cable was called off after regulators indicated they would block the deal.Health insurers, however, may be viewed differently. The industry players have been eager to combine, hoping to take advantage of growing opportunities, particularly with the recent government push to provide health insurance to those who have not traditionally had it. Insurers’ operations have been bolstered by the Obama administration’s health care overhaul, which has increased their revenue, even as many start-ups have entered the sector. The Obama administration says that 16 million uninsured people have gained coverage since major provisions of the Affordable Care Act took effect several years ago. The recent drive for deals among insurers is also spurred on by the Supreme Court upholding the portion of the Affordable Care Act that subsidizes consumers who buy policies through the government’s online marketplace. The act and its introduction of health insurance exchanges, however, have also introduced greater transparency in pricing, weighing down profit margins. Less generous funding of government plans has added additional pressure.These reasons have led the top health insurers to scramble for partners to merge with in order to cut costs. Their sense of urgency also stems from concerns that government regulators will at some point block potential combinations as anticompetitive. Anthem began pursuing Cigna last August, negotiating privately for months. But the talks hit a roadblock over a number of issues like who would run the combined company, and Anthem took its campaign public last month to put additional pressure on its target.Together, Anthem, which runs Blue Cross plans in 14 states, and Cigna, which offers insurance plans through employers, would have around $115 billion in revenue. Cigna also has 24 million behavioral health customers, nearly 14 million dental care members, eight million pharmacy benefit plan members and 1.5 million Medicare Part D pharmacy customers.The deal, by Anthem’s estimate, will lead to nearly $2 billion in annual cost savings. “We believe that this transaction will allow us to enhance our competitive position and be better positioned to apply the insights and access of a broad network and dedicated local presence to the health care challenges of the increasingly diverse markets, membership and communities we serve,” Joseph R. Swedish, Anthem’s chief executive, said in a news release.Unlike Cigna, Anthem had been a major presence on the public insurance marketplace created by the federal health care law.Regulators on the federal and state levels are likely to scrutinize how the combination of Anthem and Cigna will affect local markets and whether any proposed divestitures will be enough to dilute the market power of the remaining firms.“These mergers should be challenged by the Justice Department,” said David A. Balto, a former policy director of the Federal Trade Commission who has publicly opposed such deals. “To go and approve these mergers would be to effectively reverse some of the gains of the Affordable Care Act.”Some doctors fear that the combination of Anthem and Cigna will put them at a disadvantage in negotiations over payment and coverage for the services that they provide. “The lack of a competitive health insurance market allows the few remaining companies to exploit their market power, dictate premium increases and pursue corporate policies that are contrary to patient interests,” said Dr. Steven J. Stack, the president of the American Medical Association. Not all share that worry. Peter V. Lee, the executive director of California’s health benefit exchange, said the mergers of health plans could counterbalance the growing power of health care providers.“I am far more concerned about the consolidation of hospital and physician groups than the consolidation of health plans,” Mr. Lee said.Anthem and Cigna officials say that they believe they can meet the demands of government officials.“Quite frankly, from a governmental perspective, we think we will continue to deliver, if not accelerate, best-in-class solutions for Medicare, Medicaid and the dual-eligible population,” Mr. Swedish of Anthem told analysts in a conference call on Friday. “I think that will stand on its own merit and be a significant uplift in terms of how regulators view us.”Under the terms of the deal, Anthem said it would pay $103.40 a share in cash and 0.5152 of a share in Anthem stock, or $188 a share. That represents a 38.4 percent premium to Cigna’s closing price on May 28, before news of Anthem’s interest emerged. Based on Cigna’s most recent disclosures, the deal would value its equity at $48.3 million. Including the assumption of debt, Anthem said the deal would value Cigna at $54.2 billion.Mr. Swedish is expected to run the combined company, while his counterpart at Cigna, David Cordani, will serve as president and chief operating officer.The transaction is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval. If it passes these and other tests, the deal is projected to close in the second half of 2016.Robert Pear contributed reporting.Advertisement