By ANDREW POLLACKOCT. 27, 2015
The pressure on the medical testing company Theranos intensified Tuesday when the Food and Drug Administration released two reports saying the company had used an unapproved medical device, did not adequately follow up on customer complaints and had various deficiencies in quality control procedures.The reports, resulting from F.D.A. inspections of Theranos facilities, said that the company’s tiny blood collection tube, the “nanotainer,” was a medical device that had not been cleared by the agency but was being shipped in interstate commerce.Theranos said this month that it had temporarily stopped using the nanotainer for all but one test until it could obtain F.D.A. approval. While the company at times has said this was a voluntary move, it does appear from the inspection report that there was explicit pressure from the F.D.A.Theranos has gained wide attention because of its assertion that it can perform numerous medical tests quickly and inexpensively using a tiny sample of blood from a finger prick, rather than tubes of blood drawn from the arm. Its founder and chief executive, Elizabeth Holmes, who dropped out of Stanford and is now a billionaire, has become a Silicon Valley celebrity. The company’s reported valuation was estimated at more than $9 billion.AdvertisementBut recently questions have been raised about how well the company’s testing technology works and how much the company is actually using its own technology, as opposed to standard equipment. On Monday, at a conference hosted by the Cleveland Clinic, which has a partnership with Theranos, Ms. Holmes responded to critics by agreeing to publish data showing its tests are accurate. But she did not offer a specific timetable.“You are currently shipping this uncleared medical device in interstate commerce.”“Complaints involving the possible failure of a device to meet any of its specifications were not reviewed, evaluated and investigated where necessary.”The F.D.A. inspected Theranos’s manufacturing and engineering operations from late August through mid-September. The inspections apparently followed F.D.A. approval of one of the company’s tests, for herpes simplex virus 1, over the summer. The inspections were related to the F.D.A.’s purview over medical devices and did not include the company’s testing laboratories, which are regulated by a different agency. AdvertisementAmong the problems cited in the reports was a specific instance involving the tiny tubes, with inspectors saying that a report about a possible difficulty in clearly seeing the clotting of blood was not recorded or investigated as a complaint.“Complaints involving the possible failure of a device to meet any of its specifications were not reviewed, evaluated and investigated where necessary,” one of the reports said.Theranos said that by their nature, the F.D.A. observations were preliminary. “We believe that we addressed and corrected all the observations at the time of, or within a week of, the inspection and have submitted documents to F.D.A. that say so,” the company said in a statement.The agency released on its website two Form 483 reports, which are routinely issued after inspections. There were 14 problems, or “observations,” described in the two reports combined.Both inspection reports are heavily redacted, making them difficult to interpret. The observations in general are about gaps in the company’s quality assurance procedures and documentation, as opposed to specific problems with machinery and tests.“These documents were provided as evidence of design validation conducted in 2014; however, they were drafted during this inspection and were not reviewed and approved until 9/10/15.”“Design validation did not ensure the device conforms to defined user needs and intended uses.”The reports noted that Theranos either corrected the problems or promised to correct them, though the inspectors said that they had not confirmed that the corrections had been made.AdvertisementIt is not uncommon for problems to be found during an inspection, and a Form 483 is less serious than a warning letter, which the F.D.A. can send if problems are not corrected.For the 12 months that ended in September 2014, the F.D.A. issued at least 972 such 483 forms to medical device companies. In that year there were 251 instances in which the agency found that a device company lacked adequate procedures for handling customer complaints, one of the observations made for Theranos.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Richard Vincins, vice president for quality assurance at Emergo, a regulatory consultant to device manufacturers, said in an email that the Theranos inspection reports contained common types of “deficiencies we see with medical device manufacturers that have not fully implemented a quality management system” compliant with F.D.A. regulations.One of the reports said the company undertook corrections of its quality management system procedures and records without documenting the investigations into the causes of the problems and actions needed to prevent recurrences. It also said the company had not performed audits of its quality management system.It noted that during the inspection, Theranos was unable to produce documentation that its suppliers met qualifications. Yet the company had purchased supplies used in manufacturing the nanotainers from such vendors, the report said.Another observation was that design validation did not ensure that the nanotainer “conforms to defined user needs and intended uses.” The inspection report indicated the F.D.A. had reservations about the design validation in 2014 as well.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: F.D.A. Reports Add to Pressure on Medical Test Company .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.