By CHAD BRAYJULY 24, 2015
LONDON — Ladbrokes, the British sports betting company, said on Friday that it had agreed to acquire the bulk of its rival Gala Coral Group in an all-share deal.The deal would combine two of Britain’s largest sports betting operations and create a company worth 2.3 billion pounds, or about $3.6 billion, based on market capitalization.The deal is the latest consolidation push in the gambling industry in Europe.It came a week after the online gambling company 888 Holdings of Gibraltar triumphed in a bidding war over GVC, a rival based on the Isle of Man, and agreed to pay £893.3 million for Bwin.Party Digital Entertainment. GVC teamed up with William Hill to acquire Sportingbet, another online gambling company, in 2013.The transaction includes Gala Coral’s retail sports betting operations in Britain and Italy and its online business. The combined company, which would be renamed Ladbrokes Coral, would have net revenue of £2.1 billion.Advertisement“This is a major strategic step for Ladbrokes which firmly accelerates our strategy to improve the customers’ experience and build recreational scale,” Peter Erskine, the Ladbrokes chairman, said in a news release.AdvertisementThe deal is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval.The companies first confirmed they were in talks in June.Under the deal, Ladbrokes would issue new shares to Gala Coral shareholders, representing about 48.25 percent of the combined company.Ladbrokes would acquire the Gala Coral assets from an investment consortium that includes Anchorage Capital Partners, Apollo Global Management, Cerberus Capital Management and Park Square Capital.Gala Coral offers sports betting at more than 1,840 retail locations in Britain and at 870 sites in Italy. It also offers online sports betting and casino games and bingo at 132 locations in Britain. It posted revenue of £1.24 billion in the 2014 fiscal year, with about £290 million coming from its bingo business. The company employs more than 15,000 people.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ladbrokes offers sports betting and casino games online as well as sports betting at more than 2,700 locations in Belgium, Britain, Ireland and Spain. It posted revenue of £1.16 billion in 2014 and has about 13,000 of its 14,000 employees in Britain.“Together, the two businesses will have a strong digital presence with market-leading technology, innovation and access to significant resources to drive continued growth and deliver enhanced returns for all shareholders,” Rob Templeman, the Gala Coral chairman, said in a news release.If the transaction is completed, Jim Mullen, the Ladbrokes chief executive, will serve as chief executive, and John Kelly, the senior independent director of Ladbrokes, will serve as chairman.Carl Leaver, the Gala Coral chief executive, will serve as executive deputy chairman for a 12-month period after the deal and will oversee anticipated cost savings from the transaction.AdvertisementMr. Templeman is expected to serve as a director on the combined company’s board. The combined company’s board would have nine directors.The companies expect to achieve at least £65 million in annual cost savings after the deal.Separately, Ladbrokes said on Friday that it planned to sell 92.3 million shares, or about 9.99 percent of its outstanding shares, before the Gala Coral transaction. The proceeds from the share sale will be used to strengthen the balance sheet of the combined company.As part of the transaction, Ladbrokes will assume about £865 million in debt. The combined company would have debt of about £1.3 billion.Greenhill and UBS advised Ladbrokes, while Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs advised Gala Coral.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.