
Revalued By                     
 DAVID GELLES
 
JULY 25, 2015
Marc Benioff, the co-founder and chief executive of Salesforce, was riding high a couple of years ago. His cloud software company had weathered the financial crisis, revenue was up, and the stock was at a record high.But as Mr. Benioff pondered his company’s evolution, he had cause for concern.“I was in meetings with managers and they were all men,” he said. Silicon Valley’s notorious lack of gender diversity, he realized, was a problem at Salesforce too: “I was really worried that there was something wrong with the company.”Hoping to change the ratio, Mr. Benioff started what he called the Women’s Surge in 2013. The goal was to achieve 100 percent equality for men and women in pay and promotion, and to make sure that at least a third of all participants at any meeting were women. His efforts received a boost when Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, published “Lean In,” bringing more discussions about gender issues to the national stage.As a first step, Mr. Benioff asked managers across the company to identify their top executives, who would then receive additional leadership training. In divisions where mostly men were nominated, Mr. Benioff told the managers to come back with a more diverse list.Advertisement“We started adding more women proactively,” he said.Two of the women to receive promotions were Cindy Robbins, who became head of human resources, and Leyla Seka, who took over the Desk.com division, a customer service unit.Advertisement“We surged. We got bigger jobs; we got promoted,” Ms. Robbins said. “That’s when we started to put our heads together. We wanted to help other women as well.”Up to that point the Women’s Surge had resulted in promotions for some, but Ms. Robbins felt there was more to be done. At one of her regularly scheduled meetings with Mr. Benioff, she brought Ms. Seka along, and the two made a stark claim: Women were probably being paid less than men at Salesforce.Mr. Benioff didn’t believe it.“I didn’t know that there was a pay issue until they came to me and said so,” Mr. Benioff said. “My reaction was, ‘I don’t really think this is right. This isn’t how we operate.’  ”Wanting to see the numbers himself, Mr. Benioff commissioned a review of all 16,000 salaries at Salesforce. “I said ‘Let’s start at the top, one person at a time,’ ” he said.As the data came in, ugly, age-old truths were revealed. It turned out that Ms. Robbins and Ms. Seka were correct: Many women at Salesforce were being paid less than their male counterparts.“In certain positions, people were not being paid at the same level,” Mr. Benioff acknowledged.Now Salesforce is in the process of raising the salaries of underpaid women (and a few men), one at a time.“Many men and women were on par,” said Ms. Robbins, who is overseeing the effort to review and increase salaries. “But some salaries for men and women needed to be adjusted.”AdvertisementCiting employee confidentiality, Salesforce declined to specify which employees received raises or how large the adjustments were.There is still plenty of work to do at Salesforce. Among the company’s top 21 executives, five are women. All seven of the executive officers in the company’s annual proxy statement are men.Of the 11 members of Salesforce’s board, two are women. And across the company, 29 percent of Salesforce employees are women.“We have a ways to go,” Mr. Benioff said. “If we started the company again, we would have a 50-50 ratio among employees, engineers and leaders. But once you get this big, it’s hard.”Throughout Silicon Valley, the gender pay gap is receiving renewed scrutiny. Gender discrimination lawsuits brought by Ellen Pao against the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, and by former female employees at Facebook and Twitter, have kept the issue in the headlines.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And while “Lean In” injected a note of optimism into the debate, encouraging women to negotiate for higher salaries, remarks last year by Microsoft’s chief executive, Satya Nadella, suggested that progress might be slow.“It’s not really about asking for a raise, but knowing and having faith that the system will give you the right raise,” Mr. Nadella said. Not asking for a raise, Mr. Nadella continued, was “good karma.”(In an internal memo, Mr. Nadella apologized for his remarks and said women at Microsoft earned 99.7 percent as much as their male counterparts.)Other big technology firms also say that while there may be a problem, it is not one of their making. “We see no evidence of a gender pay gap at Google,” Roya Soleimani, a Google spokeswoman, said. Verifying such claims is difficult because companies are not required to disclose whether they pay men more than women, or to release salary data. Yet across the national work force, and in the technology industry in particular, the gender pay gap persists.AdvertisementAccording to the Labor Department, men working full time make 28 percent more than women. In Silicon Valley the situation is even worse: Men earn up to 61 percent more than their female peers, according to Joint Venture Silicon Valley, a research group.Such figures make claims by Microsoft and Google fall flat. “You can explain away all of the little things and say we have no problems,” said Linda C. Babcock, an economics professor at Carnegie Mellon University who studies the gender pay gap. “What you can’t explain away are the average numbers.”Not all of the pay gap is a result of gender bias.“Oftentimes what happens is that women bring their lower salaries from job to job,” Ms. Babcock said.And when it comes time to negotiate a salary, studies show that women are less assertive than men. This, Mr. Benioff said, was part of the problem at Salesforce.Salesforce is not alone in trying to address these thorny problems. Facebook says it reviews its compensation data for gender fairness yearly, and makes adjustments when it finds apparent inequity.Smaller technology companies are trying innovative approaches to address the issue. Buffer, a social media start-up, compensates employees based on a formula that takes seniority, experience and location into account, and it makes all its salaries public.SumAll, a marketing start-up, has made its salaries transparent internally. And at Reddit, before Ms. Pao was ousted as chief executive this month, she started a policy of not negotiating salaries when recruiting new employees.None of these efforts are likely to bridge the gender pay gap on their own. “There’s no one solution that’s going to fix things,” Ms. Babcock said.AdvertisementInstead, change is likely to arrive through a combination of more assertive female employees like Ms. Robbins and Ms. Seka, closer monitoring of compensation data (and possibly more transparency), and managers’ efforts to promote both sexes equally.At Salesforce, the Women’s Surge continues, with an added push from Ms. Robbins and Ms. Seka.“This is not a one-time fix. This is part of the work we will be doing annually,” said Ms. Robbins, who now oversees salaries for the company, because of her promotion.And while Salesforce’s leadership is overwhelmingly male, Mr. Benioff is promoting women, hiring more diverse candidates and adjusting salaries.“Companies have to lean in, too,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on July 26, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Making Strides Toward Gender Equality in Silicon Valley .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »