AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with David Politis, chief executive of BetterCloud, a maker of cloud-based software, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles as a boy?A. My first real leadership experience was with taekwondo. I got my black belt when I was 12 and started teaching some of the classes, with people of all ages. I enjoyed it.How have your parents influenced you?My drive really comes from watching my father as I was growing up. He’s an entrepreneur and had a lot of different businesses, including real estate development in Harlem and the South Bronx, and project finance in emerging markets like West Africa. Because he was working so much and traveling so much, he often would take me with him. From the age of 8, I have memories of going to Harlem and going to building sites. He taught a real estate class at N.Y.U., and he would take me to the class when I was 9 years old, give me a pad of paper and say, “Just take notes.”When I got to high school, he was doing work in the former Soviet Union. He took me to Lithuania and Ukraine. In college, he was blind-copying me on almost every email he sent for work. I knew about what he was working on, and I would ask him about his different projects.The thing he would say most often is that you can do anything you put your mind to. Because of some early successes, like getting my black belt at a very young age, I found he was right. I always remind myself that if I have enough discipline and work ethic, I will achieve what I want to achieve.And tell me about your mother.She’s a gynecologist and worked most of her career at Planned Parenthood. She would bring me to work, too, if I had a day off from school, and I would sit at the front desk and check people in for appointments. She had a real connection with her patients. With both my parents, they were the same person at work as they were at home.What did you do after college?After I graduated, I started working at a small start-up with about 15 people. It didn’t do very well. And so six months into my first job out of school, every person in the company was fired, literally, except for me. The two founders, who had made a lot of money with an earlier company, came to me and said, “Dave, there’s about $600,000 left in the bank. Do you want to be C.E.O.?” And I said, “Uh, sure. Why not?”We pivoted the company, and over the next six years we actually built up the business to 150 people or so before we sold it. I learned everything — hiring, firing, sales, marketing, customer support, financing.Tell me about the culture of your current company, which you started four years ago.There are a number of things we do. In terms of transparency, I share everything I can with the whole company. And when we discuss it during company meetings, everyone can submit questions beforehand anonymously, and I’ll answer them. We also send monthly emails that explain what every department is working on that month, and what they achieved the month before.I’m also a big believer in giving people ownership of certain areas in the business. It’s amazing what happens when you do that. People want to make a difference, and when you give them an area of the business that they can affect, the amount of stuff that gets done, and the pride in their work is amazing. People make mistakes, but they learn from them and they continue to improve.How do you hire?My job in the interview process is to really understand the person, what they’re looking to do in their career, and understand if we’re going to be a good fit for them. In many cases, I try to dissuade them from taking the job. I try to be as honest as I can about the bad parts of the job and the high expectations. People have decided against taking jobs after interviewing with me.What are your best questions?I always ask, “What would be your dream job if you could do anything in the world?” My next question is, “Why aren’t you doing that?” Those two questions will tell you a lot about people’s passions and their fears.The other ones I ask are, “What do you love every day when you go to work, and what do you hate?” Sometimes people are interviewing for a job, but they’ll never get to do what they love in that job.What advice do you give to new college grads?The first thing I tell people is, try to go where you can be a big fish in a small pond. Whether it’s a company or a market, go where you can actually have a real impact on the business. That gives you an opportunity to punch above your weight class or take on more responsibility than your résumé warrants. You may get paid less, but the experience and probably the enjoyment are going to be much higher.The second thing is that when you go into a company, especially right out of college, you have a certain energy to be in that first job. You’re ready to work. But I think a lot of people’s excitement can get dulled by colleagues who’ve been in those companies for a while. You get lulled into the cadence that everybody else is in.So I tell people to keep that energy, keep that excitement, keep that passion that you have in the beginning. Keep the work ethic up and don’t get stuck in this regular cadence of “This is what I need to do in order to get my job done.” Do more than that. Just keep pushing that envelope. People will look at you like you’re crazy and you’re making them look bad. But my advice is to just keep pushing through because that’s how you will stand out.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.Advertisement