By LESLIE PICKEROCT. 27, 2015
In expectation of another busy year for health care deals, the Swiss bank Credit Suisse has hired five bankers from Barclays.Credit Suisse said on Tuesday that Punit Mehta had been hired as the co-head of Americas health care from Barclays, where he was a managing director and global head of life sciences.Joining Mr. Mehta are Jordan Bliss, who will be a managing director in the group, and three directors: Thomas Burkly, Connie Chiang and Naeem Merchant. All five are expected to start by the first quarter of 2016, according to a statement from Credit Suisse.The hirings follow an announced major overhaul of the bank. Credit Suisse’s chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, said last week that the firm was in the process of “right-sizing” its investment bank by reducing the capital the business uses.AdvertisementBut in a separate presentation, James L. Amine, the head of investment banking and capital markets, said that Credit Suisse would continue investing in areas that provide the firm with high growth and returns. The latest hirings are part of that plan, in a busy year for mergers and acquisitions and initial public offerings in the sector.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’ve got a real societal need to lower the cost of health care, but not throttle down the innovation,” Stuart Smith, the global head of health care investment banking at Credit Suisse, said in a phone interview. “That dynamism we’re seeing in the M.&A. health care space, and has a long way to run.”For health care bankers, 2015 has been a time to shine. In the year through September, more than $460 billion worth of deals have been transacted in health care, the second largest sector for deals after energy, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters.AdvertisementAt Barclays, the five bankers had advised Teva on its announced acquisition of Allergan’s generics business for $40.5 billion as well as Perrigo’s acquisition of Elan for $8.6 billion, according to the statement.An earlier version of this article misstated the value of the deals that have been struck in the health care sector In the year through September. It is more than $460 billion, not $460 million.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.