AdvertisementSupported byBy Sarah MaxThe mood was uncharacteristically somber in the conference room of Hincapie Sportswear as George Hincapie prepared to speak at an all-company meeting on Oct. 9, 2012.A top American cyclist in his own right, Mr. Hincapie had been instrumental in helping others secure Tour de France wins — one for Alberto Contador, one for Cadel Evans and seven for Lance Armstrong. Yet as employees in Greenville, S.C., were about to learn that day, Mr. Hincapie’s career would soon need an asterisk.Choosing his words carefully, Mr. Hincapie explained that he had cooperated with a United States Anti-Doping Agency investigation of Mr. Armstrong and had testified in a related federal case. Mr. Hincapie planned to issue a public statement the next day with his own admission of doping.“I didn’t give a lot of details because, at that point, I really couldn’t,” recalled Mr. Hincapie, who retired in August 2012 after competing in the Tour de France 17 times. “I told them that I was part of a time in cycling that was really screwed up. I can’t take that back, but I rode clean for six years and contributed to changing the sport for the better.”Employees were sympathetic and not entirely surprised. Many of Mr. Hincapie’s former teammates, including Tyler Hamilton and Floyd Landis, had already come forward, describing elaborate regimens for improving performance and evading testers. The reality, his teammates and other cyclists said, was simple: Dope or quit. In the aftermath of these high-profile cases, top performers are under constant scrutiny. That was evident in this year’s Tour de France, which finishes in Paris on Sunday, as French fans and media questioned how the overall leader, Chris Froome of Team Sky, dominated the first mountain stage.Still, everyone affiliated with the Hincapie brand had good reason to worry. Similar confessions had lasting implications for Mr. Hincapie’s contemporaries. Mr. Armstrong was ultimately stripped of his seven Tour de France titles, lost a reported $150 million in endorsements and was forced to resign as chairman of the Livestrong Foundation, which he founded in 1997. “I didn’t believe that it would kill the company,” said Jennifer Horstmann, the chief financial officer of Hincapie Sportswear and its affiliated companies, which in 2012 employed 150 people. “But I knew we had to prepare for the worst.” Rancorous social media posts followed the news. “And yet another DOPER erased from my memory. Forever!” one person posted on Twitter. “We made him shut off Twitter,” said Rich Hincapie, George’s brother and business partner.George’s strategy: Ask for forgiveness, win back relationships one phone call and bike ride at a time, and double down on his efforts to promote cycling, and by association, the Hincapie brand.“We saw we had an opportunity to make a difference for the sport and said, ‘Let’s jump in with both feet,’ ” Rich said.The Hincapie brothers, who were born and raised in Queens, developed an early love of cycling thanks to their father, Ricardo, a Colombian immigrant. With Ricardo offering advice and support and their mother, Martha, and sister, Clara, cheering them on, the boys raced in Central Park and throughout the Northeast. Whereas George pursued a career in cycling, his brother took a different route. “I realized in my early 20s that I could not make a career out of cycling,” said Rich, who moved to North Carolina to study business, then headed to Greenville to work in computer sales while continuing to compete as an elite-level amateur. Hincapie Sportswear was born in 2002 out of Rich’s frustrations in finding uniforms for the amateur cycling team he helped manage. “We had a small local team of weekend warriors, and my least favorite part was getting the clothing together every year,” said Rich, who at 45 is three years older than George. Cycling teams, from casual clubs to the most serious professionals, typically reorder custom-designed “kits” of cycling shorts, jerseys, jackets and other garments every year, in part because the businesses that sponsor the teams change. In the early 2000s, few companies catered to these teams, and options were limited. High-quality products were too expensive for team kits, so most teams were stuck with low-quality gear.“There is a very fine line between good and too good,” said Joe Baratto, director of Union Bay Cycling, a regional bike-racing program in the Seattle area, and an early customer of Hincapie Sportswear. “We don’t need a kit that lasts years, but it needs to be comfortable and hold up for a season.”Rich asked his brother, already a celebrity in cycling, to join him as a co-founder, partly to open doors for the fledgling brand. Behind the scenes, George helped develop and test apparel, though he could not wear it publicly until 2010 because of team agreements with other makers like Nike.A turning point came in 2004 when the brothers started moving production to a plant in Medellín, Colombia, which they own with their aunt and uncle, who live in Colombia. “We added a new machine or two every year, and by 2008 were doing most of our orders ourselves,” said Rich, who initially outsourced manufacturing to Italy, but found that the product was inconsistent and costs were too high. Today, the Colombian plant employs more than 100 people and makes nearly everything sold by Hincapie Sportswear, including jerseys, shorts, hats and arm warmers. “Since they got their own factory, things have been unbelievably spot on,” said Mr. Baratto. “We’ll order 1,900 items a year and we’ll get 1,900 perfectly sized pieces.”Pete Rumsey, co-captain of the Arc en Ciel racing team in Providence, R.I., which spends about $20,000 a year with Hincapie Sportswear, said that its website was “what makes the relationship really sticky.”“All of our graphics are already loaded on their website,” he said. “I can switch logos out, or move things around, and the order is ready to go.” George likes to talk about the story behind the family business — and he credits it with helping the brand survive the worst of the doping scandal. “I think our customers appreciate our history in the sport,” he said. “They realize the brand is not only me, it’s my whole family.”The brothers agreed that George could not simply fade into the background after his admission. The first step was coming clean at the all-company meeting. “That was probably the most painful part for George, but he was upfront with them, and nobody left,” Rich said. George and Rich then divided a list of customers and key business contacts and went to work calling and emailing them, one by one. They considered canceling the company’s first Gran Fondo, or “big ride,” scheduled for the week after the meeting. But doing so, they decided, would only compound the problem. “I know it wasn’t easy for George to go out there and do the ride, but we only had three people out of 1,400 ask for a refund,” Rich said of the event. George used that ride — and others after — to patch relationships with fans and customers. Mr. Hincapie had opportunities to make his case on prime-time television and in national print media, but he initially declined most interview requests. “George was never the kind of person who sought interviews or wanted to make headlines, and this was no different,” said Chris Lyman, whose public relations firm represents Mr. Hincapie. He did, however, accept a longstanding invitation from a journalist, Craig Hummer, to write a book with him. The book, “The Loyal Lieutenant,” published by HarperCollins last year, chronicles Mr. Hincapie’s ascent in cycling and includes details of his doping. He wrote that in 1996, he started taking erythropoietin, or EPO, a drug used to increase red blood cell production that is banned in competitive sports. He did so for nearly a decade, though he said he adopted what he called a “minimal” program in 2005. “No use during the spring, and then an EPO hit before, and a blood bag during, the race in July,” he wrote in the book.After a close call with officials in 2006, Mr. Hincapie wrote, he quit cold turkey. By his account, he rode clean for the remainder of his career and urged his peers to do the same. “If George did what he had to do to survive, it’s disappointing, but it is what it is,” Mr. Rumsey said. “Most of my dealings were with Rich, and he had done a lot for us over the years. At the end of the day, it’s a business decision for me.” It might have been a different story if the company didn’t have an established product. “In this case, the brand isn’t just an endorsement, it’s an actual product,” said Thomas Ordahl, chief strategy officer for Landor, a global brand consulting firm. Consumers also tend to be more forgiving when the wrongdoers admit guilt, said Valerie Folkes, a marketing professor at the University of Southern California Marshall School of Business. Mr. Armstrong “suffered because he so publicly denied doing anything wrong,” said Ms. Folkes, who is an expert on how consumers respond to negative information. Until federal authorities forced his hand, Mr. Hincapie was not forthright about his own use of banned substances — and he was tight-lipped about Mr. Armstrong’s doping until the very end. When Mr. Hincapie did come forward, he was credited for his loyalty while Mr. Armstrong became a pariah. After their initial damage control, the brothers started mapping out a strategy to move forward. That included a plan for the Hincapie Racing Team, a professional team co-owned by the investor Mark Holowesko. The team, which is focused on prominent American races, has posted some strong results in the last two seasons, including winning the third stage of the Amgen Tour of California in May. Though racing teams typically don’t make money, the Hincapie team’s successes have increased visibility for the brand, and that spurs sales for Hincapie Sportswear. It also helps bring guests to Hotel Domestique, which is about 20 miles outside Greenville in the Blue Ridge foothills where Mr. Hincapie likes to ride. The Hincapies restored the property and opened it in 2013 as a luxury cycling destination, complete with an on-site mechanic and a fleet of high-performance bikes. All told, Hincapie Sportswear and its related ventures have 200 employees and annual revenue of more than $10 million.In cycling parlance, a domestique is a cyclist who rides for the benefit of the team’s leader, often without glamorous fanfare and seldom in the prized yellow jersey of the leader of the Tour de France. In the end, that status might have spared George Hincapie the worst of the doping fallout. “George was probably the most successful unsuccessful bike racer there ever was,” said Mr. Baratto. “If he had won more, it might have been different.” Advertisement