AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperFor years, traders and bankers would gather for “power hour” at the Morton’s steakhouse across the street from the train station in Stamford, Conn. Morton’s red awning waved like an invitation at the base of a hulking 13-story building that held the operations of the Swiss bank UBS.After the trading day ended at 4 p.m., the UBS traders would file downstairs from what was said to be the largest trading floor in the world, and others would meander in from the similarly imposing American headquarters of the British bank RBS nearby. Morton’s red leather chairs would be filled with men in slacks and button-down shirts, knocking back WiAnno oysters and vintage reds from their personal wine lockers. The Morton’s, and Stamford itself, flourished during an expansionary phase of the banking industry. The two squat complexes, topped with the RBS and UBS logos, were emblems of global finance easily visible to anyone passing by on Interstate 95. Stamford was Little Manhattan.Now the Morton’s is shuttered. The windows above it, where bankers used to sit, are cluttered with boxes and furniture in disarray. UBS is shrinking, and the remnants of the operation will move across the street to two empty floors of the RBS building, where there have also been huge cuts. For much of the last 30 years, the story of Wall Street was one of ceaseless growth and enormous wealth, as the clubby investment banks and trading firms that used to be based in Lower Manhattan grew into giants of the global economy, with outposts in cities like Stamford. Now these firms are in the middle of a contraction that many in the industry think could last for some time. It’s particularly obvious in a place like Stamford, where tax breaks lured banking operations and a large block of the city was remade for them. But the cuts are happening everywhere.The number of front-office employees, who are generally highly paid, at the 10 largest Wall Street banks has shrunk more than 20 percent since 2011 — to 51,000 from 64,000 — according to Coalition, an industry data provider. A study of the top Wall Street banks, released in May by the Boston Consulting Group, found that revenue had been steadily falling across the entire industry since 2012, while costs had not. “The industry gloom that we have been forecasting for some time is now well and truly upon us,” the report said.Stamford had the bad luck of housing the American headquarters of two European banks, which are facing particular challenges as the Continent has struggled to cope with several debt crises. RBS, or Royal Bank of Scotland, which is now controlled by the British government, has fewer than half the 225,000 employees worldwide that it had at its peak in 2007, when it was constructing its Connecticut campus. It recently announced plans to reduce its work force in Connecticut, which was once 2,400 people, to fewer than a thousand, making its gleaming building far too large a home. The number of UBS employees in Stamford fell to 2,000 last year, from 4,400 before the crisis, and more cuts are likely. HSBC and Deutsche Bank are the most recent banks to announce major global overhauls.The financial crisis in Greece is the latest headwind likely to challenge any recovery at European banks. But even aside from the particular problems in Europe, Wall Street banking operations in places like Manhattan and Stamford are being forced to scale back because of a broad combination of bad behavior, stronger regulations, technological innovations and a changing economy. This is a major turning point for the industry that is generically known as Wall Street — a mix of firms historically based in Lower Manhattan dealing with the issuance and trading of financial products like stocks and bonds. The financial industry today is much bigger than just these businesses, encompassing private equity and hedge funds, along with consumer banking, which was traditionally based outside New York.Some segments of the industry, especially less regulated private equity funds — and more broadly, financial companies that manage wealth for clients — have done well recently. But at companies focused on the historical business of Wall Street, the promise of boundless growth and endless wealth has waned and potential recruits are choosing to go elsewhere. To understand the nuances of what is happening, and why, it helps to look at Stamford, and the people who worked there — people like Ric Elvir, who spent two decades on Wall Street before leaving the UBS trading floor for the last time in 2012. When he was pushed out, he figured he would get right back in at another bank, albeit one with a smaller trading floor. But the jobs he expected to be plentiful weren’t there.“There are a lot less trading opportunities now than there are traders on the street,” Mr. Elvir said.As he readjusted his plans, Mr. Elvir began trading his own money and was successful enough that he kept at it. He also found he enjoyed a life that didn’t require him to miss his twin sons’ baseball practices. Now, on sunny days, he does his day trading on a patio outside the offices of Molten Markets, a start-up created by two men — one British and one Chilean — who also used to work at UBS in Stamford.“It’s been a death by a thousand cuts,” Simon Wilson-Taylor, the British co-founder of Molten Markets, said of the banking industry he left behind.The trading floors, which seemed to hover beside Route I-95 like floating airships, were the economic engines of the RBS and UBS operations in Stamford. Mr. Elvir moved among jobs and locations in his decade at UBS, but he never forgot the first time he walked onto the Stamford trading floor, back in 2002, and took in the wide, open space big enough to hold 23 basketball courts. With no structural pillars, traders could shout or gesticulate to colleagues at the other end of the floor with nothing to obstruct their view.“I was just like anybody,” he says now with a bit of a reverential hush, as he remembers thinking, “Wow, I’m in the middle of something big.” The 1,400 people who could fit on the UBS floor made money in many ways. Some simply bought and sold stocks, currencies and bonds, capturing the difference between each trade. Other desks created financial contracts, or derivatives, that made it possible to bet on changes in interest rates or stock prices. Before the financial crisis, some of the most lucrative work involved buying up mortgages and other loans and bundling them into bonds.Those trading businesses ended up accounting for a majority of the profits at the big banks in the years before the financial crisis. This work — particularly the mortgage operations — was also the main source of the staggering losses that required RBS, UBS and the other large banks to take government bailouts when the subprime mortgage market collapsed.In the midst of the crisis, RBS and UBS got rid of hundreds of traders in Stamford. But the bailouts allowed the two banks — and others across the industry — to rebuild their operations surprisingly quickly in 2009 and 2010. Mr. Wilson-Taylor was hired by UBS in Stamford during this time to oversee some of the bank’s bond trading. When he got to UBS, the floor was half full; a year later it was nearing capacity and buzzing with frenetic energy. “It was chaos — they constantly kept bringing in expensive people from other firms,” according to Mr. Wilson-Taylor.The renewed enthusiasm on Wall Street after the crisis was ultimately tempered by many different factors. Central banks around the world did everything in their power to keep interest rates low, to encourage borrowing and stimulate their nations’ economies. But the lower interest rates meant that trading desks earned smaller interest payments on the enormous stockpiles of bonds and loans that they owned. The predictable downward movement of interest rates also discouraged the type of trading from which the desks in Stamford and elsewhere had made money. The financial crisis also emboldened lawmakers and financial regulators. The Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation explicitly banned some of the trading activities that had been big in Stamford before the crisis. But the set of international banking rules that have had the single largest impact require banks to hold capital as a buffer against trading losses — rules broadly referred to as Basel III. A bank trading $100 billion of corporate bonds, for example, now needs to hold around $10 billion of capital, in comparison with the $3 billion to $5 billion it would have needed before the crisis. If the bank does not have the $10 billion in capital and wants to continue trading, it is required either to raise more money from shareholders or put aside more of its profits, with all the costs that entails. The riskier the products a bank is trading, the more capital it needs to put aside for each dollar of trading. The desire by regulators to have banks trim their risky trading desks has had a particular impact at RBS because the bank’s bailout left the British government as the majority owner. RBS’s government-controlled board has pushed the company to focus more on its British operations for retail and corporate customers and less on the international trading floors.At an industry conference in March, the RBS chief executive, Ross McEwan, said: “As we increasingly wave goodbye to some of the hangovers from our past, a new model will emerge that is set up to deliver sustainable returns from a much lower risk profile.” (A spokesman for RBS said the bank had no formal comment for this article.) While international rules tried to reduce risks, scandals of other sorts popped up. A rogue trader in UBS’s London offices lost $2 billion in 2011, one of the first of many trading scandals to leap from bank to bank. There were allegations that traders at the large banks had colluded to manipulate the benchmark interest rate known as Libor. That gave way to the details of how traders at different firms conspired to fix the exchange rates between major currencies. RBS and UBS, along with most other large institutions, have ended up paying billions of dollars in fines in these cases.RBS’s cuts are striking, but other banks are heading in the same direction. Morgan Stanley has slimmed down its trading desks and strengthened the Smith Barney wealth management business it acquired during the crisis. This spring, JPMorgan Chase talked about the strength of its less risky consumer bank at the same time that it outlined billions of dollars of new cuts in its investment bank. Even Goldman Sachs, the most storied Wall Street firm, has been looking to diversify by entering businesses like consumer lending. The latest quarterly financial results from the big banks — announced over the last two weeks — have underscored the continued drop in revenue from traditional trading businesses.At UBS, the shift has been back to the historical work of Swiss banks — serving wealthy customers from around the world and collecting fees. UBS promised Connecticut authorities last year that it would keep 2,000 employees in the state, but they will be spread out, closer to clients, rather than concentrated in Stamford. The bank has moved what was left of its trading operation into its offices in New York.“Over the past few years, UBS has been executing on a strategy to streamline our real estate footprint throughout the Americas,” said Gregg Rosenberg, a spokesman for the firm. On the trading floors, the men and women who remain face yet another continuing threat to their jobs: technology. The types of trading that were the most profitable before and after the crisis — buying and selling bonds and derivatives — are now being shaken up by the sort of automated trading that put many stock traders out of work a decade ago. This was beginning to happen even before the crisis, but new rules have encouraged, and in some cases forced, banks to move toward more computer-driven trading. Mr. Elvir and Mr. Wilson-Taylor were both involved in UBS’s efforts to automate the bank’s bond, currency and derivatives trading, which required fewer employees the more successful it became. By the time they left UBS, the floor was thinning out. UBS moved back-office employees into the vast space so that it didn’t look empty. Last year, the company recognized the new reality when it rechristened the trading floor with a less descriptive name: the Pavilion. Stamford began its bid to capitalize on Wall Street’s expansion in 1994, when it offered $145 million in tax credits, and a free parcel of land, to what was then Swiss Bank to build its American headquarters in the city. The 13-story building that sprouted up — smaller than the 20-story structure that the company initially promised — brought big changes to the city, including new power substations and data lines, and more Metro-North trains from Manhattan. Mr. Elvir came to Stamford from Manhattan in 2002 after UBS acquired Paine Webber. New arrivals were challenged to try to throw a Nerf football the length of the trading floor — and always failed. RBS was in the middle of its own expansion during those years, and agreed to build its American headquarters in Stamford in 2005 after the state promised incentives worth $100 million in exchange for 1,150 new jobs in the state. The incentives, part of the continuing race among local governments to attract international corporations, amounted to more than a quarter of the $345 million that RBS spent on its Connecticut building. But the incentives proved controversial, particularly because the state has had to continue making investments to keep the banks’ operations, even in their reduced form. In 2011, Connecticut’s governor, Dannel P. Malloy, the former mayor of Stamford, gave UBS a $20 million loan to keep employees in the state. Last year, Mr. Malloy, despite criticism, extended the loan to 2021. Mr. Malloy says that the banks still play an important role in the local economy. As recently as 2010, UBS was the largest employer in Stamford, and RBS was, at one point, the fourth largest. But with UBS planning to move out of its enormous complex by 2017, the city could be left with a potentially embarrassing vacancy right next to the train station. Some former employees decamped for other banks in Manhattan; others left banking for hedge funds and other less regulated corners of the financial industry. Some data has suggested that employment in the financial industry over all — including asset management and insurance — is staging a recovery, though industry experts say that many of the new jobs are in lower-paying compliance positions. Rohit Gupta, who began working on the RBS trading floor in Stamford almost immediately after graduating from college in 2007, left in 2012 and is one of the founders of a start-up in Manhattan, Flavour, that has created a restaurant-recommendation app. He says he frequently hears from old colleagues who are looking to get out of banking and into the tech industry. The broader consequences of the contraction of trading are still coming into focus. In places that are particularly reliant on the financial industry, like Stamford and New York, the loss of high-end jobs could have a pernicious ripple effect across the economy. The Partnership for New York City, a civic group sponsored in part by banks, has estimated that the financial industry accounts for a third of the city’s economic output and a quarter of personal income taxes.In Stamford, the cuts have left the area around the train station somewhat desolate. The Morton’s closed at the end of last summer, and at the end of a recent trading day, the sidewalks between RBS, UBS and the station had only a slow trickle of people.  “They have pulled in their horns here in Stamford,” said Joseph McGee, the head of public policy at the Business Council of Fairfield County. “Essentially they have become invisible in the city.” But Stamford’s economy over all has shown remarkable resilience. The local unemployment rate has shown no signs of rising, and the average wages remain stable. That appears to be, in part, because the city has already managed to attract several new corporate operations, including those of Starwood Resorts and Hotels Worldwide and Deloitte, which have built in an old industrial area near the waterfront and taken advantage of the infrastructure that the banks brought in, as well as new tax incentives. For society more broadly, Thomas Philippon, a professor at New York University who has studied the economics of the financial industry, said that Wall Street had grown bloated in the three decades before the financial crisis and was shrinking to a size more in keeping with historical norms.   “It’s all for the best,” Mr. Philippon said. “We had way too many people trading before.” As a former member of the trading tribe, Mr. Elvir said that when he was let go by UBS, it came with a surprising sense of relief, and some space to think about what he really wanted. “If you stay focused on something for too long, it’s very easy to lose the forest for the trees,” he said. “You tend to forget about work-life balance.” Now, instead of waking up at 5:30 a.m., he gets up at 7:30 and has breakfast with his 9-year-old sons. Trading his own money might not last forever. He has thought of looking for work at another big bank, but doesn’t think he would have much luck even if he really wanted that sort of job. He’s doing a little consulting work and “trying to figure out where are the new opportunities.”Advertisement