AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesOn Tuesday, the Conference Board, an independent business membership and research association, will report on consumer confidence in July. After a surge in June, a mild drop in consumer attitudes was expected by some experts this month in the face of slightly slower hiring, and of anxiety on Wall Street after a plunge in Chinese stocks and economic uncertainty in Europe.In a separate report Tuesday morning, the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index for May is expected to show a 0.3 percent rise, another sign that the residential real estate market remains robust. —Nelson D. SchwartzTwo of the most popular social media services will report their second-quarter financial results this week. Twitter will post its results on Tuesday after the market close. The microbroadcasting service has warned Wall Street several times, most recently in June, not to expect blowout revenue numbers. And analysts expect weak to no growth in the number of people using the service. Investors are more interested in how Twitter’s interim chief executive, Jack Dorsey, fields questions about his dual role at Twitter and Square and whether he announces any initiatives or products. The company may report on progress in the search for a permanent chief executive.Expectations are higher for Facebook, the world’s largest social network with 1.4 billion users, which will share its results on Wednesday after the market close. The company’s stock is trading near a record high, and investors will want to see evidence that recent torrid growth is continuing. Video advertising has been growing rapidly, and the company’s Instagram photo-sharing app has said it will open the service to many more ads. Expenses have been rising as Facebook invests heavily to complete newer projects, such as the Oculus virtual reality headsets due early next year, and longer-term initiatives like beaming the Internet to the world’s unconnected via lasers and drones. —Vindu GoelBank earnings reports are expected to kick into high gear this week as several of Europe’s biggest lenders report their first-half results. European lenders reporting their second-quarter results include the Swiss bank UBS; the British lenders Barclays, Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group; the Spanish bank Santander; the German lender Deutsche Bank; and the French bank BNP Paribas. Merger and acquisition advisory fees and equity trading have been strong for investment banks that have reported so far, as deal activity has been healthy this year. Initial public offerings, however, have been lighter in Europe this year than last year, which set a breakneck pace. Another big question for many of Europe’s biggest investment banks will be the performance of their fixed-income operations — particularly as uncertainty about Greece’s financial future weighed on market activity in June. JPMorgan Chase and Goldman Sachs both reported declines in their fixed-income trading revenue during the second quarter, and weakness in that business cut into Credit Suisse’s results in the quarter. —Chad BrayThe Federal Reserve will continue its long, slow march toward raising interest rates when its policy-making committee meets Tuesday and Wednesday. Fed officials have suggested they are not ready to raise rates just yet. But the Fed could use its postmeeting statement to strengthen expectations that it is on course to raise rates for the first time since the Great Recession when the committee next meets in September. —Binyamin AppelbaumEvery few years, Microsoft introduces a new version of its operating system, Windows — one of the world’s most widely used software products. That time has come again, and now Microsoft is taking a different approach to get users to download the software as soon as possible. On Wednesday, Microsoft will make Windows 10, its newest offering, available for a first wave of consumers to download onto their existing computers. The update will be available to these users free, a first for Microsoft.Microsoft is hoping users update to Windows 10 because they see value in new features like Cortana, a virtual assistant that schedules appointments and performs other tasks. Windows 10 will also give Microsoft a common operating system that powers PCs, smartphones, game consoles and other devices.Its biggest imperative is to create a huge market for Windows 10 devices, thus attracting app-writing developers, who have drifted away from Microsoft toward Google’s Android and Apple’s iOS mobile operating systems. —Nick WingfieldIt is earnings week for the oil majors. Exxon Mobil, Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Total will all report their second-quarter results. The news will probably be disappointing but not surprising; oil prices are half what they were a year ago. These integrated companies, though, should do better than smaller oil companies and service companies because the larger organizations run refineries, which are earning profits since demand for gasoline has been rising. —Clifford KraussOn Thursday, the United States Department of Commerce will announce its initial estimate of economic growth in the second quarter. Experts estimate that after an unexpected drop in output in the first three months of the year, the economy grew at an annual rate of 2.6 percent last quarter. The rebound was probably driven by healthy consumer spending, strong growth in residential real estate spending and government expenditures, and an improved trade picture. —Nelson D. SchwartzTime Warner Cable is scheduled to report its second-quarter results on Thursday, its first earnings report since the cable company announced its $56.7 billion sale to Charter Communications. The transaction is part of a pair of deals Charter announced in May that, if approved, would create the country’s second-largest cable and broadband operator, with 24 million customers in 41 states.Wall Street will be looking for clues about how regulators view the deal. Time Warner Cable’s previous deal with Comcast collapsed under intense regulatory pressure. In addition, investors will be looking for whether Time Warner Cable managed to sustain the strong performance it reported during the first quarter, when it delivered its strongest subscriber growth in years. —Emily SteelPuerto Rico, the United States territory that’s teetering on the edge of insolvency, has two critical debt payments due on Saturday. There are mounting questions about whether the island’s Public Finance Corporation and the Government Development Bank will be able to make scheduled debt payments that day. Recently, the government said that the Legislature had not appropriated money for the Public Finance Corporation payment, signaling that it might be skipped. —Michael CorkeryAdvertisement