AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — In a rare and fiery weekend session, the Senate voted on Sunday to resurrect the federal Export-Import Bank, handing the Republican Party’s most conservative wing a major defeat and setting up a showdown this week with House leaders divided over the moribund export credit agency.The bipartisan vote, 67 to 26, broke a filibuster and allowed supporters to attach a measure to a three-year highway and infrastructure bill that would reauthorize the Export-Import Bank. That bill is expected to pass the Senate early this week. The agency’s authorization expired on June 30, halting all new loan guarantees and other assistance to foreign customers seeking to purchase goods from American companies. The agency continues to service existing loans.A clear majority in the House supports resurrecting the agency, but it will be up to House leaders to decide whether the chamber will get a vote, or whether to allow the bank’s powerful opponents — led by the House majority leader, the majority whip, the Ways and Means Committee chairman and the Financial Services Committee chairman — to stand in the way.The agency has become the subject of a kind of proxy war between the Republican Party’s ideological conservatives, who have called the bank an unnecessary bastion of crony capitalism, and its pro-business wing, which sees it as vital to American exporters competing against foreign governments that routinely support their industries. Influential conservatives like Charles and David Koch and the Club for Growth political action committee have made opposition to the bank, known as Ex-Im, a litmus test for their financial support, persuading all but one Republican presidential candidate, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, to advocate the bank’s demise.But Sunday’s session showed that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and National Association of Manufacturers still hold some sway in a Republican Party increasingly willing to buck business lobbies.“With more than 60 export credit agencies enabling our foreign competitors to seize opportunities away from workers, it’s critical that Congress restores this important tool for American exports,” Jay Timmons, the president of the manufacturers’ association, said on Sunday.The Sunday session to hasten action on the highway bill, called by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, came as tensions rose between Republican leaders and rank-and-file conservatives, intensified by the presidential candidacies of four Republican senators — Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky, Marco Rubio of Florida and Mr. Graham.On Friday, after Mr. McConnell scheduled the Ex-Im vote, Mr. Cruz took to the Senate floor to say that Mr. McConnell had assured him that he had made no deal to bring the bank to a vote.“Not only what he told every Republican senator, but what he told the press over and over and over again was a simple lie,” Mr. Cruz said.That brought the most senior Senate Republicans to the floor on Sunday to rebuke Mr. Cruz.“Squabbling and sanctimony may be tolerated on the campaign trail, but not in here,” said Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the most senior Republican. “We are not here on some frolic or to pursue personal ambitions. We are here because the people of the United States have entrusted us with the solemn responsibility to act on their behalf.”“It is a sacred trust in which pettiness or grandstanding should have no part,” he added.Unrepentant, Mr. Cruz responded, “It is entirely consistent with decorum and with the nature of this body traditionally as the world’s greatest deliberative body to speak the truth.”The Senate then beat back a novel effort by Mr. Cruz to break Senate legislative rules and force a vote on an amendment he hoped to attach to the highway bill. That amendment would have blocked the lifting of sanctions on Iran — part of a broad deal to curb Iran’s nuclear program — until Tehran recognized the State of Israel and released American prisoners from its jails.On Friday, the lawmaker presiding over the Senate at the time, Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, had ruled Mr. Cruz’s amendment out of order. He had hoped to get a simple majority to reject that ruling, a “nuclear option” that Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, said would usher in “chaos.”Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, then joined Mr. Cruz, moving to amend the highway bill with a measure to defund Planned Parenthood. When that was ruled out of order, he too asked the Senate to vote to disregard that ruling. Again, most Republicans refused to back him up.But the rift between conservatives and the Republican leadership has been most acute with respect to the Ex-Im Bank. Conservative groups like Heritage Action, the political arm of the Heritage Foundation, and the Kochs’ Freedom Partners saw a chance to deal a blow to President Obama, after losing fights to defund the Affordable Care Act and reverse Mr. Obama’s executive orders on immigration. They hoped that if they could make sure Congress did nothing to save the bank, its future lending operations would go dark this summer.Their problem has been strong support for the bank by Democrats, coupled with deep divisions among Republicans. On Sunday, 24 Republicans, nearly half the Senate Republican Conference, voted with Democrats to revive the bank. By contrast, opposition to Ex-Im has become almost automatic on the Republican presidential campaign trail.“A vote against reauthorization is nothing more than a shameless attempt to garner the affection of the Koch brothers,” Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, said on the Senate floor Sunday. “After all, opposition to the Export-Import Bank is a prerequisite for any Republican running for president.”But in Congress, lawmakers have proved more sensitive to companies in their district that have lobbied hard, saying the demise of the bank would cripple their export business or at least put them at a disadvantage against foreign competitors.“We are one step closer to keeping American jobs here in America and not lost to countries like China,” said Senator Mark Kirk, Republican of Illinois and one of the most endangered incumbents up for re-election next year.The Senate vote does not assure that the bank will begin new lending operations, however. The House passed a short-term highway bill this month that would replenish the federal highway trust fund until mid-December as lawmakers work to finance a longer-term infrastructure measure. Mr. McConnell, backed by Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, is pressing for an infrastructure bill that would set policy for roads, bridges, trains and transit for six years, although with funding to last only about three years.If the House rejects the Senate’s highway bill before members leave town on Thursday for August recess, the Ex-Im Bank will be left to languish. The Senate then may have no choice but to take up the House’s five-month “patch” to ensure that federal highway funding does not run out at the end of this week.“Jobs are on the line,” Mr. McConnell said on Sunday. “We’ve got to get this done.”Advertisement