By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 25, 2015
Teva Pharmaceuticals is in advanced talks to buy the generic drug division of Allergan for about $45 billion, a person briefed on the matter said on Saturday.A deal could be announced as soon as Monday, the person said, though talks are continuing and could still fall apart.Should an agreement be reached, it would be the latest huge deal in a wave of mergers within the health care industry involving drug makers, insurers and others.Buying Allergan’s generic drugs business would help bolster the market position of Teva, which is based in Israel and is the world’s biggest seller of off-brand medicines.AdvertisementBut it could also signal the end of Teva’s monthslong pursuit of a rival, Mylan, which has repeatedly rebuffed takeover offers. Mylan itself is trying to buy another drug maker, Perrigo, which has resisted that takeover campaign.AdvertisementSelling the generic drugs business would be a change of course for Allergan, which had built itself into a powerhouse with a market value of more than $120 billion, in large part through repeated deals for companies like Forest Laboratories. On Sunday, Allergan announced that it had agreed to buy Naurex, a developer of drugs for depression and other central nervous system disorders, for $560 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The current Allergan was born from the combination of Actavis, a generic drugs maker, and Allergan, then best known as the maker of Botox. The old Allergan had been seeking to fend off an unwanted takeover bid by Valeant Pharmaceuticals, an aggressive serial acquirer that had joined with the hedge fund magnate William A. Ackman.Actavis had served as a white knight, paying $66 billion, well above the $53 billion that Valeant had offered. Among the reasons Actavis could pay so much more was that it had moved its corporate home abroad, to Dublin, and was paying lower taxes on its international sales.After the deal was completed, Actavis took the Allergan name.Now the company is weighing parting with a major business line that had previously been its foundation. The Allergan deal last year was aimed in large part at diversifying beyond the generic drug business, which is increasingly saturated with products with lower profit margins.The present-day Allergan and Teva share one common thread: The head of Teva’s global generic medicines unit, Sigurdur Olafsson, worked at Actavis until last year.News of the talks between Teva and Allergan was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.A version of this article appears in print on July 27, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Teva, Already a Giant in Generics, Is in Talks to Buy Allergan’s Division .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.