AdvertisementSupported byBy Stacy CowleyDemand for government-backed small-business loans is at a record high, but the momentum came to an abrupt halt last week when the agency that guarantees those loans reached its limit for the year and suspended its program.But potential borrowers were pinning their hopes on a House vote on Monday that would allow the lending to resume. The freeze was put in place for the first time in a decade — other than during government shutdowns — when the Small Business Administration hit its limit of $18.75 billion for 2015. More than 900 applicants were awaiting loan guarantee approvals.Although it is likely that Congress will approve a higher cap, the fact that the agency’s cap was reached so early in the year indicates how heavy the demand for small-business loans has become, despite relatively small, shaky signs of growth in the larger economy.“Creditworthy small businesses are coming back into the market,” said Rohit Arora, the chief executive of Biz2Credit, a site that matches business borrowers with loans. “They’re feeling more confident, and they’re borrowing for both working capital and for expansion. The approval rates right now are the highest we’ve seen this year.”An extended shutdown in the S.B.A.’s loan program would be “a complete disaster,” said Lynn G. Ozer, the president of government-guaranteed lending at Susquehanna Bank in Pottstown, Pa.Unless Congress acts, the agency will be unable to process loans until its new fiscal year begins on Oct. 1. But many in the industry say they anticipate a quicker resolution. Just hours after the S.B.A. suspended its program, the Senate unanimously passed an entrepreneurship bill with an amendment that would lift the S.B.A.’s cap to a record $23.5 billion and allow it to resume approving loans.The House planned to take up the bill on Monday. Officials from the S.B.A. and from the National Association of Government Guaranteed Lenders, an industry trade group, say they are confident that the measure has enough bipartisan support to pass.The S.B.A. does not make direct loans through its largest lending program, known as 7(a) loans. Instead, it guarantees a portion of the loans made by third-party lenders like Susquehanna Bank, repaying the lender if the borrower defaults. The goal is to make capital available for business owners who would not otherwise qualify. Because the program is fully financed by the fees borrowers and lenders pay, no taxpayer money is used to cover loan losses.Demand for S.B.A.-backed loans has been rising in recent years, and the agency has repeatedly come close to exhausting its lending authority. Last year, Congress acted in September to raise the lending cap just days before it would have been reached.This year, the S.B.A. saw signs as early as February that it was headed for a record year and would probably hit its cap before the year’s end, according to Ben Chang, an agency spokesman. The agency began warning lenders earlier this month that the ceiling was in sight.That prompted a flood of applications. Loan applications this month totaled $3 billion, about five times the normal volume in July.“People hit the gas pedal,” Ms. Ozer said. “We all saw it coming.”Because it normally takes a week or two for loan applications to be processed, lenders say borrowers will not be significantly affected if this freeze is short-lived. If the House follows the Senate and approves legislation, lending could resume quickly.Robert F. Polito Jr., a senior vice president at Webster Bank in Waterbury, Conn., has two potential borrowers waiting in the S.B.A.’s approval queue.“I don’t even want to let them know, because I really don’t think it will affect them,” he said. “Why give them agita?”Mr. Polito said the S.B.A.’s program filled a vital gap in the lending landscape, allowing banks like Webster to extend credit to businesses that would not otherwise meet their underwriting criteria.“When we use the government-guaranteed products, we’re able to turn loans that would be a ‘no’ into a ‘yes,’” he said. Those loans seem riskier, but the default rates are identical for Webster Bank’s conventional business loans and those backed by the S.B.A., he said.Advertisement