By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINJULY 27, 2015
The criminal case against Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs programmer, just will not die.Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the district attorney for Manhattan, announced on Monday that his office was appealing a state judge’s ruling that overturned a jury’s conviction of Mr. Aleynikov on a charge he had stolen some of the Wall Street bank’s high-speed trading source code in 2009.The decision by Mr. Vance’s office was a bit of a surprise given the long legal odyssey Mr. Aleynikov has navigated, first in federal court in New York and more recently in state court in Manhattan.Mr. Aleynikov, a Russian-born American citizen, first managed to get a federal appeals court to throw out his conviction in 2012, only to have prosecutors from Mr. Vance’s office indict him several months later on charges of violating a different set of state criminal laws. In May, a state jury convicted Mr. Aleynikov after more than a week of deliberation of a single count while acquitting on one charge and deadlocking on another count of the indictment.A few weeks after the jury verdict, Justice Daniel P. Conviser, in a 72-page ruling on July 6, said the jury’s verdict could not stand. He found that the decades-old statute under which Mr. Aleynikov was convicted did not apply to the facts of what he had been charged with doing when he downloaded copies of Goldman’s trading code.AdvertisementJustice Conviser said Mr. Vance would be better off pushing state lawmakers to amend the state’s criminal law to cover the kind of action that Mr. Aleynikov was charged with carrying out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Vance’s office is taking the case to the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of New York.Kevin Marino, a lawyer for Mr. Aleynikov, wasted no time in criticizing Mr. Vance for deciding to keep the legal battle alive. In an emailed statement, he said Mr. Vance’s decision to appeal Justice Conviser’s ruling was “inexcusable.”AdvertisementMr. Marino added that the initial decision by Mr. Vance to prosecute his client, after a federal appeals court threw out an earlier conviction, “was reprehensible.” As he has done for several years now, Mr. Marino accused Mr. Vance of doing the bidding of Goldman in pursuing his client.Mr. Marino’s defense strategy has been to argue that his client did not break any criminal laws when he downloaded some of the Wall Street bank’s source code as he was preparing to leave for a job with a high-frequency trading firm. Mr. Marino has said that, if Mr. Aleynikov did anything wrong, it was to violate his obligations to his employer. In such a case, the matter should have been treated as a civil dispute between his client and Goldman rather than a criminal case, he contends.Over the years, Mr. Aleynikov, whose case has drawn attention to the rise of high-frequency trading, has become something of a folk hero on Wall Street given his success in beating back both federal and state prosecutors.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosecutor Appeals Case of Ex-Goldman Coder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.