By REUTERSJULY 27, 2015
WASHINGTON —  A gauge of business investment plans rebounded solidly in June, suggesting the drag on American manufacturing from capital spending cuts was starting to ebb.The signs of a slight improvement in factory activity are a boost to the economic growth outlook heading into the second half of the year and support views the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates later this year.“This could be a sign that manufacturing activity is starting to pick up again following the weak start to the year,” said Daniel Silver, an economist at JPMorgan in New York.The Commerce Department said on Monday that orders for nonmilitary capital goods excluding aircraft, a closely watched proxy for business spending plans, increased 0.9 percent last month, after an unrevised 0.4 percent fall in May. The increase followed two straight months of declines.AdvertisementEconomists had expected orders for these so-called core capital goods to increase 0.4 percent in June.AdvertisementDeep investment spending cuts in the energy sector, after a plunge of more than 60 percent in crude oil prices last year, have weighed on factory activity. But signs suggest the energy spending rout is near an end.Data on Friday showed that American energy companies added 21 oil rigs last week, the third increase in the last 33 weeks, bringing the total national rig count to 659, its highest since late May. Schlumberger, the world’s No. 1 oil field services provider, said last week that it believed the North American rig count might be bottoming and that land drilling and completion activity could start to rise slowly in the second half of the year.Pointing to some moderation in the impact of weak energy spending on manufacturing, the Dallas Fed, in a separate report on Monday, said its general business activity index improved for a second straight month in July. The index, however, remained in negative territory.
            Manufacturers’ total new orders for durable goods, seasonally adjusted.        APRIL–1.7%MAY–2.1%JUNE+3.4%$300billion275250225200175’14’15JULY 27, 2015
Manufacturing has also been hurt by a strong dollar and slow global demand, which have squeezed profits of multinational corporations like Whirlpool and Caterpillar.The dollar has gained 14.6 percent against the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners since June 2014, reducing the profits of multinational corporations.Factories also have been hampered by fewer orders from businesses, which are working through a stockpile of goods accumulated last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A base appears to be forming in orders, but it remains to be seen how reliable it is,” said Chris Low, chief economist at FTN Financial in New York.Shipments of core capital goods, which are used to calculate equipment spending in the government’s gross domestic product measurement, slipped 0.1 percent in June after a 0.3 percent fall in May.AdvertisementThat suggests business spending was probably a drag on second-quarter gross domestic product. The government will release its second-quarter G.D.P. numbers on Thursday.An 8.9 percent jump in transportation equipment lifted overall orders for durable goods, items like toasters and aircraft that are meant to last three years or more. Such orders increased 3.4 percent last month.Transportation was buoyed by a 66.1 percent surge in aircraft orders, which reversed a 31.6 percent plunge in May. Boeing reported on its website that it had received 161 orders last month, up from only 11 in May.Orders for automobiles and parts edged up 0.2 percent after slipping 0.3 percent in May.Unfilled orders for durable goods ticked up 0.1 percent after two straight months of declines. Durable goods inventories increased 0.4 percent, the largest increase since last December, after falling 0.2 percent in May.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: June Data Signals Rise in Activity at Factories.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.