AdvertisementSupported byCompiled by The New York TimesThe Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum recently released an audio recording of a July 16 meeting with Yanis Varoufakis, Greece’s recently departed finance minister.Mr. Varoufakis said that beginning in December he convened a team of five people who tried to work out how Greece might drop out of the eurozone and create its own currency. Mr. Varoufakis had previously spoken about contingency plans for a euro exit, but never in as much detail.In the recording, Mr. Varoufakis described to a group of hedge fund managers his plan for a parallel banking system, one that would mean Greece abandoning the euro.Publication of the recording created a political furor just as representatives of the country’s eurozone creditors were arriving in Athens for sensitive talks on a new program intended to keep Greece in the eurozone.Below are excerpts from the recording.“We did have a plan B, but the difficulty was to go from the five people who were planning it to the one thousand people that would have to implement it. And for that I would need to receive another authorization, which never came.“But let me give you an example, we were planning along a number of fronts. I’ll just mention one. Take the case of the first few moments when banks are shut, the A.T.M.s don’t function, and there has to be some parallel payment system by which to keep the economy going for a little while to give the population the feel that the state is in control and that there is a plan.“What we planned to do was the following: There is the website of the tax office, like there is in Britain and everywhere else. Where citizens, taxpayers, going to the website, they use their tax file number and they transfer to web banking, monies from the bank accounts to their tax file number so as to make payments on income tax, and so on and so forth.“We were planning to create, surreptitiously, reserve accounts attached to every tax file number without telling anyone. Just to have this system function under us and at the touch of a button allow us to give PIN numbers to tax file number holders, taxpayers.”“Take for instance the case where the state owed a million euros to some pharmaceutical company for drugs purchased on behalf of the national health service. We could immediately create a digital transfer into that reserve account of the tax file number of the pharmaceutical company. And provide them with a PIN number so that they could use this as a kind of parallel payment mechanism by which to transfer whichever part of those digital monies that they wanted to any tax file number to whom they owed money or indeed to use it on order to make tax payments to the state.“That would have created a parallel banking system while the banks were shut as a result of the E.C.B.’s aggressive action to give us some breathing space. This was very well developed. And I think it would have made a very big difference because very soon we could have extended it using apps and smartphones.“And it would become a functioning, a functional parallel system. And then of course this could be euro-denominated, but at the drop of a hat it could be converted to a drachma.”“The general secretariat of public revenues, within my ministry, is controlled fully and directly by the troika. It was not under the control of my ministry, with me as minister; it was controlled by Brussels. The general secretary is appointed effectively through a process that is troika-controlled and the whole mechanism within.“It’s like Inland Revenue in the United Kingdom being controlled by Brussels. I am sure that as you hearing these words your hair is standing up.”“We decided to hack into my minister’s own software program in order to be able to just copy the code of the tax system’s website onto a large computer in his office so that he could work out how to design and implement this parallel payments system. And we were ready to get the green light from the prime minister when the banks closed.”Advertisement