AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — The private equity firm Hamilton Lane is raising its second fund of funds here from local investors, seeking 300 million reais, or about $90 million, according to a person with knowledge of its plans.The firm expects to hold a first close during the fourth quarter of this year, by when it should have at least half that amount, the individual said.But Hamilton Lane had expected to reach its first close in this year’s second quarter, according to the individual, a reflection of the current tough economic climate here. That person spoke on the condition of anonymity.Hamilton Lane and other private equity firms raising funds face a tough challenge from rising interest rates, which give Brazilian pension funds and other large institutional investors here an easier way to make money.That has long been the case, but last month, Brazil’s Central Bank raised its benchmark rate to 13.75 percent, the fourth consecutive increase this year, and economists expect it to keep climbing.When Hamilton Lane raised its first fund here, mostly in 2013, the benchmark interest rate was in the single digits. Still, the new fund, if successful, would be twice the size of Hamilton Lane’s debut fund, which raised 150 million reais.A spokesman for Hamilton Lane declined to comment.Another private equity firm, Spectra Investments of Brazil, plans to start raising its third fund of funds in September, looking to obtain 300 million to 400 million reais, its founding partner, Ricardo Kanitz, said. Earlier this year, it closed its second fund of funds, at 160 million reais.Despite Brazil’s economic difficulties in the last several years, private equity has continued to show strong interest in the country,Last year, despite almost no economic growth, a sprawling corruption scandal and tense presidential elections, private equity firms raised $5.6 billion in new funds to invest in Brazil, an increase from the $2.3 billion raised in 2013, albeit less than the 2011 high-water mark of $8.1 billion. That is according to the yearly survey from the New York-based Latin American Private Equity and Venture Capital Association.Advent International, Patria Investments and Gavea Investments each raised new funds for Brazil exceeding $1 billion. Yet those were primary funds, which invest directly in companies. Moreover, their investors were almost entirely foreigners, many American.Hamilton Lane and Spectra are different, operating in the niche fund of funds world. Moreover, getting backing from Brazilian institutional investors like pension funds is more difficult.That was true even during Brazil’s boom years.“There are very few cases of raising funds of funds in Brazil,” said Clovis Meurer, who was president of the Brazilian Association of Private Equity and Venture Capital from 2012 to 2014. Hamilton Lane and Spectra appear to be the only two.Many others have tried. HarbourVest Partners initially looked at Brazil when the country’s economy was soaring but decided to set up its Latin America office in Bogota, Colombia.Earlier this year, the Switzerland-based Capital Dynamics closed its office in São Paulo and has no immediate plans to raise funds again in Brazil, according to a person briefed on its plans. It sought to raise 500 million reais for a fund of funds here.It was the firm’s second failed attempt in the last four years, according to the individual, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity. Capital Dynamics opened its office in Brazil in 2010.Interest rates are not the only impediment. Pension funds and institutional investors here are still uncomfortable with the hands-off role of limited partners in private equity funds. That is more the case with funds of funds, which are an additional step removed from the companies receiving the investment.“Our investors still want to have a more direct role in the funds and businesses,” said Mr. Meurer, who is also a partner with Brazilian private equity firm CRP Companhia de Participações.The large Brazilian pension funds that invest in private equity funds typically eschew funds of funds because they think they can determine themselves how to invest in their country.The hope among some in the private equity market has been that smaller and midsize pension funds would have more reason to back funds of funds because they have smaller staffs.Yet that does not yet seem to be happening. “Today, smaller pension funds normally follow decisions taken by larger pension funds,” Mr. Meurer said.Spectra so far has mostly avoided pension funds here. Forty percent of the backers in its second fund, which closed early this year, were family offices in Brazil and 40 percent were private banks, including Bradesco and Brasil Plural, Mr. Kanitz said.However, he sees potential in Brazil’s pension funds and plans to approach some of them later this year when he starts marketing his firm’s third fund. He estimates that Brazil has 40 to 50 pension funds that are likely to start investing in private equity.It will take time, but Mr. Meurer remains optimistic. “The private equity industry has evolved a lot,” he said. “There will be a time and place for fund of funds.”Advertisement