AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Neil UnmackTeva has found a neat exit from its Mylan mess. Teva, an Israeli pharmaceutical firm, had been locked in a bitter battle to take over Mylan. Now it has agreed to buy the generic business from Allergan for $40.5 billion. The swap makes sense.Allergan’s generic-drug business basically ticks the same box as a deal for Mylan. Teva wants to bulk up its core generics business to help cope with stagnating drug prices and a decline in the supply of its raw material. And while Mylan is fighting off Teva with insults and legal ploys, Allergan has signed on the dotted line.The main downside is that the Allergan transaction may be less profitable. Teva is paying the same four times 2015 sales that it offered for Mylan. Analysts at Jefferies calculate that the sector average for generic manufacturer deals is about 3.3 times. But Teva expects only $1.4 billion of annual cost savings from Allergan, against $2 billion it estimated for Mylan.However, the synergies are more plausible, since Teva’s head of generics used to run the same business at Actavis, which took over Allergan in 2014 and kept its name. Also, the lesser overlap should speed regulatory approval. And, while the expected increase in earnings looks lower than the original Mylan bid, Teva could have been forced to pay more, and the deal might have dragged on well into 2016.The deal allows Teva to come full circle. The Allergan generics business was not for sale earlier, as the company was busy digesting and financing the Actavis merger. The prospect of a Teva-Mylan combination seems to have forced Allergan’s hand.For Teva, the switch may prove costly. It now owns a $1.4 billion Mylan stake, which it will probably sell at a loss.This acquisition will put Teva far in the lead in the slow-growth global copycat drug business. It will not address its problems in its brand-name drugs business, a lack of scale, and the expiration of patents for its biggest drug, its multiple sclerosis treatment Copaxone.Acquisitions are the best way forward. A faster, cleaner deal with Allergan should let Teva deleverage more quickly, paving the way for more deals.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement