By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 27, 2015
The image was striking: 35 women — dressed in black, in chronological order by their alleged year of assault — appeared together on the cover of New York magazine, giving faces to their accounts of being sexually assaulted by the comedian Bill Cosby.The cover presentation, and the individual portraits that accompanied the women’s stories in this week’s issue, drew widespread attention on the Internet and lit up social media as soon as it was posted Sunday night. The magazine’s website went offline early Monday morning and stayed dark until about noon, thwarting what had been extraordinary traffic. (On Twitter, a user who goes by Vikingdom2016 claimed responsibility for the disruption and did not draw a connection to the Cosby package.)The photographs, by Amanda Demme, were accompanied by an article by Noreen Malone that examined the women’s accusations in the context of the evolving attitude in the country toward the reporting of rape accusations. Although there were no revelations in the magazine article — all of the women had come forward previously — the magazine said its intention was to show the sheer number of women who have publicly accused Mr. Cosby of sexual assault.“I believe that there will be power in the number — and that was always our theory — that to see all these women and their stories side by side, one would have a greater sense of the magnitude of the story,” Adam Moss, the magazine’s editor in chief, said in a telephone interview.AdvertisementThe project began about six months ago, around the time when more than a dozen women publicly accused Mr. Cosby of sexually harassing, assaulting or raping them, sometimes after he had drugged them, they said.Jody Quon, the magazine’s photography director, said she researched the women’s stories and began putting them in chronological order based on the year of their alleged assaults, dating from the 1960s.“What I saw was this community of women who really had nothing in common with each other other than this one thing,” she said — their accusations against Mr. Cosby.AdvertisementFrom there, she started slowly, contacting only a handful of women. The response was “overwhelmingly positive,” Ms. Quon said.“At the beginning of the project, we couldn’t know how much these women were going to really embrace this and how much they were really going to talk,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The women who agreed to talk and have their photographs taken were asked to bring a black and a white outfit to one of several photo shoots that occurred, mostly in Los Angeles and New York. Some have questioned the decision to photograph the women in white — as they appear in their portraits — arguing that the color connotes innocence and could be portrayed as one-sided. But Ms. Quon said the goal was to make the portraits about the women’s faces and not about their clothing.On the cover, the women sit in chairs, wearing black.In the article, Ms. Malone wrote, “The group of women Cosby allegedly assaulted functions almost as a longitudinal study — both for how an individual woman, on her own, deals with such trauma over the decades and for how the culture at large has grappled with rape over the same time period.”The article said that emails to four of Mr. Cosby’s lawyers and representatives went unanswered.On Monday, Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, declined to comment on the magazine’s presentation.Mr. Cosby has never been charged with a crime and has repeatedly denied the accusations of sexual assault. In a deposition for a 2005 lawsuit, excerpts of which recently became public, Mr. Cosby denied he was a sexual predator but presented himself as an unapologetic playboy, who used fame, influence and powerful drugs in his pursuit of women.The women who spoke to New York magazine told similar stories in their interviews, with many asserting that he drugged them or plied them with wine before having sex with them.Patricia Leary Steuer, who until the magazine piece had come forward only as “Patricia,” said in an interview that she had been text-messaging and talking on Facebook with some of the other women on Monday. She said some of the women said they had cried when they saw a group portrait online that had been assembled from several portraits shot at different times. She could “feel a sadness in the background,” she said.“Nobody wants to be a member of this club,” she said. “But we are.”Katie Rogers contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: An Accounting of Accusers Is Disrupted by a Hacking.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.