AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayMcGraw Hill Financial, the owner of Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and S&P Capital IQ, said on Monday that it had agreed to buy the financial data and information provider SNL Financial for $2.2 billion in cash.The deal is expected to strongly complement S&P Capital IQ’s offerings in banking and insurance, and expand the analytics and capability of its Platts business, which serves the energy markets, McGraw Hill Financial says.Founded in 1987, SNL Financial, based in Charlottesville, Va., provides financial data and information to more than 5,000 customers about a variety of industries, including banking, insurance, real estate, energy, the media, and metals and mining. SNL has about 3,000 employees.McGraw Hill Financial will acquire the company from an affiliate of the private equity firm New Mountain Capital and former members of SNL’s management. New Mountain Capital took a majority stake in the firm in 2011 in a deal that it said valued the company at about $450 million at the time.“We are enthusiastic about SNL because it is a fast-growing, highly complementary subscription-based business that will enable us to accelerate our strategy to be the leading provider of transparent and independent benchmarks, analytics, data and research across the global capital, commodity and corporate markets,” Douglas L. Peterson, the president and chief executive of McGraw Hill Financial, said in a news release.McGraw Hill Financial said it expected to achieve about $70 million in cost savings by 2019.After the deal, Mike Chinn, the SNL Financial president and chief executive, will report to Mr. Peterson.“We’re thrilled to continue this journey with the McGraw Hill Financial team and join their portfolio of market-leading brands,” Mr. Chinn said in a news release.McGraw Hill Financial is expected to finance the transaction through cash and new debt.Based in New York, McGraw Hill Financial — which provides financial data, analytics and credit ratings to a variety of industries — was created in 2013 after the sale of McGraw-Hill Education to Apollo Global Management for $2.5 billion. Its brands also include S&P Dow Jones Indices and J. D. Power. McGraw Hill Financial employs about 17,000 in 30 countries and posted revenue of $5.05 billion in 2014.Separately on Monday, McGraw Hill Financial said that its second-quarter net income rose 21 percent, to $353 million, from $292 million in the same quarter a year ago. Revenue rose 3 percent, to $1.34 billion, in the quarter.Advertisement