By CHAD BRAYJULY 27, 2015
Sergio P. Ermotti, the chief executive of UBS, says that the Swiss bank’s profit rose 53 percent in the second quarter.LONDON —  The Swiss bank UBS said on Monday that its profit rose 53 percent in the second quarter, driven by gains in its wealth management business as it had higher inflows from the Asia-Pacific region and ultrahigh-net-worth clients.UBS, based in Zurich, reported a profit of 1.21 billion Swiss francs, or about $1.26 billion, for the three months that ended June 30, compared with 792 million francs in the same period last year. The results exceeded analysts’ forecasts and came a day earlier than expected after a report in a Swiss newspaper on Sunday included inaccurate figures for the quarterly earnings.UBS and its rival Credit Suisse reported stronger second-quarter results, overcoming investment bank weaknesses and making gains in Asia, particularly in wealth management.Operating income, which is similar to revenue, rose 9 percent to 7.82 billion francs, from 7.15 billion francs in the second quarter of 2014. Operating expenses rose 2 percent to 6.06 billion francs, from 5.93 billion francs in the same period last year.Advertisement“I am pleased with the quarter,” Sergio P. Ermotti, the chief executive of UBS, said in a news release. “We maintained our momentum despite ongoing market challenges.”AdvertisementUBS said that its adjusted pretax profit, which excluded items like gains on sales of businesses and restructuring charges, was 1.64 billion francs.Since a government rescue in 2008, UBS has aggressively cut costs and left businesses to meet stricter Swiss capital requirements and better prepare the bank to weather future financial upheavals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the second quarter, the bank created a Swiss holding company to wall off its Swiss retail and corporate business as well as some of its wealth management operations from other business lines. UBS said it was the first bank in Switzerland to complete such a step.In recent years, UBS has also shrunk its investment bank and shifted its focus to wealth management, an area it sees as more consistently profitable.Net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits and other liabilities, rose 20 percent to 1.49 billion francs in the second quarter, from 1.24 billion francs a year earlier.In the wealth management division, UBS said, the bank’s pretax profit more than doubled to 756 million francs.The wealth management business in the Americas, which is operated separately, experienced a 14 percent decline in pretax profit over the quarter, to $205 million. In its investment bank, pretax profit declined 2 percent.A version of this article appears in print on July 28, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Gains in Wealth Management Lift UBS Earnings .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.