By ALAN COWELLOCT. 2, 2015
LONDON — Full disclosure: I recently switched cars, and I feel like a chump.I had one that ran on gasoline. Then, in June, I bought one with a diesel engine. It was made by Volkswagen, which has now admitted to the world that it cheated on the emissions control system used on 11 million of its diesel vehicles.My car is not a Volkswagen-brand car, but one manufactured in the Czech Republic by the company’s Skoda unit. No, not that Skoda — not the Cold War Skoda that, along with other Communist jalopies, served as the butt of automotive jokes, like the Lada, or Yugo, or, most of all, the East German Trabant.Mine is the new-style Skoda, built to German specifications with German innards, including its 2-liter diesel engine. Here in Britain it was blessed by no less an auto guru than Jeremy Clarkson on his car-review television show “Top Gear.”Mr. Clarkson checked the Skoda’s off-road stability by driving through a field while a tattooist worked on a client in the back seat. He tested the refrigerative capabilities of its air-conditioning by driving through a fiery barn while eating an ice cream. He probed its load-bearing abilities by having a helicopter land on its roof. (Notably, these were not the reasons for Mr. Clarkson’s ouster in March by the BBC. That came about after what was termed a fracas with a producer.)Mr. Clarkson’s review was not my reason for switching cars, though. I had, for years, hankered after this particular model of Skoda. I had checked and rechecked the specs and the reviews. Most of all, I was persuaded that, for Skoda prices, I was getting a Volkswagen in all but name, shape and status. It had low carbon-emission and high fuel-mileage figures, and I bought the model equipped with a diesel particulate filter to safeguard the planet.AdvertisementI was prepared for the inevitable mirth of owners of gas-guzzling BMWs, the chuckles and nudges as I parked my totem of Czech engineering alongside their echt-Deutsch wagons. I knew I would have the last laugh because my car, too, was underwritten by a company known for dependability, honesty, reliability. But my fuel bill would be lower, and my service charges, too. Volkswagen’s word — articulated by Skoda — was its bond.AdvertisementNow, quite fortuitously, I know that my new car’s engine is one of those 11 million that, according to Volkswagen, have been kitted out with software that enables it to detect when it is being tested and to return fraudulent results. Volkswagen has said that the software has been enabled on only about half of those cars.But I know mine is one of the enabled rogues because when I called the Skoda shop to book a repair job (someone had smashed a rear light while the car was parked on the street), I asked the clerk to check on my engine’s status. He traced the vehicle identification number and said, yes, my car, a 2014 model, would need to be recalled and fixed at some stage, maybe by the end of the month.Neither Skoda nor Volkswagen has apprised me of this “officially.” But I have no reason to disbelieve what the clerk told me. And the fact remains that the car I paid for was not the one I thought I was buying.This huge international scandal has left many drivers like me facing unsettling questions. Who will buy their used cars if they choose to sell? Should they drive them at all, until they know for certain what is coming out of the exhaust pipes? Will Volkswagen volunteer compensation or face down class-action lawsuits?The only clue on Skoda’s website was an announcement that, in Britain, 131,569 Skodas with the offending engines had been sold among a total of 1.1 million “affected” cars and vans, including Volkswagens, Audis and Seats. “All vehicles are technically safe and roadworthy,” the posting said, and “step by step, affected customers will be contacted, with details of a process to get their vehicles corrected in the near future.”Of equal concern, the whole imbroglio has played into an environmental debate that diesel drivers in particular were already losing. Just last weekend, Paris — about two-thirds of the cars on the road in France are diesels — closed off main thoroughfares to cars for a day of clean air. Other cities cannot be far behind. London already levies a congestion charge on vehicles entering the central area.The bombshell from Volkswagen left a crater quickly filled by representatives of the vocal lobbies advocating electric cars and bicycles. Diesel is the new devil — even though it is the same fuel that drivers had been encouraged to use because of its greater economy and lower carbon emissions.My new car is not simply a Skoda, but a model called the Skoda Yeti. It is named for the abominable snowman, the Bigfoot said to haunt the Himalayas and the Hindu Kush — a myth whose legend eclipses its reality. Quite literally, as it has turned out.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.