By MARY M. CHAPMANOCT. 27, 2015
Helped by stout sales of its Ford F-150 pickup truck, Ford Motor reported third-quarter earnings of $1.9 billion on Tuesday, up $1.1 billion from a year earlier.It was the automaker’s best quarter ever in North America, the company said. Improvements in Europe and South America contributed to the positive report.Ford increased its worldwide market share to 7.6 percent, pushing revenue for the period up to $38.1 billion, which exceeded most analysts’ expectations. In the last few years it has introduced about two dozen products, including a new Mustang.Its numbers represent a more-than-doubling of the year-earlier figure for North America, when profits in the region were affected by lagging F-150 inventory and a blitz of product introductions.AdvertisementOperations in North America earned $2.7 billion, up from $1.4 billion in the fourth quarter of 2014, driving pretax Ford profits to $2.7 billion, a third-quarter record and more than double the $1.2 billion it made in the third quarter of last year. The profit margin in North America was 11.3 percent.Already this year, Ford has made $4.7 billion, more than the $3.2 billion in net income it reported for all of last year.AdvertisementA major factor is improved inventories of best sellers including the F-150. Bob Shanks, Ford executive vice president and chief financial officer, said the average selling price of its F-Series trucks was up approximately $2,000.“This gives them the vehicles with the strong profit margins and sales that they want,” said Stephanie Brinley, senior analyst for IHS Automotive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company expects solid results next quarter, despite a seasonal uptick in material costs and signing bonuses that are expected to be part of a new labor agreement with the United Automobile Workers. “We would characterize the U.S. industry as healthy, and barring any shock, we expect sales to remain strong,” Mark Fields, Ford president and chief executive, said in a conference call.In Europe, Ford announced third-quarter losses of $182 million, down from $439 million from the fourth quarter last year. It was nevertheless its best third quarter in several years in Europe.Losses in South America edged downward to $163 million, from $170 million a year ago. Given the unstable financial conditions in the region, Mr. Shanks said he was pleased with the numbers. Market share rose in South America, in North America and in Europe.“Some of the challenges this year are out of their control,” Ms. Brinley said. “South America continues to be a difficult market, but they’ve contained that as well as they can, despite economic conditions.”A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Profit Surges for Ford, Propelled by F-150 Sales .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.