AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsProcter & Gamble has named David S. Taylor, its group president of global beauty, grooming and health care, as its next chief executive, a move that comes on the heels of a major corporate restructuring that the company hopes will help improve its sputtering growth.Mr. Taylor, who joined Procter & Gamble in 1980, will take charge of a global consumer products giant that has spent months vigorously slimming down. He will succeed the current chief executive, A. G. Lafley, who has led efforts to shed about 100 brands. Those have included some of the company’s most familiar household names, like Duracell and Nice ’n Easy, to focus on a handful of core products, like Tide laundry detergent.“P.&G. is transforming to be a faster-growing, more profitable company,” Mr. Taylor said in a statement. “I am committed to the strategies, and look forward to leading the people of P.&G. to win with consumers, drive growth and create shareholder value.”The appointment of Mr. Taylor, 57, was widely expected. In January, the company handed him oversight of global beauty products, a move that elevated him to front-runner status, wrote John Faucher, an analyst with JPMorgan Chase, in a research note Tuesday. The move put Mr. Taylor in charge of brands that together generated more than 40 percent of the company’s sales.In early July, the company sold 43 of its beauty brands to the personal care company Coty, a transaction Mr. Taylor was heavily involved in, the company said.“I don’t think it’s a seismic shift in the strategy,” said Ali Dibadj, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company. “I think there’s a lot more continuity than change with this C.E.O.”The executive ranks at Procter & Gamble have been tumultuous over the last few years. Mr. Lafley, who served as the company’s chief executive from 2000 to 2009, emerged from retirement to return to the position in 2013 after the activist investor William A. Ackman pressured the board to oust his successor, Robert A. McDonald.Mr. Ackman had been demanding that the company divest some of many product lines, which included well-known personal care products like Gillette razors, Pampers diapers and Crest toothpaste, as well as more obscure product lines.About one year later, Mr. Lafley, 68, agreed to sell most of its pet care business to Mars for $2.9 billion. Mr. Taylor, the company said on Tuesday, was a leader in that deal.The two men will continue to work together after Mr. Taylor’s new appointment takes effect, as Mr. Lafley will remain at the company as executive chairman.Mr. Taylor has also been appointed to the board.Mr. Taylor first joined Procter & Gamble as a plant production manager in Greenville, N.C. Over the last 35 years, he has held management positions in Europe, Asia and North America. Procter & Gamble shares were flat in after-hours trading. The company is set to release its fourth-quarter financial results on Thursday.P.&G. has struggled with sluggish sales growth and other competitive pressures, particularly in the United States, where its market share losses have been acute.“To say that expectations are low for PG’s FQ4 is an understatement,” Mr. Faucher wrote in his note, referring to the company’s fiscal fourth quarter.Last year, the company announced it would shed about 100 brands to focus on about 10 core product lines. With the sale to Coty, that transformation is largely complete.Now, the company’s biggest challenge is to innovate a stable of products that, in some cases, have remained largely the same for years. In recent years, for example, the company has put a big push behind Tide Pods, individually wrapped nuggets of a detergent that it has been selling for decades.“You’re trying to get that consumer to pay more every year for something that’s only incrementally better,” Mr. Dibadj said. “Essentially they’re a luxury brand in an area where nobody wants luxury.”Advertisement