AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsDon Oberdorfer, a highly respected diplomatic correspondent for The Washington Post and the author of well-received books about Korea, Vietnam and the Cold War, died on Thursday in Washington. He was 84.The cause was complications of Alzheimer’s disease, his wife, Laura, said.Mr. Oberdorfer’s nearly four-decade career in journalism reached from the war in Vietnam to the collapse of the Soviet Union, took him to 50 countries and endowed him with an assurance and expertise that was admired by his colleagues and by the foreign policy experts he covered.In an interview on Monday, Leslie H. Gelb, president emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations and a former correspondent and columnist for The New York Times, called Mr. Oberdorfer “a reporter’s reporter.”“Always there, calm, knowledgeable, unbiased, armed with the right questions, knew everybody, clear and fair,” he added. “He made neither enemies nor friends of officials.”Mr. Oberdorfer reported for The Charlotte Observer, The Saturday Evening Post and Knight Newspapers before joining The Post in 1968, hired by Benjamin C. Bradlee, who said in his 1995 memoir “A Good Life” that Mr. Oberdorfer “could and did peg even with the very best foreign affairs experts.”As The Post’s “ace foreign policy writer,” in Mr. Bradlee’s words, Mr. Oberdorfer huddled at Mr. Bradlee’s home with other reporters involved in the paper’s coverage of the Pentagon Papers, the secret Vietnam War history, in 1971.He also witnessed a startling moment in Cold War diplomacy during the summit meeting between President Ronald Reagan and the Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1986.“At the end of the summit Reagan even said — and I have the quotes authenticated for the first time — ‘Why don’t we just get rid of all nuclear weapons? Just get rid of them all,’ ” Mr. Oberdorfer recalled on the C-Span program “Booknotes” in 1991 while discussing his book “The Turn: From the Cold War to a New Era; the United States and the Soviet Union, 1983-1990.” “And Gorbachev said, ‘Yes, let’s do that. Let’s just get rid of them.’ ”While the meeting was initially deemed a failure, he said, “it opened the way, in a way, toward a degree of trust and a degree of willingness to bargain that was not the case before that meeting.”Donald Oberdorfer Jr. was born in Atlanta on May 28, 1931. His father was an insurance agent. His mother was the former Dorothy Bayersdorfer.He graduated from Princeton University in 1952 and served in the Army in Korea after the war.His other books included “The Two Koreas: A Contemporary History,” and “Tet!,” which was a finalist for the National Book Award in 1972.After he retired as a reporter in 1993, Mr. Oberdorfer taught at Johns Hopkins University’s Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies. He was named chairman of its U.S.-Korea Institute in 2006 and chairman emeritus in 2013. Besides his wife, the former Laura Klein, survivors include two children, Daniel and Karen Oberdorfer; and a brother, Eugene.Advertisement