
Standard Deduction By                     
VICTOR FLEISCHER

JULY 28, 2015
Hillary Rodham Clinton’s proposal to increase capital gains taxes for well-off individuals who hold investments for less than six years has a certain appeal. The plan is likely to raise effective tax rates on the top 1 percent of taxpayers, and some might wish to support it for that reason.But it seems more show horse than workhorse: It would do little to accomplish its stated goal of aiming at what Mrs. Clinton called “the tyranny of today’s earnings report.”Under current law, gains from assets held for more than a year often qualify as long-term capital gains, which are taxed at a top rate of 20 percent. Under Mrs. Clinton’s proposal, for individuals in the top bracket, the tax would start at 39.6 percent for investments that taxpayers maintained for two years or less, then gradually decrease after that, back to the 20 percent rate only for assets held for more than six years. Taxpayers outside the top bracket, which starts at about $465,000 for married filers, would see no change.Mrs. Clinton tied the tax proposal to her concern about short-termism. Short-termism refers to the idea that some investors looking for short-term profits may push corporate managers to increase share buybacks, split up companies, sell off ancillary assets and generally use whatever techniques are necessary to increase a stock’s price.AdvertisementI’m skeptical of this line of argument. Shareholders who receive cash from share buybacks typically reinvest in other companies, thus making the overall allocation of economic resources more efficient. Some companies should be split up. Investors should not be myopic, but movements in the stock price relative to industry peers provide a useful way to monitor and evaluate the performance of top executives.AdvertisementIt is true that corporate executives are often overly focused on quarterly earnings. Earnings reports often drive stock price movements in the short run. Too much focus on quarterly earnings invites earnings management, where executives change the real or paper timing of transactions to strengthen earnings in a particular quarter, sometimes at the expense of the long-term stability and profitability of the firm.The left wing of the Democratic Party may find Mrs. Clinton’s narrative about corporate executives appealing. And because Mrs. Clinton’s proposal would raise the top rate on capital gains relative to current law, it has the effect of making the tax system a bit more burdensome on some rich people.The problem with Mrs. Clinton’s proposal is that it slides over some important institutional details about how people invest. As a result, the proposed changes would do little to shape the behavior of corporate managers.Top corporate executives receive substantial equity compensation in the form of restricted stock grants or similar arrangements. Executives often manage earnings to try to bolster them in periods when they can sell off shares. But changing the capital gains tax rate will not discourage this destructive behavior.Consider the following example, which demonstrates why Mrs. Clinton’s plan misses the mark.When stock vests, an executive recognizes ordinary income for the fair-market value of the shares, taking that amount as the tax basis in the shares.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Suppose an executive received 50,000 shares of restricted stock in 2012, when the stock was worth $1 million, or $20 a share. Suppose the restrictions lapse in 2016 when the stock is worth $2 million, or $40 a share. Under either current law or Mrs. Clinton’s plan, the executive would recognize $2 million of ordinary income and pay about $800,000 in income taxes. The executive would then have a basis in the shares of $2 million. This result does not depend on whether the executive sells the stock immediately or holds on to it after it vests.Under Mrs. Clinton’s proposal, if the executive sold the stock 18 months later for $42 a share, he or she would recognize $100,000 of short-term capital gain, paying tax of about $40,000. Under current law, the executive would pay tax of $20,000.But raising the rate on tax gains also raises the value of tax losses. If the stock price declined to $38 a share, the executive would recognize a short-term capital loss of $100,000, worth about $40,000. Under current law, he or she would have a long-term capital loss of $100,000, worth about $20,000.AdvertisementAnd whatever happens to the stock price after the stock vests, the amount of tax is likely to be small compared with the tax on the stock award itself, which is taxed at ordinary income rates. As a general matter, the stock price of a publicly traded company is about as likely to go down as it is up, and so broadly speaking, corporate executives care more about the top rate on ordinary income than the top rate on capital gains.Executives of start-ups and other privately held firms often make an election under section 83(b) of the tax code that results in stock appreciation being taxed at capital gains rates. Those executives would not be affected much by Mrs. Clinton’s proposal. They typically hold shares for longer periods, and, as a general matter, do not engage in the sort of short-term earnings management that Mrs. Clinton is focusing on.A better approach would be to pressure firms to change executive compensation practices. I would suggest an overhaul of Section 162(m), which disallows corporate deductions for pay above $1 million unless it is based on meeting performance goals. Instead, Section 162(m) could be rewritten to allow a deduction for compensation paid to any employee in excess of $1 million only if the compensation is paid in cash, deferred for at least five years and unsecured (meaning that if the company goes bankrupt, the executive would not have a priority over other creditors). This approach would encourage corporate executives to act more like long-term bondholders and obsess less about short-term stock price movements.In the speech on Friday, Mrs. Clinton expressed preliminary interest in changing the tax incentives for executive pay. Her campaign aides indicated that there was more to come.“Hillary Clinton’s speech last week focused on just a few specific proposals to combat short-termism,” said Jake Sullivan, a senior policy adviser to the campaign. “She will have more to say about tax fairness related to capital gains, as well as specific reforms to ensure executive compensation aligns with long-term value and rising pay for workers.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »