
Breakingviews By                     
RICHARD BEALES

JULY 28, 2015
The Economist is an elite publication facing plebeian problems. Its revenue has been in decline since 2012 as highbrow and lowbrow magazines alike have struggled with a decimation of print advertising. But the business’s self-assessed value keeps rising.Pearson, fresh from selling The Financial Times to Nikkei of Japan for 844 million pounds, or $1.3 billion, wants to sell its 50 percent interest in The Economist. The Agnelli family of Italy, through its Exor investment vehicle, owns 4.7 percent, and John Elkann, the Agnelli family scion, sits on the weekly publication’s board. Exor has said it wants to raise its stake. Rothschild family members own more than 20 percent, and they or other owners like the Schroders or Cadburys might be interested in doing the same.A 5.6 percent dividend yield for the year to March is appealing, especially with interest rates so low. So is the brand’s prestige. The in-house valuation, at nearly £730 million in March, has more than doubled since 2005, offering an internal rate of return, including dividends, of 11 percent over the decade – better than major stock benchmarks.Even so, The Economist’s annual dividends, worth £41 million, look precarious. The ratio of that payout to profit in the most recent financial year was nearly 90 percent. That’s indicative of the challenge of keeping earnings up as revenue falls. The group’s top line has shrunk about 10 percent since 2012, to £328 million, and its operating profit has done the same, to £60 million, in the latest accounts.The Economist’s bosses have done well to keep after-tax profit more or less steady, supporting both valuation and dividends. The widespread carnage in print advertising, though, has not passed The Economist by. Its executives have increased revenue per subscription and are trying other ways to lift sales, including a recent initiative to produce short documentaries.They are, however, racing against a digital tide. Even if they can attract online ads, revenue is shared with Google and others. The magazine’s cachet and its record may make it easier for wealthy owners to double down on a bet that their publication can succeed where others have failed. It would nevertheless be a contrarian call worthy of The Economist’s own editorial page.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »