AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben ProtessThe Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington, a sprawling unit that prosecutes a mix of Wall Street misconduct, public corruption and other frauds, is losing one of its highest-ranking officials.Marshall L. Miller will step down from his role as the criminal division’s No. 2 official at the end of the month, the Justice Department said in a statement on Tuesday. Mr. Miller, a longtime federal prosecutor, will join New York University and is expected to land in the private sector eventually.At the Justice Department, he was the principal deputy and chief of staff to the criminal division’s leader, Leslie R. Caldwell. Mr. Miller has overseen some 600 prosecutors and a wide range of cases at the department.On the Wall Street front, Ms. Caldwell and Mr. Miller handled the guilty pleas of several banks — JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup among them — that were accused of manipulating the price of foreign currencies. As Ms. Caldwell’s top aide, and before that as a federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, Mr. Miller also supervised the corruption investigation into FIFA, soccer’s global governing body.Mr. Miller’s roles in Brooklyn and in Washington positioned him as a close adviser to Loretta Lynch, who was the United States attorney in Brooklyn before becoming the attorney general. After President Obama nominated Ms. Lynch to be attorney general last year, Mr. Miller managed and coordinated her Senate confirmation process.“Marshall Miller is an outstanding attorney, a remarkable public servant and an unwavering advocate for the principles of justice,” Ms. Lynch said in a statement.Mr. Miller, who was once rumored to be a potential candidate to replace Ms. Lynch in Brooklyn, will soon join the Program on Corporate Compliance and Enforcement at the New York University School of Law. He will be a senior fellow at the program, according to Jennifer Arlen, the program’s co-director. Mr. Miller, 44, is expected to pursue a job in the private sector at some point.David Bitkower, one of Mr. Miller’s current deputies, will succeed him in the criminal division, the Justice Department said.Mr. Miller’s departure from the department caps a nearly 14-year prosecutorial career, which he interrupted to take a teaching position at N.Y.U. Law School. He also took a hiatus to help run the 2005 mayoral campaign of his brother, A. Gifford Miller, who was then speaker of the New York City Council.After returning to the Brooklyn office — in what is known as the Eastern District of New York, a jurisdiction that also encompasses Queens, Staten Island and Long Island — Mr. Miller was named head of the violent crimes and terrorism division and later chief of the entire criminal unit. He also handled several terrorism prosecutions, including a case in which several defendants were convicted of plotting to blow up the jet-fuel supply tanks at Kennedy International Airport.Mr. Miller, who earned his undergraduate and law degrees from Yale University, is one of several Brooklyn prosecutors to join the Justice Department in Washington. In addition to Ms. Lynch, Ms. Caldwell, the head of the criminal division in Washington, was a prosecutor in Brooklyn, as was Mr. Bitkower, Mr. Miller’s successor.“While Marshall’s departure is a great loss to the department, I am grateful to have someone with David’s experience, intellect and dedication to help guide me in leading the criminal division,” Ms. Caldwell said in a statement.Advertisement