By STEPHANIE STROMOCT. 27, 2015
Restaurant Brands International, the company behind Burger King and Tim Hortons, continues to benefit from revamping and catchy new products like the Extra Long Jalapeño Cheeseburger.Adjusted for currency translation, sales in stores open at least one year climbed 6.2 percent in the third quarter at Burger King and 5.3 percent at Tim Hortons, a Canadian coffee shop business that Restaurant Brands is rapidly expanding in the United States.“We’re pleased with our results and continuing to grow same-store sales,” Daniel Schwartz, chief executive of Restaurant Brands, said in an interview after the company announced its earnings on Tuesday.The company has also signed several contracts for extensive development of Burger King restaurants in places like Russia, France and eastern India, and as a result, Burger King expects to add 700 stores in 2015, compared with 170 stores added in 2010.AdvertisementA similar agreement will bring 150 new Tim Hortons stores to the Cincinnati region over the next decade, and Restaurant Brands hopes to make similar deals with other well-capitalized franchise owners in other parts of the country. “We see as big an opportunity for Tim Hortons as we do for Burger King,” said Joshua Kobza, chief financial officer at Restaurant Brands.AdvertisementOverall sales at Restaurant Brands were down slightly in the quarter that ended Sept. 30, to $1 billion compared with $1.1 billion in the same period in 2014.Earnings rose to $49.6 million, or 24 cents a share, up 7.6 percent from $46.1 million, or 23 cents a share, in the third quarter last year. The overall comparisons with the previous year were pro forma, as the merger of Burger King and Tim Hortons was completed in late 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company is part of the food empire being assembled by 3G Capital, a private equity group run by Brazilian investors who are known for relentlessly cutting costs to enhance profitability. They have pared about 500 jobs from Burger King and Tim Hortons and used budgeting practices intended to expose unnecessary expenses.But more so than at other companies in the 3G portfolio, Burger King and Tim Hortons have invested in developing new products, limited-time promotions and other marketing techniques to increase business. Tim Hortons, for example, has added a grilled breakfast wrap to its menu, which Mr. Schwartz said has helped lift sales in the morning through lunchtime, as has the Creamy Chocolate Chill, the chain’s answer to Starbucks’s Frappuccino.Burger King has brought back its mascot, the Burger King, and popular products from the past like Chicken Fries.More recently, Burger King introduced a hamburger with a black bun for Halloween, which has generated a great deal of attention in social media for its scatological aftereffects. “It was a delicious Halloween burger laced with A1 Sauce,” Mr. Schwartz said, giving a nod to a product produced by another 3G company, Kraft Heinz. “Customers loved it so much, we sold out.”Restaurant Brands clearly seems to be reaching out to young men with its marketing. The King has made appearances at horse races and other sporting events. And Tim Hortons recently started sponsoring “Coffee With the Coach” videos: interviews over coffee — Tim Hortons, of course — with Rex Ryan, the coach of the National Football League’s Buffalo Bills.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Restaurant Brands’ Sales Rise After a Revamping .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.