AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Tuesday that it intended to further reduce its stake in the Citizens Financial Group, the American retail bank it spun off in an initial public offering last year.R.B.S., which is based in Edinburgh, said it planned to sell 75 million shares of the American bank, equivalent to a 14 percent stake. It could also sell an overallotment of 11.25 million shares, the bank said in a news release.If the overallotment is fully exercised, R.B.S. would retain a 24.7 percent stake. R.B.S. has a 40.8 percent stake in the bank.R.B.S. also said that Citizens Financial intended to rebuy a further $250 million in stock at the offering price in a directed buy back.Shares of Citizens Financial closed down less than 1 percent at $25.94 in New York on Monday.It would signal the second major sale by R.B.S. this year as it looks to reduce its holdings in Citizens Financial. R.B.S. has said it plans to fully exit the American bank by the end of 2016.In September, Citizens raised $3 billion in its initial public offering in New York. It was the second-largest I.P.O. in the United States last year, behind the $25 billion debut of the Alibaba Group, the Chinese Internet juggernaut.In March, R.B.S. sold a further $3.2 billion in shares of the Citizens Financial.R.B.S., about 80 percent of which is owned by the British government, has scaled back its global ambitions and is shaping itself into a Britain-focused retail and corporate lender. It has sold or spun off several businesses in recent years, including Citizens Financial.In February, R.B.S. reported its seventh consecutive annual loss. It said it would dismantle its global investment bank and reduce the number of countries where it operates to about 13 from 38, resulting in significant job cuts.In June, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, announced plans for the government to begin to sell down its stake in the lender, which received a bailout of 45 billion pounds, or about $69.9 billion, during the financial crisis in 2008.Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are serving as global coordinators on the latest Citizens offering.Advertisement