AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerReversing a period of lackluster earnings, the Ford Motor Company on Tuesday reported robust profits, surging 44 percent in the second quarter compared with a year earlier.The growth in net income, driven by record-setting profit in North America, helped propel Ford to after-tax earnings of 47 cents a share, nearly 10 cents higher than Wall Street analysts had expected. The overall automotive division’s quarterly profits were the highest in 15 years.The automaker, based in Dearborn, Mich., said that strong sales of sport utility vehicles and trucks helped power the earnings — a feat accomplished even as sales of Ford’s F-150 pickup, one of the most popular vehicles in America, have taken a hit as the company struggles to meet demand.Ford’s chief executive, Mark Fields, in a conference call on Tuesday, called it “one of the strongest quarters in our recent history.” In the first quarter, earnings had declined over the previous year.“We’re now more confident than ever that we’ll deliver a breakthrough year,” said Mr. Fields, who took over the top job last year.Shares of Ford closed up nearly 2 percent.Mr. Fields and Bob Shanks, Ford’s chief financial officer, were peppered with questions about the new mostly aluminum-bodied F-150, which required extensive retooling at two factories that resulted in production delays this year. Sales of the F-series fell 9 percent last month in the United States, and market share for the trucks also fell by five percentage points.The executives said the F-150 was now being assembled at “full production” speed, and they promised that the company would achieve “normal” levels of inventory on dealers’ lots by the end of the third quarter.Mr. Fields also responded to reports this month that some Ford dealers were offering discounts of more than $10,000 on high-end versions of the aluminum F-150 in an attempt to lift sales volume.“Incentives and rebates are a normal part of the competitive environment,” Mr. Fields said, adding that some dealers associations had decided to add their own discounts on top of Ford’s own offerings. He said that supply, not demand, was the more pressing issue in ramping up the F-150’s sales — a problem that would be fixed in the third quarter.“With Ford it always comes down to the F-150, which remains the automaker’s lifeblood,” said Karl Brauer, senior analyst for Kelley Blue Book.Mr. Brauer said that until the F-150’s challenges were resolved, Ford’s revenue, profits and market share “will be handicapped,” holding back the truck’s potential to be a huge moneymaker for the company.Ford said on Tuesday that it predicted higher profits in the second half of the year compared with the first, partly because the new F-150s were more accessible for consumers. It reaffirmed its estimate that its pretax profit for 2015 as a whole would end up between $8.5 billion and $9.5 billion, up from $6.3 billion in 2014.The company, which reported a quarterly pretax profit of $2.4 billion, significantly improved its ability to turn each dollar of sales into profit. That measure, known as operating margin, rose to 7.2 percent, compared with 6.6 percent in the quarter a year earlier. That helped Ford generate greater earnings even though its overall revenue was essentially flat compared with a year ago.Ford’s North American revenue increased to $23.3 billion, from $21.2 billion in the quarter last year.While the North American and Asian divisions performed well for the company, Ford continued to have trouble in South America. Profits for the Middle East and Africa also fell, and Europe was essentially flat for the quarter.Ford’s strong performance was all the more striking because it about doubled the second-quarter profits announced by General Motors last week.Brian A. Johnson, an industry analyst with Barclays, said in a research note on Tuesday that despite Ford and G.M. delivering strong quarters, investors’ current view of automakers is “quite soft, ranging from somewhere between apathy and skepticism.”“Unfortunately in this market, as we’ve seen with other stocks in our space, perception is reality,” Mr. Johnson wrote, adding that the second-quarter results simply might not be “enough to overcome investor concern of a U.S. peak and headwinds in China.”Both companies, along with Fiat Chrysler, recently began negotiations with union officials at the United Automobile Workers on a new contract to succeed the current agreement that expires in September.Advertisement