By CHAD BRAYJULY 28, 2015
LONDON — Zurich Insurance Group said on Tuesday that it was considering making an offer for its smaller British rival RSA Insurance Group.One of Europe’s largest insurers, Zurich said it had made its interest public in response to “market speculation” that it was evaluating a bid for RSA.“There can be no assurance that any offer will be made,” the Swiss insurer said in a news release.Under British takeover law, Zurich has until Aug. 25 to make a firm offer for RSA or walk away for up to six months.AdvertisementIn a news release on Tuesday, RSA said that it “has not held talks with or received a proposal from Zurich” and advised shareholders to take no action.AdvertisementShares of RSA rose 14.1 percent to 499.70 pence, or about $7.76, on the news in midday trading in London on Tuesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.RSA, based in London, offers a variety of insurance products to consumers and businesses, including home, automobile, liability and marine insurance. The company is worth about £5 billion, based on its market capitalization.The insurer employs about 19,000 people worldwide and wrote £7.47 billion in net premiums in 2014.RSA brought in Stephen Hester, a former chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland, as chief executive in February 2014. In December 2013, the insurer’s top executive quit after a capital shortfall in its Irish operations. At R.B.S., Mr. Hester took the helm after a government bailout in 2008.Since joining the insurer, Mr. Hester has sold businesses and raised capital in order to bolster RSA’s balance sheet.RSA was created in 1996 by the merger of two of the largest British insurers, Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance.Founded in 1872, Zurich Insurance offers general and life insurance across a variety of product lines. It has about 55,000 employees in more than 170 countries and had net written premiums of $48.7 billion in 2014.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.