AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackThe French pharmaceutical giant Sanofi will pay at least $1.7 billion to enter a new collaboration with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, this one aimed at developing drugs that harness the body’s immune system to fight cancer.Sanofi and Regeneron, a fast-growing biotechnology company in Tarrytown, N.Y., have been collaborating for years on development of various biotechnology drugs. On Friday, they won regulatory approval to market their first jointly developed product — a powerful but costly cholesterol-lowering medicine called Praluent.In their new collaboration, announced on Tuesday, the two companies are pursuing what is perhaps the hottest field in drug research. Scientists seem to be succeeding in a century-long quest to unleash the immune system on tumors, producing some substantial remissions in certain patients.Huge sums are being poured into the field. Celgene last month agreed to pay $1 billion to enter a collaboration with Juno Therapeutics. This month, Immunocore, a British company, raised $320 million in the biggest private fund-raising round ever for a European life sciences company.Regeneron and Sanofi are latecomers to the field. They are in early stages of clinical trials of a drug known as a PD-1 inhibitor. But Merck and Bristol-Myers Squibb already have PD-1 inhibitors on the market — Keytruda for Merck and Opdivo for Bristol-Myers Squibb. Roche and AstraZeneca are also further along than Regeneron and Sanofi in developing such drugs.Leonard S. Schleifer, the chief executive of Regeneron, said his company could catch up by developing an array of immuno-oncology drugs that could be combined with one another to be more effective than PD-1 drugs alone.“For sure, combinations are going to rule the day technologically,” he said. “There’s plenty to be done in this field. There are lots of scientific breakthroughs to be made.”Of course, other companies are also working on combinations.Under the terms of the agreement, Sanofi will make an initial payment to Regeneron of $640 million. The two companies will spend $650 million, with half coming from each company, to develop the PD-1 inhibitor. They will also spend $1 billion for early development of other drugs; Sanofi will pay $750 million of that.The companies also agreed to reallocate to the new collaboration $75 million over three years from their existing partnership, under which Sanofi pays Regeneron $160 million a year.After a drug candidate achieves proof of concept in a clinical trial, Sanofi will have the right to opt in for further development and commercialization. The two companies will share equally in worldwide profits.The companies will concentrate on drugs known as monoclonal antibodies, which are genetically engineered proteins that can bind to a particular target, like the protein PD-1. The collaboration will not involve so-called CAR-T therapies, which involve genetically engineering a patient’s immune system cells to attack tumors.Mr. Schleifer said the same effect might be achieved by antibodies that can bind to two proteins at once — one on the tumor and the other on an immune cell, in that way pulling the immune cell next to the tumor cell. Such bispecific antibodies, he said, would be off-the-shelf products that would be easier to deploy than immune cells custom-engineered for each patient.Advertisement