By BROOKS BARNESJULY 29, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Dan Fellman, one of Hollywood’s most experienced movie distribution executives, beginning his studio career in 1964 and recently playing an influential role in the digital transformation of the exhibition business, said on Tuesday that he would leave Warner Bros. at the end of the year.Mr. Fellman, 72, will become a consultant to Warner, where he has worked for 37 years, most recently as president of domestic distribution.“I know I’ve been threatening to go for what feels like forever, but it’s finally time,” he said. He added, “I’ll find a different way to get the juices flowing.”His departure is a loss for Warner, where Mr. Fellman — whether because of seniority or personal integrity — has helped maintain relationships with producers, directors and box office reporters.AdvertisementIn a statement, Clint Eastwood called Mr. Fellman “a close friend,” adding, “I look forward to working with him on my projects in the future.”AdvertisementIt was Mr. Fellman who devised the slow rollout for Mr. Eastwood’s last film, “American Sniper,” which made an astounding $547 million worldwide.Mr. Fellman’s exit comes in the face of a generational changing of the guard in studio distribution departments. Last year, Universal said goodbye to its longtime distribution chief, Nikki Rocco, after 47 years at the studio, and Sony parted ways with its top distribution executive, Jeff Blake, after 22 years. Chuck Viane, who spent 25 years in distribution jobs at Disney, retired in 2011.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One reason for their longevity: Distribution has long been a particularly clubby part of the movie business, in which relationships carry additional weight when it comes to jockeying among studios for the best theaters. Distribution executives must also be able to serve as a bridge between the slickness of Hollywood and the often unpolished world of theater operators and owners.Warner’s head of international distribution, Veronika Kwan Vandenberg, will take over Mr. Fellman’s duties. Ms. Vandenberg, who was given the title president of worldwide distribution, will report to Sue Kroll, who was promoted to president for worldwide marketing and distribution. (Mr. Fellman reported directly to Warner’s chief executive.)Mr. Fellman, who grew up in New Rochelle, N.Y., got his start in distribution at Paramount Pictures, moving from one local office to the next: Dallas, Chicago, Cleveland.Among his accomplishments, he helped create the film industry’s move toward mass releases. When he started, a 500-theater release was considered big and now some Warner movies open in up to 4,000 domestic theaters.He was also an early proponent of IMAX, pushed exhibitors to adopt digital projection, and helped create a system of beaming movies to theaters by satellite.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.