By CHAD BRAYOCT. 27, 2015
LONDON — Two European initial public offerings produced little excitement in morning trading after their debuts on Tuesday.Shares of Poste Italiane, the operator of the postal service in Italy, rose slightly in early trading in Milan after its initial public offering last week.At the same time, Equiniti, a British provider of employee benefits administration and payments services, priced its initial public offering at the bottom of its expected range and was trading below its offering price in conditional trading in London on Tuesday morning.The lackluster starts came as the Dutch government announced plans on Tuesday to proceed with an initial public offering of the state-owned lender ABN Amro.AdvertisementPoste Italiane was valued at 8.8 billion euros, or about $9.7 billion, in its initial public offering on Friday. The company priced its offering at €6.75 a share, the midpoint of its expected range.AdvertisementShares of Poste Italiane rose as much as 3 percent after its shares began trading on the Borsa Italiana in Milan on Tuesday, but they were up less than 1 percent at €6.76 a share by midmorning.Successfully selling shares in the postal operator was an important milestone in Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s effort to reduce Italy’s debt by privatizing government-controlled assets.Poste Italiane is one of the biggest employers in Italy, with 142,000 workers. In addition to operating the postal service, the company sells insurance and provides financial services. It posted revenue of €16 billion in the first half of 2015.Equiniti, owned by the private equity firm Advent International, said it had priced its initial public offering at 165 pence, or about $2.53, a share.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That was the bottom of its expected pricing range of 165 pence to 200 pence a share. The pricing valued Equiniti at £495 million.Shares of Equiniti traded down nearly 9 percent at 150.53 pence a share in conditional trading in London on Tuesday morning. Unrestricted trading of the company’s shares is expected to begin on Friday.“We have always felt that Equiniti belongs in the public markets, and I am delighted that our new and existing shareholders have supported this,” Guy Wakeley, the Equiniti chief executive, said in a news release, adding, “We believe that Equiniti is well positioned to benefit from increasing legislation, regulation and digitalization that drives corporates and governments to outsource complex, mission critical services.”Equiniti handled more than £90 billion in payments a year. It reported adjusted revenue of £350 million for the 12 months that ended in June.AdvertisementLast year, Equiniti took a controlling stake in MyCSP, which administers the Civil Service pension plan in Britain. It also owns Selftrade, an execution-only stockbroker.The company raised £315 million in the offering, which will be used to reduce its debt.Advent International acquired Equiniti in 2007 for £550 million from Lloyds TSB, now part of the Lloyds Banking Group.If an overallotment of shares is fully exercised, Advent International will own 25.6 percent of the company after the offering.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.