By RANDY KENNEDYJULY 29, 2015
Two of the most venerable American art publications will now be owned by the same company and will be merged into a single entity online.Peter Brant, the contemporary art collector and publisher, announced on Wednesday that he had agreed to sell Art in America, which has been published since 1913 but has struggled recently as have other specialty magazines, to the company that owns ARTnews, published since 1902.Under the terms of the deal, Mr. Brant’s media company would become the majority shareholder of ARTnews’s parent, ARTnews S.A., which is listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange and has its primary operations in New York.In a statement, Mr. Brant said that Art in America would continue its publication schedule of 11 issues a year. He did not specify whether changes would be made to the ARTnews publication schedule. But the statement said that the merged publications would begin a bundled print subscription under the Art in America brand, with ARTnews focusing on special themed editions that have proved popular, such as the ARTnews annual issue “The World’s Top 200 Collectors.”AdvertisementA spokesman for Mr. Brant said in an email that there were no plans for staff reductions at either magazine and that the merged publications would continue to be based in New YorkPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sarah Douglas, editor in chief of ARTnews, said in a statement on the website that the magazine had “published compelling journalism, winning numerous journalism awards, including a National Magazine Award, and has boasted one of the widest circulations of any art magazine.” She added, “I am happy to say that the magazine will continue in this tradition.” ARTnews reports a print circulation of 65,705 to its advertisers, according to 2012 figures from the Audit Bureau of Circulations, now called the Alliance for Audited Media.AdvertisementLindsay Pollock, editor in chief of Art in America, said on the magazine’s website that “while there will likely be some changes and enhancements on the digital front, we will retain the distinctive and trustworthy voice found in our printed pages for the past 103 years.”Mr. Brant said that all of the merged company’s media properties would be consolidated online under artnews.com, which would focus on “art-related news, extensive archives, images and editorials.”“Under one umbrella,” Mr. Brant said, “the combined company will have some of the most important cultural publications that together provide the complete content and history of decorative arts, classical arts and art-related news.”A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Art in America Sold to ARTnews Owner .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.