AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioThe Hollywood talent agency Paradigm has deepened its expansion into music through a partnership with the Windish Agency, one the most successful independent shops covering the world of indie rock and electronic music.In a joint announcement Wednesday, the companies declined to elaborate on the arrangement. In previous deals with independent agencies, like one for the British agency Coda last year, Paradigm has bought stakes as large as 50 percent.Paradigm, founded in 1992, has gradually built a sizable music division representing acts like Coldplay and the Dave Matthews Band. Three years ago it expanded into the growing world of electronic dance music through a joint venture with the agency AM Only, whose stars include Tiesto and Disclosure.Windish, founded by Tom Windish in Chicago in 2004, has become a dominant force in independent music, representing hundreds of the kinds of acts that may get their first taste of buzz from a Pitchfork review or a blog post. A 2012 profile of Mr. Windish in The Los Angeles Times noted that he might have been the busiest professional at the South by Southwest festival, with his acts performing up to 1,000 times there.Among the biggest acts on the Windish roster are Lorde and the D.J. and electronic producer Diplo. In an interview, Mr. Windish said that part of the reason he made the deal with Paradigm was to draw on the bigger company’s experience in booking larger tours for his growing list of clients.“This type of growth has really accelerated the last five years, and I kept thinking, What do I not know that I need to know?” he said. “What if I had people down the hall, partners I could ask their opinion to help decisions about where an artist should play? That sort of thing. I’m fully confident this will make us better agents.”Mr. Windish will continue to run his agency, the companies said.“The common thread in building Paradigm Music has been to invest in strong, visionary leaders who are universally respected by their peers and committed to building careers the right way,” Sam Gores, the chairman and chief executive of Paradigm, said in a statement.In the music business, the role of agents has historically been limited to booking concerts and tours, and that is still their primary function. But as income from touring has become a bigger part of artists’ income, the role of agents has often grown to include marketing and branding.“No agency has really defined what it means to be an agent in the future,” Mr. Windish said, “but we’re all trying to figure it out.”Advertisement