
Breakingviews By                     
NEIL UNMACK

JULY 29, 2015
Biotechnology investors can be better than big pharmaceutical companies at valuing and nurturing small drugs. Recognizing this, Novartis is spinning three drugs in development into a new entity backed by British investors. With biotech markets hot, there’s room for copycat deals.Under the deal outlined on Wednesday, Novartis, Switzerland’s $275 billion market-cap drug giant, will inject the drugs into a start-up called Mereo, run by former Nomura employees, in exchange for an undisclosed chunk of equity. Given the size of Novartis, the financial impact is likely to be tiny. But the deal is a neat way for Novartis to retain exposure to good drugs, while sating shareholder hunger for value accretion.Investors have pushed pharmaceutical company valuations to a 26 percent premium over their five-year average. They like blockbusters best. They fear that smaller drugs, like the treatments for brittle bone disease and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism that are involved here, can be a costly distraction.Yet there is ample demand for neglected gems among biotech investors. The Nasdaq biotechnology index has almost doubled in the last two years. And the Novartis deal shows how quickly demand for biotech assets is growing in Britain. The chief investors in Mereo are British investment stalwarts, including Neil Woodford and his old shop, Invesco Perpetual. Analysts at Evaluate, the research house, reckon that private biotech capital raisings rose 71 percent last year to $430 million. Public listings jumped nearly tenfold to $574 million.There’s a risk copycats may look foolish if the drug exceeds expectations or the acquirer exits quickly. Axovant Sciences raised $2.8 billion last month by listing a drug it had bought from GlaxoSmithKline seven months earlier for $5 million. But Novartis is hanging onto future profit by keeping equity and royalty payments.The last few years have had a wave of pharmaceutical deal-making, such as the asset swap by Novartis and GlaxoSmithKline in 2014, or the $40.5 billion acquisition of Allergan’s genetics business by Teva this week. As the drug industry restructures, foundations are built for many more smaller deals.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »