AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelComcast, the cable and entertainment conglomerate, has introduced a relative sense of calm into the churning media storm.Comcast reported on Tuesday an 11 percent increase in revenue, to nearly $18.7 billion, in the third quarter, fueled by continued growth in its high-speed Internet and film businesses.Its cable business reported the smallest third-quarter loss in video subscribers in nine years. And its NBCUniversal broadcast group and cable television group both recorded revenue gains.Three months ago, media stocks underwent a mass sell-off, prompted by fears of cord-cutting by customers who drop cable and satellite subscriptions, along with worries about steep ratings declines and weak advertising sales.Shares in many media companies, including Comcast, have largely rebounded, but broader concerns remain about the future of the business.Comcast is the largest cable operator in the country as well as the owner of the NBCUniversal television and film group, and its third-quarter earnings provide a window into the broader health of the media business.At least for now, those results point to less of a doomsday outlook than the one that swept the market in August, said Amy Yong, an analyst with Macquarie. “The business doesn’t erode as quickly as the market thinks,” she said.Other big media companies — Walt Disney, 21st Century Fox and Time Warner — are scheduled to report earnings next week.Brian L. Roberts, Comcast’s chief executive, said the company had strong results despite broad technological changes reshaping the industry. He said that the company continued to grow by “giving consumers what they want and having a unique set of assets to do that.”Comcast has tried to keep pace with the rapid change by investing in its X1 technology system, which is aimed at transforming how people watch cable television. The X1 system accounted for about 60 percent of Comcast’s video connections during the quarter.Hoping to appeal to a generation of customers who will pay for Internet service but have dropped cable packages, the company is also introducing a more selective service called Stream. Priced at $15 a month, it offers a bundle of broadcast networks and the premium cable network HBO without a broader cable package.NBCUniversal recently unveiled a new digital comedy streaming channel called Seeso that costs $4 a month and is free of advertising.During the third quarter, revenue in Comcast’s cable group increased 6.3 percent, to $11.7 billion. The company lost 48,000 video subscribers during the quarter. But Comcast’s high-speed Internet group continued to propel the business, adding 320,000 subscribers during the quarter.Comcast is just one piece of the pay TV business and it remains to be seen whether defections among subscribers accelerate during the third quarter. This year’s second quarter was the industry’s worst ever for pay TV subscriber losses, according to Craig Moffett, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson Research.Mr. Moffett said that cable operators like Comcast were stealing share from their satellite and telecom rivals. “Some of that owes, no doubt, to cable’s accelerating dominance in broadband,” he said in a research note. “But some of it owes to the fundamental changes in the way we are watching TV.”In Comcast’s NBCUniversal entertainment group, revenue increased 20.8 percent during the quarter to nearly $7.2 billion. The film business, built around the Universal studio, continued to be a bright spot; revenue in the group was up 64 percent, to $1.9 billion, led by the box-office success of its films “Jurassic World” and “Minions.”The television business also reported stronger results. Broadcast television revenue was up 11.3 percent and cable network revenue was up 7 percent.Comcast’s total net income was nearly $2 billion for the quarter, down 23 percent from the same period in 2014, the company said on Tuesday. The sharp decline resulted from one-time income tax adjustments that increased last year’s third-quarter results by $724 million.Advertisement