AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonThe Carlyle Group’s profit fell in the second quarter, but the private equity behemoth still exceeded expectations, bringing in more cash from the sales of stakes in companies it owns.Carlyle, based in Washington, said on Wednesday that profit in the second quarter — a measure that includes gains that have not been realized — fell by 43 percent, to $180 million, from the same period a year earlier.But the firm’s distributable earnings — a measure of the cash generated by the firm and eligible to be given to shareholders — rose 19 percent to $386 million, compared with $324 million in the same quarter a year ago.These earnings, which amounted to 55 cents a share after taxes, came in just above expectations of 54 cents a share among analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.“Once again Carlyle delivered excellent cash earnings and thus an attractive second-quarter distribution for our unit holders,” David M. Rubenstein, co-chief executive, said in a statement.Carlyle was active in selling assets from its portfolio in the quarter and generated strong net performance fees, which represent a share of the profits from such sales. It exited its position in companies like Nielsen, the ratings company it had previously taken public, and Haier Electronics, the Chinese appliance maker. It also sold some of its shares in other companies like CommScope and Axalta Coating Systems.In April, Carlyle sold a $560 million block of shares in Axalta Coating Systems to Berkshire Hathaway. Carlyle bought Axalta from DuPont in February 2013.In all, Carlyle said it generated $5.8 billion from such sales.But not all its performance was positive. Some gains in the private equity portfolio were offset by holdings in legacy energy funds, which were buffeted by volatility in the energy markets and lower commodity prices. Carlyle owns a stake in these funds, which were raised by another firm, Riverstone Holdings.And Carlyle continues to be plagued by its global market strategies business, which makes investments in equities, credits and alternatives, reporting an 81 percent drop, to $4 million, in distributable earnings in the quarter. The firm blamed investor redemptions of $700 million, most of which came from its Claren Road fund. Carlyle bought a majority stake in the Claren Road hedge fund in 2010.It also attributed the decline in its global markets strategies segment to $9 million in fund-raising costs related to a new $2 billion energy fund that has not started to collect fees.Like its peers, Carlyle demonstrated its ability to tap into the tremendous demand from investors for private equity investments in a low interest rate environment. In some instances, Carlyle has had to turn some investors away. Over the last 12 months it has raised $20.4 billion of new capital to deploy. In the quarter, it raised $4.7 billion. Over all, Carlyle has $62.8 billion of capital available for investment.But William E. Conway, co-chief executive, warned that Carlyle would make new investments at a slower, more cautious pace than in recent years.“We think prices in many asset classes are high,” Mr. Conway told analysts and investors in a call on Wednesday. “Our caution is further driven by uncertainties in Greece, fluctuations in the Chinese stock markets, continued high levels of leverage and a significant movement in energy prices,” he added.Carlyle also announced a dividend of 89 cents a share. Its shares closed up 1.3 percent, at $26.35, on Wednesday.Advertisement