By CHAD BRAYJULY 29, 2015
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Wednesday that it had sold $2.2 billion in shares of the Citizens Financial Group, an American retail bank, in a larger-than-expected offering as it further reduces its stake in the lender.R.B.S., which spun off Citizens in an initial public offering last year, said that it had sold 86 million shares at $26 a share, equivalent to a 16 percent stake in Citizens Financial. If an additional overallotment of shares is fully exercised, the sale could amount to as much as $2.6 billion in Citizens Financial stock.Citizens Financial also intends to repurchase 9.6 million shares for $250 million from R.B.S. in a directed buyback.After the sale and buyback, R.B.S. will hold a 23.4 percent stake in Citizens Financial, down from 40.8 percent.Advertisement“The sale of Citizens is an integral part of our capital plan,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said in a news release. “It will help us to create a simpler, stronger and more efficient U.K.-focused bank that can better serve the needs of its customers.”AdvertisementR.B.S. had announced plans to further reduce its holdings in Citizens Financial on Tuesday.Shares of Citizens Financial closed up less than 1 percent at $26.17 in New York on Tuesday.R.B.S., based in Edinburgh, said it now planned to fully exit the American bank by the end of this year, a year ahead of schedule.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.European regulators required R.B.S. to divest itself of its stake in Citizens Financial as a condition of a bailout of 45 billion pounds, or about $70 billion, it received during the financial crisis in 2008.In September, Citizens raised $3 billion in its initial public offering in New York. It was the second-largest I.P.O. in the United States last year, behind the $25 billion debut of the Alibaba Group, the Chinese Internet giant.In March, R.B.S. sold a further $3.2 billion in shares of Citizens Financial.R.B.S., which is about 80 percent owned by the British government, is reshaping itself into a Britain-focused retail and corporate lender.In February, R.B.S. reported its seventh consecutive annual loss. It said it would dismantle its global investment bank and reduce the number of countries where it operates to about 13 from 38, resulting in significant job cuts. It has also sold or spun off several businesses in recent years, including Citizens Financial.In June, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, announced plans for the government to begin to reduce its stake in R.B.S., even if it had to record a loss on some holdings.Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are serving as global coordinators on the latest Citizens offering.A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: R.B.S. Share Sale.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.