AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael Cieply and Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Relativity Media, an entertainment mini-conglomerate that outgrew its financial underpinnings after a decade of expansion by its brash founder, Ryan Kavanaugh, filed for Chapter 11 protection on Thursday and put itself up for auction.In a declaration filed late Thursday, Brian G. Kushner, chief restructuring officer for the Relativity companies, said the companies had liabilities totaling $1.2 billion at the end of last year, and approximately $560 million in assets at book value. The petition was filed in United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York. Mr. Kushner also put the amount of the companies’ unsecured trade debt at $89.9 million as of the filing of the petition. Relativity Holdings and almost 150 affiliates joined in multiple petitions that named more than 1,000 creditors. The maneuver was a sharp setback for Mr. Kavanaugh, who hurriedly added sports, music, fashion, education and other businesses to an independent film and television studio. But it may not mark his end: Mr. Kavanaugh expects to lead the company through a reorganization and sale.Furthermore, Mr. Kavanaugh is among the company’s potential buyers, according to people briefed on his plans, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of confidentiality strictures. He recently sold a Malibu estate for $8.75 million.In a statement, Relativity said it had reached an agreement with an entity, called RM Bidder L.L.C., through which some of its lenders would acquire the company’s assets, then join in a court-supervised auction to be conducted by the Blackstone Group.The auction would presumably clear enormous debt that piled up as Mr. Kavanaugh tried to outwit rivals by focusing on middle-of-the-road movies like the horror film “Oculus” and Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s “Don Jon.” In addition, Mr. Kavanaugh, a flamboyant executive who flies his own helicopter, surrounded his film unit with a constellation of loosely related media ventures.According to Thursday’s filing, Relativity’s biggest trade creditors included the media buying firm Carat USA, which was owed $36.8 million in what was listed as a disputed debt. Mr. Kushner’s declaration described various debt holdings by Dune Capital Partners and a syndicate of banks led by OneWest Bank and others. Mr. Kushner said the banks were still owed around $28 million under a credit facility that recently matured. Not included in the bankruptcy filings were Relativity Sports; Relativity Education, a division focused on training in the film and media professions; and a movie-releasing arm, Relativity EuropaCorp Distribution. Relativity still expects to release the comedy “Masterminds” in early October and the thriller “Kidnap” in February.Relativity’s television division, best known for the MTV series “Catfish,” will proceed with “Limitless,” a drama set to debut on CBS this fall.As it prepared for the expected bankruptcy filing, Relativity on Wednesday sent layoff notices to 75 of its 350 employees. “Regrettably, as a result of the need to reduce costs, we have had to make some difficult staffing decisions,” Mr. Kavanaugh said in a statement on Thursday.People briefed on Mr. Kavanaugh’s plans said he was expected to keep the company’s core movie and television businesses intact, while scaling back or eliminating the hodgepodge of other interests. Relativity’s fashion business is already being closed, those people said. Relativity is based in Beverly Hills, Calif.Those operating plans will be supported by $45 million in new financing from a group of unnamed lenders, the filing on Thursday said. Relativity said that it hoped that a sale of the company would be complete by early October.The bankruptcy filing “will protect our valuable franchise and allow us to emerge as a stronger, more focused company,” Mr. Kavanaugh said in his statement.Founded in 2004, and then backed by the New York-based hedge fund Elliott Management, Relativity initially organized investments known as “slate financing deals” for major studios; rather than betting on a single film, investors bet on the collective returns of a group of movies. Its dealings with Universal Pictures yielded high-profile films like “The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift” and “Evan Almighty,” while an alliance with Sony Pictures brought “Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby,” “Ghost Rider” and “Hancock,” among others. While many of the films did well, some financial backers, including Aramid Entertainment, were less than thrilled with returns. Aramid sued Relativity in 2012, and eventually settled.As it began distributing its own films, building on the acquisition of the Rogue film label from Universal for $150 million in 2009, Relativity fell quickly into a trap that has often snared independent film companies: Even when successes outnumbered flops, cash needs outstripped financing.Those pressures, as well as Mr. Kavanaugh’s hunger for new ventures, led to a financial crisis earlier this year, and now a filing that will give the court and creditors sway over his next step.Advertisement