
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

JULY 30, 2015
For reasons that are mystifying, the idea of separating investment banks from commercial banks — once the law of the land for more than 60 years — is again the rage among certain politicians.The leading political proponent of this idea has been Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, a former Harvard Law School professor who should know better. In 2013, she joined with a bipartisan group of her fellow senators, including John McCain, Maria Cantwell and Angus King, to introduce what she called the 21st Century Glass-Steagall Act – an homage to the original law passed 80 years earlier. It was created, she hoped, to make the financial system safer.The goal, she wrote in the bill, was “to reduce risks to the financial system by limiting banks’ ability to engage in activities other than socially valuable core banking activities” and “to protect taxpayers and reduce moral hazard by removing explicit and implicit government guarantees for high-risk activities outside of the core business of banking.”Senator Warren’s bill went nowhere in the 113th Congress — because it was a bad idea. So she and Senator McCain reintroduced it last month. “Shattering the wall dividing commercial banks and investment banks, a culture of dangerous greed and excessive risk-taking has taken root in the banking world,” Senator McCain said in a statement explaining why he thought the wall should be rebuilt. “Big Wall Street institutions should be free to engage in transactions with significant risk, but not with federally insured deposits.”AdvertisementSenators Warren and McCain are not the only politicians on this particular bandwagon. Also along for the ride is Martin O’Malley, the former governor of Maryland and Democratic presidential aspirant, who has made reforming Wall Street a centerpiece of his long-shot campaign for his party’s nomination. (Or is he really running for the vice presidential spot on the ticket?)AdvertisementOn Monday, during a radio interview in New Hampshire, Mr. O’Malley reiterated his view that the Glass-Steagall Act should be reinstated. “If a bank is too big to fail without harming the common good of our nation, then it’s too big and we must break it up before it breaks us,” he said. In May, Senator Bernie Sanders, Democrat of Vermont and another candidate for the presidency, introduced his own legislation intended to break up the big banks.Interestingly, Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Democratic Party front-runner, whose husband signed the legislation repealing Glass-Steagall in 1999, does not seem to support the idea of re-establishing the separation between investment banking and commercial banking. “I think this is a much more complicated issue than pointing to any one piece of legislation and saying, ‘Well, if we just pass that, everything would be fine,’  ” she told reporters last week in South Carolina.Mrs. Clinton is right. Despite the relentless rhetoric, the fact that commercial banks are in the investment banking business and investment banks are in the commercial banking business had almost nothing to do with causing the financial crisis of 2008.The truth is that the most acute problems in the years leading up to the financial crisis occurred in what we would traditionally think of as pure investment banks – Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley – which had generally gone hog wild in the manufacture and sale of mortgage-backed securities, billions of dollars of which they allowed to build up on their balance sheets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When the banks’ short-term lenders no longer wanted these assets as collateral for overnight loans, the investment banks could not finance their daily operations and sent up the white flags of surrender. As we all remember, JPMorgan Chase rescued Bear Stearns and Bank of America rescued Merrill Lynch. Lehman Brothers was allowed to fail after the British regulators blocked Barclays, another big commercial bank, from buying it. Both JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America were already in the investment banking and commercial banking businesses when the federal government encouraged them to save the two failing investment banks.It was clear that the path to salvation for the financial system – at least in 2008 — was through the big banks that were already in the investment banking business. (The glaring exception to this pattern was Citigroup, which, while a big commercial bank, would surely have failed without its government rescue, in large part because of the behavior of its investment bankers.)If Senator Warren had her way, JPMorgan Chase’s rescue of Bear Stearns and Bank of America’s rescue of Merrill Lynch would have been prohibited. What fun to contemplate the idea of Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch in bankruptcy at the same time.You can bet that Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs would have also filed for bankruptcy in Senator Warren’s world because essentially the Federal Reserve rescued both of those investment banks, in late September 2008, by allowing them to become bank holding companies. That gave them access to short-term funding from the Fed, a huge benefit because short-term financing in the markets was drying up. (After the Fed allowed Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley to become bank holding companies, each quickly obtained a lifesaving equity investment: Goldman from Warren E. Buffett and the public market; Morgan Stanley from a large Japanese bank.)The problem on Wall Street is not the size of the banks, their concentration of assets or the businesses they choose to be in. The problem on Wall Street remains one of improper incentives. When people are rewarded to take big risks with other people’s money, that’s exactly what they will do. The problem is that the top bankers, traders and executives on Wall Street collectively no longer have enough of their own skin in the game to make a difference to them when the things that they do go awry. They get rich either way. That is what needs to change on Wall Street, not some outdated, cockamamie notion of having the government dictate what businesses Wall Street can be in or how big a bank can be.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »