By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 30, 2015
SunGard may have been planning to return to the public markets, but it may instead be sold to a peer.The company, a financial software maker, is in talks to sell itself to Fidelity National Information Services, a big service provider for banks, people briefed on the matter said on Thursday. Such a deal could value SunGard at more than $8 billion, one of those people said.If completed, a sale would represent a quicker exit for SunGard’s backers, an alliance of private equity firms that bought the company in 2005 for nearly $11 billion. That deal, struck in the early days of a leveraged buyout boom, has been one of the lengthier investments by private equity shops in recent years.The company filed to go public last month as those investors — Bain Capital, the Blackstone Group, the buyout arm of Goldman Sachs, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Providence Equity Partners, Silver Lake and TPG Capital — sought to take advantage of strong stock markets to sell their holdings.AdvertisementThose companies have rushed to hold initial public stock offerings of their portfolio companies, trading in the quickness and certainty that an outright sale of their properties would bring in exchange for a potentially higher payout.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But in virtually every I.P.O. filing by a company owned by private equity, the owners have explored a sale nonetheless.AdvertisementSunGard, based in Wayne, Pa., provides a number of software products, primarily for banks and other financial institutions. The company’s revenue has been roughly flat for the last five years, while it has posted annual losses more often than profits during that time. Last year, the company lost $222 million on $2.8 billion in revenue.Its suitor is also a big player in the financial services industry. Fidelity National Information Services, known within the industry as FIS, was spun off from Fidelity National Financial in 2006, and it focuses on banking and payments services.The company has a market value of about $17.8 billion.News of the talks was reported earlier by Bloomberg News.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Merger Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.