AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeIt is far from clear that Jacob Fugger really was “The Richest Man Who Ever Lived,” as the title of Greg Steinmetz’s new biography claims. That said, he definitely seems to have amassed significantly more money than any of the current crop of multibillionaires.Very few Americans have heard of him. The marketing people at Simon & Schuster wisely relegated “The Life and Times of Jacob Fugger” to a subtitle.Just the same, the superrich are now the object of intensely conflicting and conflicted interest. Revulsion at the apparently inexorable growth in income inequality sits uneasily alongside public veneration of the latest crop of tech billionaires. What better time to explore the lessons of a largely forgotten Renaissance figure whose wealth, estimated to have been in the hundreds of billions, far surpassed that of today’s Bill Gates — still No.1 on the latest Forbes rich list at $79.2 billion.It is a good idea and makes for an interesting book, although the payoff, unlike Fugger’s wealth, is relatively modest. The problem Mr. Steinmetz faces is twofold.First, Fugger, a German banker who lived at the turn of the 16th century, did not leave much behind to give any real flavor of what kind of man he was: no juicy love letters, revealing diaries or contemporaneous descriptions of emotional outbursts or dramatic confrontations. Letters to the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, demanding that he pay back his huge outstanding loans with interest and “without further delay” make entertaining reading. They don’t, however, give any sense of the man beyond his self-confidence and the extent of his leverage with the powers of his day. The author is frequently reduced to speculating what Fugger and others might have thought or felt at various crucial points in the narrative.Second, it is not obvious what lessons the Fugger story has for either the aspiring superrich or those looking for a relevant morality tale on the dangers of excessive income inequality. The economic and political environment of Renaissance Europe is far enough removed from our own times that parallels are hard to draw without really stretching.Mr. Steinmetz tries valiantly but none too convincingly to argue for contemporary relevance by claiming that Fugger was “the first modern businessman in that he was the first to pursue wealth for its own sake.”The recent legitimate preoccupation with growing income inequality could lead one to forget that until the second half of the 19th century, most people lived in absolute squalor. What “The Richest Man Who Ever Lived” reminds us is that before then, not only were the poor poorer and more numerous, the superrich were richer and far fewer. To understand why this is so, one does not need to look toward Fugger’s character or psyche but to how he made his money.Fugger made himself indispensable to various potentates by financing bribes, wars and other expensive tools of statecraft. As collateral, he insisted on long-term exclusive concessions, notably for mining and other interests within their borders or the borders of an about-to-be-invaded territory. In an economy in which sovereigns controlled access to the important natural resources and staples that then represented the bulk of gross domestic product, it is not surprising that the sovereigns themselves or their enablers could amass unprecedented wealth. While contemporary concerns about wealth disparities have legitimacy, the emergence of the knowledge economy has made it impossible for wealth to be as concentrated as it was in Fugger’s day.An unexpected group of heroes to those most concerned with wealth inequality emerges from the pages of “The Richest Man Who Ever Lived.” Hated then as now, lawyers during Fugger’s time were observed to be “increasing like grasshoppers year by year.” The ascendance of Roman law over so-called customary law had two long-term implications. One was that by establishing the sanctity of private property rights, it created many potential private competitors to the state for the ownership of crucial assets. Second, enforcing those and other rights generated an insatiable demand for lawyers and indirectly established the foundation of a professional middle class.That someone like Fugger could exist at all is remarkable to modern eyes. Kings redrew borders and raised taxes at his behest. Popes changed canon law — notably eliminating the usury prohibition — to satisfy his interests.The people revolted, although they did not have much success: The German Peasants’ War was quickly crushed at the cost of 100,000 lives. Of more lasting influence was the emergence of Protestantism, which can reasonably be described as a reaction to Fugger’s success in co-opting Rome.The economic and political structures that enabled Fugger to wield this kind of power no longer exist. Nonetheless, “The Richest Man Who Ever Lived” still provides a fascinating and useful cautionary tale of the dangers of unbridled capitalism, particularly in economies dominated by autocratic rulers.Jonathan A. Knee is a professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners.Advertisement