By EMILY STEELJULY 30, 2015
NBCUniversal is poised to make a pair of investments in the digital media start-ups BuzzFeed and Vox, seeking to appeal to younger millennial viewers who are abandoning traditional media, according to executives with knowledge of the negotiations.The film and television group, owned by Comcast, is close to investing $250 million in BuzzFeed, known for its trending quizzes and lists and a relatively recent expansion into journalism. The deal would value BuzzFeed at about $1.5 billion, said the executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the deal terms were private.NBCUniversal also is in talks to invest an unknown sum in Vox Media, the home of a stable of sites including the sports brand SB Nation, the tech site The Verge and the news site Vox.com, at a valuation of about $850 million, the executives said.Representatives of NBCUniversal, BuzzFeed and Vox declined to comment. The deals will probably be announced in the coming weeks, one executive said. News of the investments was first reported by ReCode, which is owned by Vox Media.AdvertisementValuations for the digital media outlets have soared in the last year as their traffic continues to grow. At the same time, legacy media companies grow ever more eager to tap their connection to youth, especially as television ratings deteriorate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At BuzzFeed, which attracted about 80 million unique visitors in the United States in June, about 54 percent of the audience is between the ages of 18 to 34, according to the measurement firm comScore. At Vox, which had 54 million unique visitors in June, about 41 percent of its audience is in that same age group. (That age group represents just 30 percent of the total United States Internet population.)The deals represent the latest effort by big media to dip their toes into the digital media waters. Investments can give media companies the opportunity to learn about the digital landscape and also the chance to benefit on the company’s growth without taking on the risks that come with outright acquisitions.AdvertisementMedia giants including 21st Century Fox and A&E Television Networks have backed Vice Media, known for its gritty take on news and entertainment. Last year, Vice closed a pair of investments totaling $500 million and valuing the company at more than $2.5 billion. And in January, a group of investors led by Axel Springer SE, the large European publishing house, invested $25 million in the digital media upstart Business Insider.An earlier version of this article erroneously included ReCode among digital media sites backed by the NBCUniversal News Group.Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: NBCUniversal Invests in BuzzFeed and Vox.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.