AdvertisementSupported byStandard DeductionBy Victor FleischerThe plot of Oliver Stone’s 1987 movie “Wall Street” revolves around the betrayal of Bud Fox by his mentor and hero, Gordon Gekko.Bud persuades his father, a maintenance foreman at Bluestar Airlines, to vouch for him and secure union concessions that are critical to a buyout plan. But Gekko betrays Bud and puts in motion a plan to strip the company’s assets, raid the overfunded pension plan and liquidate the company. Bud retaliates by getting his friends at Jackson Steinem to dump the stock. Gekko is forced to sell at a loss. Bud faces down Gekko, wearing a wire as part of a plea deal with federal authorities.It’s a heck of a good story that captured the spirit of Wall Street in the 1980s.Political speechwriters also try to capture the spirit of the times. But it seems that Hillary Rodham Clinton’s team is three decades behind.The story on Wall Street today is asset management, not corporate raiders.In a column on Tuesday, I argued that Mrs. Clinton missed the mark with her plan to address short-termism, which she presented in a speech at New York University on Friday. Mrs. Clinton proposed raising capital gains tax rates on investments held for less than six years.The speech spun a narrative about “cut and run” investors, bringing to mind the stereotype of Gordon Gekko. I’m not sure it’s a winning approach. Michael Douglas received an Oscar for delivering Gekko’s famous “greed is good” speech. In any event, it’s a stale debate. And a good tax platform needs verisimilitude as much as narrative. Details matter.The specific ways that investments are made through financial intermediaries make the capital gains tax an unwieldy instrument for shaping corporate behavior.Tax is a fickle policy instrument, and any attempt to use tax policy to change incentives should take the old carpenter’s advice to measure twice, cut once. Or, in this case, measure twice, raise once.I suspect that Mrs. Clinton’s tax platform will soon change to focus on more promising ways to tax today’s Gordon Gekkos, like raising the tax rate on carried interest (an idea she has already endorsed) and limiting corporate deductions for executive pay. But it may be useful to explain in more detail why some tax experts reacted so negatively to Mrs. Clinton’s plan.Here are seven reasons it is difficult to change investor behavior by toggling the capital gains rate:Asset managers are generally evaluated on a pretax basis.Private equity fund managers, hedge fund managers, venture capitalists and most other asset managers are compensated on a pretax basis, meaning that their performance is evaluated based on investment returns that are calculated without taking investor-level taxes into account.When choosing among money managers, investors pay attention to pretax performance, which is disclosed, and not after-tax performance, which is not usually disclosed as clearly, if at all. A crucial reason for this is that different investors have different tax profiles, and so it is difficult for an asset manager to disclose performance in terms of a single after-tax rate of return. As a result, most asset managers don’t pay close attention to investor-level taxes.Many investors are tax-exempt.Mrs. Clinton wants to focus on “cut and run” investors out to make a quick buck. Some private equity funds would seem to fit that description. A fund manager who buys a company, sells assets, fires workers and sells the company for a gain two years later would seem to be affected by Mrs. Clinton’s proposal.The problem is that the fund manager is investing other people’s money.Private equity funds raise money from institutional investors like pension plans, university endowments, foundations and insurance companies. A majority of these investors are tax-exempt. As a result, those investors are indifferent to the capital gains rate.Carried interest is calculated on a pretax basis.Still, not all investors are tax-exempt. Wouldn’t taxable investors in private equity encourage fund managers to change their behavior in response to rising capital gains taxes?Perhaps, but fund managers are not likely to listen. A major element of the fund manager’s compensation, known as carried interest, is the percentage of profits, typically 20 percent, allocated to the fund manager in exchange for managing the fund and its portfolio companies. Profits are calculated without taking investor-level taxes into account.Hit and run is not the usual strategy.An increase in the capital gains rate could affect the fund manager personally, but not as much as you would think. The holding period of investments is determined at the fund level, and the average holding period for private equity is about five years. Under Mrs. Clinton’s plan, the rate on such investments would be just 4 percent higher than current law.Managers of activist hedge funds don’t change behavior in response to capital gains rate changes.Consider activist hedge funds, another target for Mrs. Clinton. Again, although the fund manager might be personally affected by capital gains rates, most of the investors are tax-exempt, and the fund manager’s carried interest is based on pretax, not after-tax, returns. Fund managers are unlikely to hold an investment for a longer period if it jeopardizes their carry, and it’s not clear that we would want them to.Mutual fund managers don’t change behavior in response to capital gains rate changes.Most wealthy individuals hold shares though mutual funds or other investment vehicles. Other than funds that market themselves as tax-sensitive, most funds advertise only their pretax performance, and that is what most investors care about.A recent government study, for example, found that mutual funds are “extremely insensitive” to changes in tax rates. The study finds an elasticity coefficient of just -0.08, meaning that even a 10 percentage point increase in capital gains tax rates would lead mutual fund managers to defer realizations — that is, to hold on to appreciated stock for longer periods — less than 1 percent of the time compared with no change in the law.Middle-class investors aren’t likely to respond.Finally, most middle-class investors hold equity investments through retirement accounts that are sheltered from tax. Distributions from retirement accounts, when taxed, are taxed at ordinary income rates, not capital gains rates.But there is a silver lining in all of this nonresponse to changes in tax rates: An increase in the capital gains rate would raise quite a bit of revenue without distorting the allocation of economic resources.Here is one suggestion. If Mrs. Clinton wants to address private equity short-termism, a better approach would be to increase the tax rate on dividends to equal the ordinary income rate. Fund managers often load up a company with debt, using the cash to pay out a quick dividend. It’s not clear that a tax change would curb this kind of destructive financial engineering. But at least we would have more tax revenue.One can debate whether that revenue should be used to pay for entitlement programs, to reduce the deficit, to reduce payroll taxes or to reduce the corporate tax rate. But anytime the government can raise revenue without distorting behavior, it’s worth considering.Advertisement