AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzIn a common pattern of the last few years, the American economy, after a dismal start to 2015, regained its footing in the spring and looked set to continue a modest advance for the rest of the year.But the lackluster data last quarter and a slight downward revision of the estimated growth rate over the last three years underscored the challenges that still lie ahead for an economy that doesn’t seem to be able to move ahead at more than a slow jog.The rebound in April, May and June was largely expected, but the 2.3 percent annualized rate, adjusted for inflation, that the Commerce Department reported on Thursday in its initial estimate was a bit below what economists on Wall Street predicted before the release.Investors were not impressed, and major stock market averages moved little.“I think it’s an O.K. performance,” said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS, a research firm based in Lexington, Mass. “Underlying growth is stable but not spectacular. The economy is plodding along.”While hardly exceptional by the standards of the late 1990s or even compared with the 5 percent burst of growth in the summer of 2014, the pace of expansion is largely in line with the trajectory of the recovery, which began almost exactly six years ago.In annual revisions that were also part of the Commerce Department report on Thursday, government statisticians lowered their assessment of the economy’s performance over the last several years.The initial estimate of 2.3 percent growth for 2011 through 2014 was lowered to 2 percent, a level that reflects the slow healing of the job market and helps explain why wages and prices have gained so little ground. The pace was below that of most past recoveries.The rate of expansion in the first quarter of 2015 was revised up to 0.6 percent, reversing earlier estimates that showed a minor contraction.“The environment has been even more challenging than we thought before,” Mr. Behravesh said. “The primary reason is that the U.S. economy had to go through a period of deleveraging, with debt reduction primarily by households and banks.”As for the last quarter, much of the improvement in the economy came from a better trade balance, especially in terms of exports. Mr. Behravesh said he expected growth in the second half of the year to rise to just under 3 percent as the drag from lower energy industry spending diminishes.In a separate report on Thursday, the Labor Department reported that initial unemployment claims last week at the state level increased by 12,000, to 267,000. Despite that slight rise, new jobless claims remain close to a 32-year low, and the more reliable four-week moving average suggests that the labor market continues to improve despite the less-than-impressive overall growth rate.If output continues to expand and hiring advances at a healthy pace, the Federal Reserve is likely to begin its long-awaited move to raise interest rates from historic lows by year-end, perhaps as early as mid-September.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.On Wednesday, Fed policy makers issued an upbeat assessment of the economy’s progress after concluding a two-day meeting. But they left interest rates near zero, where they have been since late 2008, when the economy and the financial system were at crisis levels.Oxford Economics, a research firm, termed the latest snapshot of gross domestic product a “sweet and sour G.D.P. release.”In a note to investors, Oxford said it saw “sweet upward revisions to residential activity and solid Q2 consumer spending momentum, but a sour taste from reduced household outlays on services and lower equipment spending.”Net exports added 0.13 percentage point to overall growth last quarter, a big turnabout after being a significant drag in late 2014 and early 2015.Hammered by a one-two punch from a stronger dollar and then a labor slowdown at West Coast ports, net exports reduced growth by one percentage point in the fourth quarter of 2014 and nearly two full percentage points in the first quarter of 2015.That was the worst two-quarter trade performance since 1998, according to a report by Morgan Stanley, but as the ports began functioning normally again this spring and the dollar has stabilized, the drag from trade has faded, at least for now.In addition to the impact on the headline growth numbers, the trade balance will also be watched by experts who want to gauge the degree by which economic distress overseas is affecting American exporters and importers.In contrast with the turmoil overseas, the American economy has been an island of relative stability recently. Consumer spending in the second quarter rose 2.9 percent, compared with a 1.8 percent gain in the first quarter. Investment in residential real estate rose 6.6 percent, compared with 10.1 percent over January, February and March.The next crucial reading for the economy will come Aug. 7, when the Labor Department reports the latest figures on hiring and unemployment for July. The unemployment rate in June stood at 5.3 percent, the lowest level since April 2008, although that figure did not take into account the large number of jobless Americans who gave up the search for work and dropped out of the labor force entirely.The Fed and Wall Street are keeping an eye on the falling unemployment rate, but they are also looking for signs that more unemployed Americans are being drawn back into the labor force by the prospect of finding a decent job.Looking ahead, Michael Gapen, the chief United States economist at Barclays, said the 2.9 percent increase in consumer spending last quarter bodes well for the rest of the year because consumers are responsible for the bulk of overall economic activity.Weakness elsewhere in the world, however, may act as a ceiling on American output despite growing demand at home.“One thing that would help would be if the rest of the world were doing better,” Mr. Gapen said. “About 15 percent of growth is from trade, so without that, it’s hard to get a growth rate of 3 percent or better.”Advertisement