By CHAD BRAYJULY 30, 2015
LONDON — British regulators said on Thursday that they had barred a former trader at the Dutch lender Rabobank from the securities industry after he pleaded guilty in the United States in March in connection with rigging a global benchmark interest rate.The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain said the former trader, Lee Stewart, 52, had been barred from working in the British financial services industry for lacking “honesty and integrity.” The ban was put in place on July 21, the regulator said.In March, Mr. Stewart pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit wire and bank fraud in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York and acknowledged misconduct related to the bank’s submissions of the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, as it was tied to the dollar. He is set to be sentenced in 2017.“Mr. Stewart was an experienced trader at Rabobank who, through his guilty plea, has admitted to participating in a criminal conspiracy to manipulate Libor over a prolonged period of time,” said Georgina Philippou, the acting director of enforcement and market oversight at the Financial Conduct Authority. “His behavior was inexcusable and very serious.”AdvertisementMr. Stewart, who was a senior derivatives trader, is one of three former Rabobank employees to admit wrongdoing. Seven former Rabobank employees have been charged with crimes in the United States.AdvertisementRabobank itself admitted in October 2013 to criminal wrongdoing by its employees and agreed to pay more than $1 billion in criminal and civil penalties to settle inquiries by American, British and other authorities. Its chief executive also stepped down immediately.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Stewart could not immediately be reached for comment on Thursday.In its final notice, the regulator said that it determined that Mr. Stewart, who worked at the bank from 1993 to 2009, committed “deliberate misconduct” by trying to manipulate the dollar-Libor rate. Libor helps determine the borrowing costs for trillions of dollars in loans.As part of his guilty plea in the United States, Mr. Stewart acknowledged participating in a conspiracy that ran from May 2006 through early 2011, according to the Justice Department.To set Libor and other rates, banks submit the rates at which they would be prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities.Since it emerged publicly in 2012, the Libor scandal has engulfed some of the world’s largest banks and tarnished the reputations of many of Britain’s leading lenders.Prosecutors in Britain also have brought criminal charges against 13 individuals related to the manipulation of Libor. The first criminal trial in Britain in the inquiry is continuing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.