By JACK EWINGJULY 30, 2015
FRANKFURT — Deutsche Bank, the European bank with the largest presence on Wall Street, said on Thursday that its net profit had more than tripled in the second quarter. But the newly appointed co-chief executive called the earnings “poor” and said the bank needed to do better.“Our financial performance does not reflect our tremendous potential,” John Cryan, who replaced Anshu Jain as co-chief executive on July 1, said in a statement.Mr. Cryan said the bank must become more efficient, getting rid of businesses that are not very profitable, reducing risk and simplifying an overly complex organizational structure that “inhibits effective decision making, blurs accountability and embeds wasteful cost.”“Only by doing this can we produce the attractive returns our shareholders deserve,” Mr. Cryan said.AdvertisementThe unusually forthright statement signals that Mr. Cryan plans major changes in Germany’s largest bank, and that it could follow other European banks like UBS or Barclays that have cut back their investment banking activities. New regulations, intended to prevent another financial crisis, force banks to rely less on borrowed money and make it more difficult for them to earn huge profits from risky trading strategies.AdvertisementDeutsche Bank said net profit rose to 818 million euros, or about $904 million, in April through June, compared with €238 million in the first quarter of 2014. Profit benefited from favorable exchange rate movements, as did revenue, which rose 17 percent to €9.2 billion, the bank said.The euro has declined sharply since last year, increasing the value of sales in dollars or other major currencies when they are translated into euros. In addition, Deutsche Bank clients were more active in financial markets, which increased fees. The bank also had a lower tax bill than it did a year earlier.The bank’s pretax return on shareholders’ equity, a common measure of bank profitability, was 6.7 percent, compared with 6.3 percent a year earlier. That is considered a meager return. Deutsche Bank’s goal is 10 percent. Before the financial crisis forced banks to curtail risky activities, Deutsche Bank and many other institutions aimed for 25 percent.The earnings report is the first since Mr. Cryan, a former high-ranking executive of the Swiss bank UBS, was named co-chief executive of Deutsche Bank in June. Mr. Jain resigned that month amid questions about the way he handled an investigation into possible manipulation of benchmark interest rates by Deutsche Bank traders.Jürgen Fitschen remains a co-chief executive of the bank, but he has said he will resign next year.As Mr. Cryan takes control of the bank, he must contend not only with poor profitability but also with scandals that have led to huge fines and have hurt its reputation.In April, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay $2.5 billion in penalties to the United States and British authorities to settle accusations of rate fixing. The fine was larger than that paid by other banks in the case, and many shareholders blamed Mr. Jain for bungling negotiations with investigators.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the meantime, a report by Germany’s bank regulator, known as BaFin, said that Mr. Jain had ignored signs of misconduct by traders and failed to investigate thoroughly when allegations of wrongdoing came to light.The confidential BaFin report, prepared in May but first leaked to news outlets this month, also said that Mr. Jain and other Deutsche Bank executives — some still on the job — had created a culture that allowed the wrongdoing to take place. The report did not accuse Mr. Jain of any crimes.AdvertisementHowever, the president of BaFin has since disputed one of the main assertions of the report, which was written by one of the regulator’s department heads.Felix Hufeld, president of BaFin, said in a letter to Mr. Jain dated July 15 that he did not believe Mr. Jain had intentionally made false statements to the Bundesbank, the German central bank, which also oversees commercial banks. The BaFin report had suggested that Mr. Jain had lied about when he first learned of possible wrongdoing.Mr. Hufeld wrote that, based on an examination of the evidence, “it seems to me that suspicions that you knowingly made false statements to a regulator are not substantiated.” Other assertions made in the BaFin report remain under investigation, Mr. Hufeld wrote, according to a copy of the letter obtained by The New York Times.Mr. Cryan acknowledged the bank’s legal problems in a letter to employees on July 1, the day he took office. “Our reputation has been damaged by instances of serious misconduct,” Mr. Cryan wrote.Even after the recent settlement in the rate-fixing case, Deutsche Bank still has €3.8 billion set aside to cover costs from lawsuits and official investigations into allegations of misconduct, primarily in the years before the financial crisis began in 2008.Mr. Cryan, who was a member of Deutsche Bank’s supervisory board before becoming chief executive, spent his career in investment banking but until this month had never been a full-time employee at Deutsche Bank. He may be more willing to make significant changes than Mr. Jain, who played a major role in turning Deutsche Bank into a contender on Wall Street.A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Deutsche Bank Profit Jumps, but a Chief Sets Higher Expectations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.