
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

JULY 31, 2015
What constitutes insider trading has always been open to interpretation. Now, the Supreme Court is being asked to decide a knotty question: How much of a benefit does the source of confidential information have to receive in order to convict those who trade on it?This week, the Justice Department filed a petition with the Supreme Court asking for review of the decision in United States v. Newman, which overturned the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers. The move comes after the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled that the government had not proved the tipper received a benefit, rejecting a request to revisit its ruling.There is no guarantee the Supreme Court will take the case. And even if it does, there is the risk that the government will not get the answer it wants because the justices could decide to refashion insider trading law.Like every advocate seeking review, the government will invoke the turmoil that the Newman opinion is likely to generate in future cases that seek to grab the Supreme Court’s attention. The court turns down the vast majority of the nearly 10,000 petitions for review it receives every year, with fewer than 100 granted in a term. Even the nation’s solicitor general – sometimes referred to as the “Tenth Justice” because of the high standing his office holds before the justices – needs to engage in a bit of hyperbole to get a case heard.AdvertisementThe Newman case involved insider trading based on information passed along by employees at Dell and Nvidia about earnings announcements that were not yet public. The two defendants, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson, got secondhand information from analysts at their hedge funds and traded on it. They never dealt directly with the employees who tipped off others, nor did they speak to those who initially received the illegal tips.AdvertisementThe United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan reversed the convictions last December. Its rationale was that the jurors were not told they had to find that the two defendants knew the tippers received a benefit in exchange for revealing the confidential information. The Justice Department did not challenge that part of the ruling in the Supreme Court, so at a minimum, Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson will have their convictions overturned.The appeals court did not stop there, however. It also ruled that the government could not retry the defendants because the evidence was so deficient about the benefit provided to the tipper that no reasonable jury could find them guilty. It was this issue that has the Justice Department so upset, because in a brief description of what constitutes a sufficient benefit, the appeals court raised the bar for proving a violation of the securities laws in other cases.Insider trading cases involving tips are based on Supreme Court ruling in 1983, Dirks v. SEC. The court said that to convict a defendant for trading on confidential information received as a tip, the government must show the tipper received a benefit — called a quid pro quo. That benefit is usually something tangible, like money or future business. But the Supreme Court also found that it can be shown “when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”In the Newman case, the Justice Department pointed to the friendship between the sources of the confidential information and the initial recipients to show the benefit. But the United States Appeals Court for the Second Circuit changed the analysis by requiring greater evidence of the benefit, at least when the relationship is a casual social friendship. The fateful words of the appeals court ruling were that there must be “proof of a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”It is that additional element that requires a Supreme Court review because it represents an “effort to rewrite this court’s decision in Dirks,” according to the petition filed by Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the nation’s solicitor general. If left in place, the appeals court’s decision will “hurt market participants, disadvantage scrupulous market analysts, and impair the government’s ability to protect the fairness and integrity of the securities markets,” Mr. Verrilli argues.In a similar case, United States v. Salman, which was heard before the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the court took a more favorable view of what the government has to prove in a tipping case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As I wrote in a recent post, “The Newman and Salman decisions are not taking opposite positions, but are not harmonious, either.” It is questionable whether the Supreme Court will view the two federal appeals court decisions as contradictory enough to warrant its review. The issue of how much evidence is enough to prove a gift is a narrow point of law that depends largely on the circumstances of each case. Thus, the Supreme Court could decide to wait to see whether the decision in the Newman case causes as much trouble in future insider cases as the government claims in its petition.To further heighten its chances for review, the Justice Department points out that the appeals court seems to be thumbing its nose at the Supreme Court’s own ruling in the Dirks case. The government argues that the decision in the Newman case “rewrote the concept of a ‘gift’ so as to eliminate it” and “substituted its novel and imprecise legal rules” for the test “that this court carefully fashioned.” In other words, the solicitor general is like the little brother tattling to his parents about the big brother’s transgressions.AdvertisementIf the Supreme Court takes up the case and leaves the appeals court decision intact, the government may find itself regretting its action. Indeed, there is a chance that the law could be cut back, making it more difficult to pursue tipping cases, and perhaps other forms of insider trading.The Supreme Court justices have signaled their unease with the extension of federal criminal law into new areas, highlighting the problem of overcriminalization in which acts that are only of questionable legality can result in substantial punishments. Before their convictions were overturned, Mr. Chiasson received a 78-month prison sentence, while Mr. Newman was sentenced to 54 months. Furthermore, the Justice Department never took any action against the employees at Nvidia or Dell who leaked the insider information in the first place.The recent decision in Yates v. United States shows how the Supreme Court might approach limiting insider trading law. That case involved an obstruction of justice statute that made it illegal to alter, destroy or mutilate any “record, document, or tangible object” to impede an investigation.The defendant, a fishing boat captain, destroyed red groupers to avoid being found to have violated a federal law that prohibits harvesting undersize fish. A majority of the justices found that fish did not fit within the meaning of a tangible object as used by Congress, which was limited to items similar to records and document that contain information.A dissenting opinion by Justice Elena Kagan roundly criticized the majority for rewriting the law to avoid overcriminalizing conduct that should not be subject to punishment. She sympathized with the goal of avoiding punishment for marginally illegal conduct, noting that the obstruction statute is “an emblem of a deeper pathology in the federal criminal code.” But “we are not entitled to replace the statute Congress enacted with an alternative of our own design,” she concluded.Insider trading is not written in a statute, however, evolving instead as the product of judicial decisions. So the justices would have a much freer hand in refashioning the rule if they believe it reaches too broadly by giving prosecutors undue power.Of course, the Supreme Court could turn down the government’s petition to review the decision in the Newman case altogether, leaving the government with conflicting appeals court rulings. Or worse, it could go beyond both rulings and make it even tougher for the government to prove insider trading, if it feels that the developed by the courts is contributing to overcriminalizationIf either were to happen, then perhaps Congress would finally adopt a statute providing a clear definition of what constitutes insider trading. The Justice Department may be willing to roll the dice with the Supreme Court in hopes that it would force Congress to broaden insider trading law.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »