By MICHAEL CIEPLYJULY 31, 2015
LOS ANGELES — As the multiple filings in Relativity Media’s Chapter 11 bankruptcy case surfaced on Thursday, details of the financial crisis that has gripped the entertainment miniconglomerate for months finally became clear.In a declaration filed with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York, Brian G. Kushner, designated the chief restructuring officer for Relativity, provided a list of the secured debt that pushed the company and its flamboyant chief executive, Ryan Kavanaugh, toward the voluntary bankruptcy filing.According to Mr. Kushner, the secured debt totaled roughly $675 million, plus accrued interest, as of the bankruptcy filing.The largest single component was about $362 million due under a pair of term loans called the “Courtland” facility. In recent weeks, holders of the Courtland debt, including Anchorage Capital and Luxor Capital, have been intensely negotiating terms under which Relativity would receive new, “debtor-in-possession” financing during the bankruptcy, pending what is expected to be a sale of the company next month.AdvertisementMr. Kushner’s declaration attributes the rest of the secured debt to four lending arrangements. One of those was a loan led by the OneWest bank, under which about $28 million is still owed. By the account of both Mr. Kushner and Timothy R. Coleman, a Blackstone investment banker who has worked with Relativity in recent months, OneWest “swept” $32 million from Relativity’s accounts as the bank loan came due.That captured funds would normally have been used to make payments to those who helped make Relativity’s films and television programs. Mr. Kushner estimates that $28 million in certain kinds of those payments are due, and he argues that Relativity should be allowed to pay those on a high-priority basis to avoid defaults that would cripple its ability to do business in Hollywood.AdvertisementMr. Coleman’s declaration, also filed with the Bankruptcy Court, said lenders in July gave Relativity $15 million in extremely short-term loans, as it tried, unsuccessfully, to raise $175 million in fresh equity and $250 million in new debt by July 27. Its failure to do so, he said, precipitated the bankruptcy filing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.