By REUTERSJULY 31, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Labor costs in the United States recorded their smallest increase in 33 years during the second quarter as workers were paid less in commissions and bonuses. The tiny gain appeared to be a temporary wage growth setback against the backdrop of diminishing labor market slack.The employment cost index, the broadest measure of labor costs, edged up 0.2 percent in the quarter, the Labor Department said on Friday. That was the smallest gain since the series began in the second quarter of 1982. The index rose 0.7 percent in the first quarter.The weakness in compensation was concentrated in sales, information and wholesale trade, occupations where workers are likely to receive incentive pay. Commissions and bonuses helped lift workers’ compensation at the start of the year.Excluding commissions, compensation was up 0.6 percent in both the first and second quarters, according to TD Securities.AdvertisementEconomists forecast that the employment cost index, widely viewed by policy makers and economists as one of the better measures of labor market slack, would rise 0.6 percent in the second quarter.AdvertisementAt 5.3 percent, the unemployment rate is close to the 5 percent to 5.2 percent range that most Fed officials consider consistent with full employment.That tightening of the labor market, which is expected to translate eventually into faster wage growth, has helped to hold consumer sentiment at lofty levels over the last eight months.In a separate report released on Friday, the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index slipped to 93.1 in July from 96.1 in June. Still, the index was up 13.8 percent from July 2014.Households expected their incomes to rise over the next two years, in sharp contrast with another confidence survey published this week that suggested a deterioration in consumers’ perceptions of the labor market.“On balance, the Michigan survey suggests that consumer sentiment remains broadly stable,” said Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the second quarter, wages and salaries, which account for 70 percent of employment costs, rose 0.2 percent. That was also the smallest increase on record.Private sector compensation failed to rise for the first time on record. Compensation in the services industry nudged up 0.1 percent in the second quarter after rising 0.6 percent in the previous period.Compensation in the goods-producing sector rose a solid 0.7 percent after increasing 0.5 percent in the first quarter.AdvertisementIn the 12 months through June, labor costs rose 2 percent, the smallest 12-month increase since last year and a further slip below the 3 percent threshold that economists say is needed to bring inflation closer to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent medium-term target.Benefits rose 0.1 percent in the second quarter, but economists said that was mostly because of changes to the definition of retirement benefits.A third report on Friday, from MNI Chicago, showed that factory activity in the Midwest rose to a six-month high in July. The Chicago Business Barometer rose to 54.7, the first gain since April, from June’s reading of 49.4. A reading above 50 indicates expansion in the region’s manufacturing industries.Both production and new orders expanded at the fastest pace since the beginning of the year. A special survey question on wage growth showed that 40 percent of respondents said wages had grown 1 percent to 2 percent over the last year.About 19 percent of respondents reported that wages were up 3 percent to 4 percent, and nearly a quarter said that wage growth was unchanged over the year.A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: While Job Market Tightens, Labor Costs Rise at Slowest Pace in 33 Years.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.