By STEPHANIE STROMJULY 31, 2015
Jim Perdue initially joined his family’s business after graduating from Wake Forest University. But less than a year later, he put as much distance as he could between it and himself, moving to the Pacific Northwest.“I came into the business because of calls from my dad,” he said. “I worked nine months and decided I had to leave. I was the only other Perdue in the business, and that’s a lot of pressure for a young person.”He spent the next decade earning a doctorate in marine biology from the University of Washington and trying his hand in the fisheries business. “It was a little hard to make money in salmon, and so I came back,” he said.He still dabbles in seafood, however, operating a small business on Assawoman Bay that raises about 600,000 clams under nets as well as bull fish and blue crabs.Advertisement“It’s all about confidence,” Mr. Perdue said. “We now have four of what we call G4s in the business” — members of the family’s fourth generation — “and all of them have spent at least five years in other businesses before coming here.”AdvertisementWhen he rejoined Perdue in 1983, he started out in the processing plant, which he said was the most important part of his education in the business. His father was so excited that he called several executives in the poultry business who were going to Atlanta for the industry’s annual trade conference and arranged times for them to “accidentally” meet up with his son.“He invited me to sort of casually bump into Jim at the conference — and then insisted on setting a time when I was supposed to do that,” one former executive from a competing company said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Frank Perdue was hard to work for because he worked so hard himself. He spent his days visiting the company’s facilities and worked the phones at night. Almost everyone over a certain age in the industry can remember getting a call from him at 2 or 3 in the morning.“All the stories you’ve heard about him getting out of cars before they came to a complete stop are true,” said George Watts, who headed the National Chicken Council for many years and knew both Frank and Arthur Perdue well.“I didn’t see him much,” Mr. Perdue said of his father. “He’d come home for dinner and then head next door to the office to do paperwork until late at night.”Frank Perdue not only greatly expanded the chicken business — he was the third employee when he joined his father in 1939 — but also capitalized on a small grain operation that his father had started to protect the business from swings in commodity prices, turning it into what is today one of the largest sellers of processed soy for animal feed.And he established Perdue as a brand at a time when most chicken was sold as simply “thighs” or “breasts.”Mr. Perdue’s own mark on the company rises out of a relentless fascination with consumer trends. Perdue is the country’s largest seller of organic chicken, for instance, because it recognized early that a growing number of consumers were willing to pay more for organic meat and it worked to sell to Whole Foods.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.