AdvertisementSupported byBy Vanessa FriedmanThere is another major job opening in fashion. Kering, the French luxury goods conglomerate, announced on Friday that the designer Alexander Wang was leaving the helm of Balenciaga after less than three years by “joint decision.”Mr. Wang will concentrate on his namesake brand, based in New York, which he maintained during his time as creative director at Balenciaga. A search has begun for his successor in France.No specific reason was given for the split, though according to a person close to the negotiations who spoke on the condition of anonymity, Mr. Wang is about to announce a minority investment in his own brand.Mr. Wang was named to the top design post in 2012 after Nicolas Ghesquière, who had revitalized the brand since taking over in 1997, left over creative differences with Kering’s management.The appointment surprised the fashion world, as Mr. Wang, then 28, was known for the hip, downtown aesthetic embodied by his own brand, as opposed to a couture sensibility.Balenciaga is considered one of Kering’s “emerging luxury brands,” along with Stella McCartney, Alexander McQueen, Christopher Kane and others. Analysts estimate that Balenciaga alone has annual revenue of 350 million euros ($387 million), which would represent less than 5 percent of Kering’s overall luxury revenue, based on results released this week.Reports that Mr. Wang was about to leave the 96-year-old brand surfaced this week in Women’s Wear Daily.In a statement on Friday, Isabelle Guichot, chief executive of Balenciaga, said: “We are all at Balenciaga extremely grateful to Alexander for his important contribution to the style and history of this iconic house. The dynamic growth of the brand over the last years bears testimony to his successful creative work.”According to Thomas Chauvet, an analyst covering luxury goods at Citi Investment Research, the growth at Balenciaga was slower than that of similar smaller brands, and that may have contributed to Kering’s decision to make a change.Still, Mr. Chauvet said, “it is a shame Alexander Wang is being replaced, because it will take another 12 months to get a new creative direction and products in place.”Mr. Wang’s appointment was counter to industry wisdom about the demands of maintaining one’s own brand while overseeing another. When John Galliano was fired from Dior in 2011 over anti-Semitic remarks, he attributed his behavior to the pressure of being responsible for two brands (his own as well as Dior).After Mr. Wang’s appointment, however, many young designers took on dual roles, including Jonathan Anderson at Loewe, Zac Posen at Brooks Brothers and Jeremy Scott at Moschino.Mr. Wang’s 10 collections for Balenciaga met with a generally positive reaction, though no single look or accessory proved a blockbuster. “Wang has done an O.K. job, but not the super job Kering was hoping for,” said Luca Solca, head of luxury goods research at Exane BNP Paribas.The end of the relationship may revive the case for having a designer who can devote creative capital to a single house.“Kering needs a designer that can really propel it to a higher level,” Mr. Solca said. “It should be next in line to blossom into a bigger business.”Mr. Wang’s last show for Balenciaga will be on Oct. 2 in Paris.Advertisement