
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
AUG. 1, 2015
This interview with Joel S. Marcus, chief executive of Alexandria Real Estate Equities, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I grew up in Denver. My dad was an entrepreneur and had many careers — he built homes, sold cars, managed restaurants and then ended up in a political career. I was always interested in what he was doing, and I spent a lot of time with him when he was working. I wanted to be in business from Day 1. How else did your parents influence you?My father and mother were children of the Depression. They graduated from high school but never went to college. They were always very careful about managing money and believed in having no debt.Tell me about your college years. I studied accounting because I knew it was an easy way to have a job. That was my dad’s mentality — have a skill set that is depression-proof. In good times and bad times, everybody needs an accountant.AdvertisementThen I went to law school, and after that went to Arthur Young, the accounting firm, to become a C.P.A. That’s where I met my first mentor, who was responsible for probably one of the most important things that ever happened in my life. He took me under his wing, and one day he said to me: “I’m teaching this tax class over at U.S.C. I’ve got a lot going on, and I’d like you to start teaching some of the classes.” I told him I had never taught before, but he said: “You’ll figure it out. Just go do it.”I found that I really liked teaching. He opened up the world of public speaking to me, and I also started doing seminars on taxation, which helped me get a lot of new clients.So how did you end up in your current role?I had shifted to a law firm, and another moment occurred that changed my life. A call came in from an investment banker to the head of the corporate law group, who had left the firm. But the secretary said to them: “Joel Marcus is here. He can help you.”I was a young partner at the firm, and she didn’t know if I could help them or not. But unlike some lawyers who treat administrative staff poorly, I had always been respectful and nice to them. She reached out to me purely because she liked me.The person calling was looking for someone to represent Kirin Brewery on a big biotech deal with Amgen. That led me to spend a lot of time in Japan and work on other deals in the biotech and pharmaceutical industries. Because of that work, I was approached by the Jacobs Engineering Group to work on a business plan to launch a life science real estate company as a garage start-up. Then they asked me to run it. I told them no at first, but I eventually agreed.AdvertisementDid you have management experience at that point?I had worked on projects with others, but I never had to hire people or inspire them before then. I was 47, and I had no operational or management experience up to that point. Zero. But I knew about accounting, tax and legal issues, so that was a pretty good start.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So 21 years later, how big is the company?We have about 200 employees.And what are some key insights you learned along the way about culture and leadership?I’ve always felt it’s good to keep a flat, decentralized and cross-matrix reporting organization. We don’t have an organizational chart; I actually ban org charts from being done because I don’t believe in them.I’m a big fan of Eric Schmidt and the book he co-wrote, “How Google Works,” where he says you should hire smart, creative people and then not put them in boxes. Give them a lot of authority to do some great things and you’re going to have great results. I don’t like hierarchical reporting structures.What other lessons?I learned early on not to take hard and fast positions. If somebody says they want to do something, I don’t normally say no. Instead, I’ll say, “Well, tell me why.” I may decide I’m against it, but I’m open to hearing you debate it.I never try to be dogmatic with a no answer. I always try to let the person win the day, and I’m egoless when making decisions. I never think, “Oh, I need to make that decision and I know I’m right.” That was hard to learn for a while, but I’ve learned that lesson.I also always try to get people to have multiple solutions for a problem. I never want to be put into a corner or forced down one road. There ought to be alternative options that can be successful for us, and the key is to have strategic optionality.How do you hire? What qualities do you look for, and what questions do you ask?I like great educational experience, intuition and instincts. I like somebody who has really done things that are a little bit different. One of the questions I like to ask is “If you could do anything, and money wasn’t an object, what would you do?” If somebody’s honest, their answer can be meaningful and tell you a lot about them.Another one is “What’s the biggest opportunity in your professional life that you’ve missed and shouldn’t have missed?” I’m not talking about a job opportunity; I mean a missed business opportunity. That reveals insight and reflection and ability to learn from mistakes. If somebody says, “I don’t think I’ve ever missed anything,” that’s pretty revealing, because we all make mistakes. I’m less interested in the fact that you missed something, but I am really interested in whether you recognized it and learned from it.You can also tell a lot about a candidate by the questions they ask. Do they ask basic questions that you could answer from our website? If they’ve clearly done their homework, then I’m impressed.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about the challenges of leading and managing. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.A version of this article appears in print on August 2, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Taking the Ego Out of Leading.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »