By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 2, 2015
The Athens Stock Exchange reopened on Monday after a five-week closure that followed a decision by the Greek authorities to shut Greek banks and impose capital controls. The banks reopened two weeks ago, though restrictions on cash transactions remain in place to avert a run on the banks’ deposits. To prevent capital flight, a mass sell-off of holdings and a market crash, there is a cap on stock fluctuations and restrictions on local traders, though foreign investors will face no constraints when stock trading resumes. The reopening of Greece’s market comes as government officials and representatives of the country’s international creditors enter a second week of difficult negotiations on a multibillion-euro bailout, Greece’s third in five years. —Niki KitsantonisComing off robust second-quarter profits announced by Ford, General Motors and Fiat Chrysler, the auto industry will report its latest monthly sales numbers on Monday. Analysts predict the figures will show a rise in July sales for most automakers compared with the previous year, and will total close to 1.5 million vehicles in the United States. According to Edmunds.com’s director of industry analysis, Jessica Caldwell, the first half of 2015 “was the best six months in a decade for new car sales, and the pattern of strength continued into July.” Consumer confidence is expected to bolster sales throughout the summer. —Aaron KesslerIt’s another busy week for earnings reports in Europe as several of the region’s biggest banks are expected to report their first-half results. The British lenders HSBC and Standard Chartered, the Italian bank UniCredit and the French lenders Société Générale and Crédit Agricole are all expected to update investors on their results for the first six months of the year. Equity trading has been a bright spot for several European lenders so far, even as uncertainty about whether Greece would stay in the eurozone weighed on other parts of their businesses in the second quarter. —Chad BrayThe electric carmaker Tesla Motors will have a lot riding on its second-quarter earnings announcement, which is set for Wednesday after the markets close. The company’s long-awaited new offering, the Model X sport utility vehicle, has faced several production delays but first deliveries are finally scheduled for September. Investors will be watching closely to see if the Model X is still on schedule and how many of the new S.U.V.s Tesla predicts it will sell this year. Wall Street expects the company will report a loss for the second quarter, although on higher revenue compared with last year. Investors will also learn more on Wednesday about how Tesla’s new energy storage business is faring. —Aaron KesslerAdvertisementJon Stewart is entering his final week as host of Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show.” This week, his last guests include Amy Schumer, Denis Leary and Louis C. K. Like David Letterman, who retired in May, Mr. Stewart has not announced any guests for his final episode on Aug. 6. The finale is expected to last nearly an hour. Mr. Stewart’s replacement, Trevor Noah, takes over “The Daily Show” in September. —John KoblinPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Bank of England will announce its monthly decision on whether to raise a key interest rate on Thursday. The Monetary Policy Committee is expected to leave the benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009, but it is possible that some members of the committee may vote to increase interest rates. At their July meeting, members of the committee believed that the uncertainty surrounding Greece and whether it would stay in the eurozone at the time was a material factor in keeping rates steady, according to the committee’s minutes. Absent that uncertainty, some members believed the decision between holding rates at the current level and a small increase was “becoming more finely balanced,” according to the minutes. Thursday also will represent the first time that the central bank will publish the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee’s meeting simultaneously with the rate decision. The Bank of England has changed the process in an effort to give the market more transparency on the decision-making process. —Chad BrayOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will report the latest data on hiring and unemployment in July. In June, the jobless rate dropped to 5.3 percent while payrolls jumped by 223,000, a bit below May’s gain but still considered healthy by analysts. Wall Street economists expect employers to have added about 220,000 workers in July, with the unemployment rate staying flat at 5.3 percent, the lowest level since 2008. Private experts and the Federal Reserve will also be keeping an eye out for an increase in the percentage of Americans in the labor force, which has been falling as the unemployed have given up searching for jobs and have dropped out entirely. If that ratio does bounce back, or the economy gains at least 200,000 jobs, it will be another sign that the Fed will most likely raise interest rates before the end of 2015. —Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementShareholders are expected to consider on Friday whether to approve a merger between the Bermuda insurers Axis Capital Holdings and PartnerRe after a series of competing bids from the Italian investment company Exor. The Axis Capital deal, which was originally agreed upon in January, suffered a setback in recent weeks after the influential proxy advisory firms Institutional Shareholder Services and Glass Lewis both recommended that shareholders vote against the deal. PartnerRe said on July 21 that it was willing to negotiate with Exor after the latest sweetened bid, in which Exor would pay $140.50 a share, including a special, preclosing dividend of $3 a share. If Exor is able to wrest PartnerRe away from Axis Capital, it will be a coup for John Elkann, Exor’s chief executive and the scion of the Agnelli family that founded and still controls the Italian holding company. —Chad BrayA version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.