By RAVI SOMAIYAAUG. 2, 2015
Jason Fine, the editor of Men’s Journal, will take over as the managing editor of Rolling Stone as part of what the magazine’s publisher, Jann S. Wenner, described as a “shake-up.”Mr. Fine will succeed Will Dana, who ran Rolling Stone for a decade before it was announced Wednesday night that he would be leaving. The leadership change comes at a difficult time for the magazine. In April, it retracted a widely criticized article that alleged a gang rape at the University of Virginia.The article was published late last year, but the local police could find no evidence of the crime, and it was widely condemned before being retracted.Mr. Fine, 49, said in an interview that he would formally start his new role in the second week of August, though he would oversee the close of the current issue this week. Mr. Fine will also assume the role of editorial director of Men’s Journal, Rolling Stone’s sister publication, which Mr. Dana had held earlier.Advertisement“It was all pretty surprising to me,” he said of being offered the job. “I was pretty shocked to learn that Will was leaving.”In a separate interview, Mr. Wenner said his relationship with Mr. Dana remained amicable, describing their split as “a conscious uncoupling.” After the controversy over the University of Virginia article, Mr. Wenner said, “it was very important for us to figure out a way to move on.”He added: “I think over all it was time for a change. I’m a big believer in change and the opportunities that arise from that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said that the magazine’s mission would remain the same under Mr. Fine. “There is just a level at which we execute,” Mr. Wenner said. “It’s a vision I set, and I see no changes in that.”Mr. Fine said that Mr. Wenner had sought an editor he trusted to take over at Rolling Stone, and that Mr. Wenner admired the work Mr. Fine had done at Men’s Journal, which is published by Wenner Media. “He didn’t have to do too much to it,” Mr. Fine said. “He didn’t have to rip up pages and all that stuff.”The two men had worked at the same college newspaper at different times — The Daily Californian at the University of California, Berkeley. Also, Mr. Fine plays tennis with Mr. Wenner’s son, Gus, who is an increasingly hands-on presence at the company his father started in 1967.AdvertisementMr. Wenner said that his son had not been a driving force in the decision to change editors and hire Mr. Fine, though Gus had been consulted. In 2014, Gus was named the head of digital operations at Wenner Media.Mr. Fine will meet with Mr. Wenner and his son, and the editors of Rolling Stone, before deciding whether to make changes, he says. Sean Woods, the editor who oversaw the University of Virginia article, will remain with the magazine “as long as he wants,” Mr. Fine said.Mark Healy, the deputy editor of Men’s Journal, will take over as editor of that magazine.A version of this article appears in print on August 3, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Rolling Stone Appoints a New Managing Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.