AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.06 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.15 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.04 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: TUESDAYBrazosport, Tex., Independent School District, $59.3 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive. Connecticut, $500 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New Hanover County, N.C., $83.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYLoudoun County, Va., Sanitation Authority, $117.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Minnesota, $1.07 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKCentral Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority, Wash., $923.8 million of sales tax, improvement and refunding bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Chicago Transit Authority, $176.9 million of capital grant receipts revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Clovis, Calif., Unified School District, $103 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Colorado Regional Transportation District, $191.1 million of certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities.Colorado State University System, $94.5 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Contra Costa County, Calif., $125.6 million of lease revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Denton, Tex., Independent School District, $170.8 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. FirstSouthwest.Fremont, Calif., Community Facilities District No. 1, $80 million of special tax bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Garland, Tex., $55 million of combination tax and electric utility system revenue refunding bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Hillsborough County, Fla., School Board, $150 million of refunding certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $98.8 million of revenue refunding bonds. Raymond James. Maine State Housing Authority, $138 million of mortgage purchase bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation, $370 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $92.8 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Barclays.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $137.6 million of unlimited tax refunding bonds. Bosc. Oakland, Calif., Unified School District, $356.2 million of general obligation and refunding bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Oregon, $80.4 million of mortgage revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities. Philadelphia, $270.5 million of gas works revenue refunding bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Reynolds, Ore., School District No. 7, $125 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.San Luis Obispo County, Calif., $115.8 million of Nacimiento Water Project revenue refunding bonds. Raymond James.State Public School Building Authority, Pa., $52.1 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Successor Agency Carson Regional Development Authority, Calif., $60 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray.Washington Health Care Facilities Authority, $72 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Wyoming Community Development Authority, $114 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Advertisement