AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Sonia Kolesnikov-JessopFrançois-Henry Bennahmias  has been chief executive of the luxury watchmaker Audemars Piguet since 2012.Q. Were you given leadership opportunities as a child?A. Not really, but I did show an entrepreneurial streak. I remember as a 6- or 7-year-old having to sell Unicef stamps. I was the best seller by far, and I would try to teach the other kids how to do it. Then when I was 13 years old, we were living in a block of flats and with my brother, who was 11, we went to see a baker and told him we would come at 6 a.m. every Saturday to buy croissants and resell them to the block — with a markup, of course. At the beginning we were doing quite well, but my brother didn’t want to wake up early, so it lasted three or four weekends and then, well, I couldn’t do it alone.Q. When was the first time you had to manage a team?A. I don’t have any diplomas, I didn’t graduate, and when I was 18 years old, I went to work for Club Med in Marbella, Spain. I was a golf teacher there but I also worked as a stage manager helping put up big shows like “Les Misérables” and “Cats.” It’s something I really wanted to do, I’ve always loved dancing and shows. I think I could have been a Broadway producer. Anyway, I had to get people to work together, adults but also kids, because during the summer we also put on a production with kids: 68 kids rehearsing for three weeks, aged from 9 to 18, and I was 18. It was tough!Q. What did you learn from that experience?A. That you have to care for people. It doesn’t mean you have to be nice all the time, but you have to care about what they do, even if sometimes you have to push. I’ve been told by people I’ve worked with for a long time, “Sometimes I hated you, but you’ve made me better.” I think sometimes I see things in people that they don’t see themselves. Yes, I’m extremely demanding, but not in a crazy way, it’s not to demand just to demand, it’s to demand in order to be better.Q. Do you think playing sports competitively made you more demanding on yourself and others? A. No, I don’t think it comes from that. I had a rather difficult time at school, I was always picked on and I couldn’t stand it. So in my mind I was always thinking, “One day you’ll see.” I’m very, very competitive.Q. How did you move from teaching golf to a corporate life?A. One day a friend of mine who was working in fashion told me, “Come and join me.” I didn’t know anything about fashion, but he told me, “You’ll learn.” My first year I was packing stuff; three years later, I was the managing director.Q. How did you achieve that?A. I was on the road selling, performing well, my team grew and the business grew very seriously from zero to 20 million francs. What I learned during those early years is to respect your word no matter what. And the second thing is that, to inspire people and bring them along, you yourself have to perform. But of course it’s not the same thing to be successful as a one-man show and then bring people on board. You can’t make people be like yourself — that’s not the point. You have to accept them for who they are and make the team successful. You have to respect the differences, and if it doesn’t work, you let people go.Q. What is the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. A great leader will be able to bring people from his team to levels that will not have been expected from others. It’s about helping others overachieve.Q. Have your views on leadership changed over time?A. Sure, but the most important change has not been my views on leadership but the way I’ve acted as a leader. I was educated in France, where you never hear, “You’ve done well.” I wasn’t a good student, but even if I’d moved from 3/20 to 9/20 in math, I still wouldn’t have been praised for my efforts. That wasn’t the French way, and for many years I was doing the same as a manager. If someone was doing a good job, I was, “Fine, you’re getting paid, you owe it to the business and I don’t care,” and I was only telling people what they had done badly. I was very tough. Then I decided to look at it a different way. You have to tell people when they’re doing well, too.Q. What made you change your mind?A. Living in the United States for 13 years. It’s a completely different culture, which I witnessed with the education system. Every time my stepson was doing better at school, he was getting lots of encouragement, and I realized this positive attitude helped him a lot. When in the U.S. they say, “Everything is possible,” everything is possible — there is no limit. If you wake up every day thinking this, you’re more likely to go and get it. That’s not the attitude you get in Europe.Q. What is your experience managing across cultures?A. I think you need to adjust the cursor a little bit depending on where you are in the world and whom you are talking to; it’s important to adapt.Q. Audemars Piguet is a family-owned company. What’s that like?A. On the positive side, everything goes a lot faster for decisions. We have six board members and I have a direct line, so if I can convince them, I can move fairly quickly. If I was working for a large corporation, things would move at a much slower pace. That’s also allowed me to take some bold moves. For example, in 2005 we were the first luxury watch company to approach someone from the hip-hop world [Jay Z] to do a limited edition. At the time it was a rather bold association. We sold out in two months, and two watches showed up at auction later and went for twice their original price.Q. What about the disadvantages?A. A large group has more financial power and can unblock considerable funds pretty quickly when a project is worth it, whereas a family-owned business like ours has to move at its own pace. We have been in business for over 140 years without ever coming close to bankruptcy, so whatever you might think, the families have obviously done many things right. Today, we’re doing great, some [other watchmakers] aren’t, and we could take this opportunity to expand, but their style is a bit more conservative. It’s not a bad thing, but I certainly have to adapt, because I always want to go faster.Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. Be a little more patient. It will come.Advertisement