AdvertisementSupported byBy Margalit FoxVincent Marotta Sr., who as a creator of the Mr. Coffee machine helped send the percolator the way of the one-horse shay, died on Saturday at his home in Pepper Pike, Ohio. He was 91.His daughter Susan Parente confirmed his death.One of the first automatic drip coffee makers designed for home use, Mr. Coffee was first marketed in 1972. The brainchild of Mr. Marotta, then a real estate developer, and his partner, Samuel Glazer, it was intended to replace the prevalent, problematic household percolator.Mr. Coffee became a market leader almost immediately. By 1979, Forbes reported, the company was generating $150 million in annual sales and held a market share of at least 50 percent versus rivals like Norelco, General Electric and Proctor-Silex.Much of the brand’s success owed to its ubiquitous television ads featuring Joe DiMaggio. Mr. Marotta, a former pro football player who had also signed with Major League Baseball’s St. Louis Cardinals, personally recruited Mr. DiMaggio; as a result of the campaign, “millions of kids grew up thinking Joe DiMaggio was a famous appliance salesman,” The Columbus Dispatch wrote in 2007.Tacit credit also goes to Mr. Marotta’s wife, Ann. For had Mr. Marotta liked her coffee better, his daughter said on Monday, Mr. Coffee very likely would not have come to be.The son of Calogero Marotta and the former Josephine Mirabella, immigrants from Italy, Vincent George Marotta was born on Feb. 22, 1924 — Washington’s Birthday, hence his middle name. His father, known in America as Charles, was a coal dealer.A star athlete, Vincent Marotta was signed as a center fielder by the Cardinals soon after he graduated from high school. But World War II intervened, and after Army service stateside, he earned a bachelor’s degree in history from Mount Union College in Alliance, Ohio.In 1948, Mr. Marotta was drafted by both the New York Giants of the National Football League and the Cleveland Browns, then in the All-America Football Conference. He played briefly with the Browns before going into business with Mr. Glazer, a friend since high school, as a developer of homes and shopping malls.In 1968, after a credit squeeze made real estate financing difficult to obtain, Mr. Marotta found himself wondering what else he might do. His thoughts turned to coffee, and in particular to the pernicious percolator.A mainstay of American material culture for generations, the percolator had changed little since its advent in the 19th century. It operated by repeatedly forcing boiling or near-boiling water through a perforated metal basket of grounds. Through a crystal knob in the lid, users could peer into the pot’s dark heart, watching the coffee grow blacker and blacker.But that small voyeuristic thrill was, in the opinion of many coffee lovers, the only positive aspect of the experience. Because the percolator circulated the same water through the same grounds again and again, what emerged could be a bitter third- or fourth-generation brew.At the time, the only commonly available alternative was instant coffee. But that preparation, many consumers maintained, made perked coffee taste ambrosial in comparison.For Mr. Marotta, duplicating the speed and quality of restaurant drip coffee makers for the household market became an ardently sought grail.“I was so involved with the thing itself,” he told Forbes in 1979. “Like Michelangelo, when he was making his Moses.”He continued, talking of Michelangelo: “He got so involved that it became alive to him! He would talk to it. As a matter of fact, he got so carried away one time he took his chisel and scratched its knee to see if it was alive! Well, I had a similar experience with my coffee maker!”Mr. Marotta and Mr. Glazer engaged two former Westinghouse engineers, Edmund Abel and Erwin Schulze. They designed a machine that worked by heating water to only 200 degrees Fahrenheit and sending it downward through a paper-lined filter basket filled with grounds and into a heated glass carafe.Though Mr. Coffee’s original retail price — $39.99, about $226 today — was about four times that of a percolator, consumers clamored for the machine. By 1975, its parent company, North American Systems, had sold more than a million units.Mr. Marotta was the company’s chairman and chief executive from its inception until 1987, when it was sold to a securities firm in an $82 million leveraged buyout. Mr. Coffee is now a brand of Jarden Consumer Solutions, whose other brands include Sunbeam, Oster and Crock-Pot.In later years, Mr. Marotta focused on real estate and philanthropy. His business partner, Mr. Glazer, died in 2012.Besides his daughter and his wife, the former Ann Laughlin, whom he married in 1954, Mr. Marotta’s survivors include two other daughters, Mary Marotta and Jane Marotta; three sons, Charles, Timothy Sr. and Vincent Jr.; and 11 grandchildren.For all his missionary zeal, there was one convert Mr. Marotta could not make. Though Mr. DiMaggio was the face of Mr. Coffee for more than a decade, he had ulcers and rarely drank coffee himself.When Mr. DiMaggio wanted to indulge, Mr. Marotta told NPR in 2005, he fixed himself a cup of Sanka.Advertisement