
Breakingviews By                     
GEORGE HAY

AUG. 3, 2015
Britain shouldn’t obsess about losing money on its Royal Bank of Scotland stake. George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, is about to get cracking on reducing the government’s 79 percent holding, which will mean a short-term loss on the 46 billion pounds handed over by taxpayers in 2008 and 2009. That hit needs to be put into perspective.If the British government were to sell the entirety of its stake at R.B.S.’s share price of 342 pence at the market close of July 31, it would lose about £14 billion, considering the average in-price of 500 pence at which the government bought during the crisis.That’s not great at a time when Mr. Osborne is trumpeting the need for further austerity. But factor in fees already paid by the bank to the state in return for insurance on its stinky assets from 2009 to 2012, as well as various other support measures, and the in-price is more like 430 pence, cutting the potential loss in half.Besides, this is not a particularly helpful way to think about the government’s actions in 2008. If R.B.S. hadn’t been bailed out, the British economy would have contracted by even more than the 7.2 percent it did. Questions of “value,” therefore, are a little fuzzy.AdvertisementIf Mr. Osborne is still worried about prices, he could choose to parcel out R.B.S. shares to institutional investors a little bit at a time, as the government announced on Monday, with the planned sale of a 5.2 percent stake. But he could also go a bit faster.There is a parallel in R.B.S.’s own deleveraging program. In early 2014, it took provisions covering notional losses of 15 percent on £33.5 billion of assets it no longer wanted. So far, it has sold at tighter discounts: Since its initial estimate, it has released £1.6 billion in provisions, helped by central bank quantitative easing that has kept asset prices high.AdvertisementThe same factors could mean it is better to sell equity stakes now rather than to wait. But even if quantitative easing is unwound, R.B.S. would still gain from being a nonstate-owned institution. Investors rightly mark down institutions that are subject to political interference, which R.B.S. has been for years. Addressing that could push up the price — and further reduce the British government’s exit wounds.George Hay is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »