AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithA federal prosecutor confronted the lead defendant in the first criminal trial in the United States in the Libor interest rate scandal over his failure to intervene in more than a dozen instances in which traders at his bank improperly sought to influence the critical rates.In a 105-minute cross-examination Wednesday morning, Carol L. Sipperly, a prosecutor trying the case in federal court in Lower Manhattan, presented the former Rabobank trader Anthony Allen with numerous emails, text messages and a few recorded phone calls in which traders asked that the bank’s Libor submissions be raised or lowered to help them make money.Mr. Allen, who was based in London as the bank’s former global head of liquidity and finance, restated his insistence that he never knowingly submitted or condoned false Libor reports by his subordinates. But Ms. Sipperly repeatedly asked whether he had intervened or made any effort to stop the evident widespread efforts by other traders to influence the submissions.Mr. Allen generally said he had not, in some cases because the traders did not work for him, in others because he was working in an environment where collegiality was required.“I couldn’t stop him talking” to traders who worked for him, Mr. Allen said of another Rabobank trader who pleaded guilty to manipulation charges and worked nearby. “We were in a trading room,” he explained, where “everyone discussed ideas” about what was moving markets and interest rates.Abuse of interest rates and the failure to address the problem is one of the most expensive scandals to hit Wall Street since the financial crisis.“You never told him not to make those sorts of statements?” Ms. Sipperly asked about another trader’s efforts to influence his own traders’ Libor submissions.Mr. Allen answered, “I didn’t tell him to or not to.”Mr. Allen and his former fellow trader Anthony Conti are accused of manipulating Libor, short for the London Interbank Offered Rate, which is the result of submissions by 16 banks reflecting rates at which they can obtain short-term loans.Traders who pressed them to nudge Rabobank’s Libor submissions either higher or lower were hoping to profit on trades in swaps and other instruments whose value was tied to Libor. Some of the traders’ positions topped $1 billion, the evidence indicated.Three former traders at Rabobank, which is based in the Netherlands, pleaded guilty to the Libor-rigging conspiracy and testified for the prosecution. Mr. Conti and Mr. Allen are among four others charged in the case. Another, Paul Thompson, was just arrested last week in Australia after a United States extradition request.In response to a question, Mr. Allen agreed that Rabobank’s American trading partners — which included Bank of America, Citigroup and Wells Fargo — would not have done such trades with his bank if they had known Rabobank’s traders were trying to manipulate the rate.Confronted by Ms. Sipperly with an appeal that was made in March 2007 by another trader for a low submission for the three-month Libor and was sent to both him and Mr. Conti, Mr. Allen said he had ignored the trader’s appeal but had not told subordinates that such appeals were impermissible. He also said had never discussed with Mr. Conti how to set the bank’s Libor submissions. He said that Mr. Conti was an “experienced” trader and that he knew Mr. Conti “knew how to set Libor.”Earlier Wednesday, lawyers for Mr. Conti indicated that he had reversed his prior intention to testify and would not take the stand in his defense, curtailing the expected length of the day’s proceedings. At noon, lawyers for both defendants said they had rested, concluding their presentation of evidence and testimony, and both sides shifted their attention to instructions to be issued to the jury after summations are made on Monday.Advertisement