AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe Watergate credo to “follow the money” is the reason for a number of laws that require banks, credit unions and money-transmission businesses to keep track of who their customers are and report suspicious transactions. These financial firms are the first line of defense against money laundering, and recent cases highlight just how difficult it is for the government to police the tidal waves of cash that wash through the banking system.The effort to combat money laundering is never-ending because criminals always seek new ways to move the proceeds of crime. It is a battle that requires constant vigilance, and is not so much a matter of winning or losing, but of just trying to stay current with the latest tactics.Money laundering problems can afflict the largest banks, even though they now pour billions of dollars annually into anti-money laundering compliance programs. On July 22, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and California’s Department of Business Oversight levied a $140 million civil penalty against Banamex USA, owned by Citigroup, for failing to have enough staff members and a “qualified and knowledgeable” official responsible for detecting and reporting illegal or suspicious transactions. Citigroup announced that it would close the small unit, which only had a few branches in California and Texas.This is not the only issue facing the bank as it deals with how well it monitors accounts. Bloomberg News reported that the Justice Department has issued a subpoena to Citigroup’s much larger Mexican bank subsidiary, Banco Nacional de Mexico, known as Banamex, as part of the money laundering investigation. This comes on top of a $400 million fraud involving a large Banamex client that came to light in 2014, resulting in a number of employees being fired. The New York Times reported that the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan was investigating Citigroup for whether it willfully ignored possible red flags about the fraud.The danger for Citigroup is that any problems with its anti-money laundering program and the failure to adequately monitor accounts are likely to draw a strong rebuke from the Justice Department, perhaps even a guilty plea from its Mexican bank in any settlement. Prosecutors, including the attorney general, Loretta E. Lynch, were stung by criticism over the deferred prosecution agreement in 2012 with HSBC that required the bank to pay about $1.9 billion for violations that included allowing money laundering through its Mexican subsidiary.No individuals were charged in that case, and the decision not to demand a guilty plea gave the impression that HSBC bought its way out of trouble. The case was prosecuted by Ms. Lynch’s office when she was the United States attorney in Brooklyn, and questions about the settlement were brought up at her confirmation hearings. So future problems with money laundering at a global bank are unlikely to be treated with much forgiveness by the Justice Department.It is not just the big banks that can run afoul of the money laundering laws. Perhaps the greater challenge to stopping abuses comes through small financial operations that give criminals access into the soft underbelly of the banking system to move their money largely undetected, at least for a little while.Charges filed recently by the Justice Department against Anthony R. Murgio and Yuri Lebedev have been linked to the hacking of JPMorgan Chase in which information related to 83 million customer accounts was stolen. The two men are accused of setting up an illegal Bitcoin money-transmission business to help hackers launder money from ransom demands made on companies threatened with cyberattacks. An intriguing aspect of the plan outlined in the government’s complaint included taking control of a small credit union in New Jersey to help move the proceeds through the banking system.The problem for anyone engaged in financial crimes is getting the money out of the United States without a trace so that it can be retrieved later. Carrying cash is far too risky, so finding a way into the financial system to move funds electronically is crucial.According to the complaint, Mr. Murgio and Mr. Lebedev hid their money-transmission business, called Coin.mx, behind a dummy corporation named “Collectables Club.” Its website claimed to let members trade cars, stamps and sport memorabilia, with the club taking a 15 percent cut of the transactions. Mr. Murgio opened accounts at two banks to move the money from Bitcoin transactions at Coin.mx to accounts in Cyprus and the British Virgin Islands, using the club as a front to explain the volume of large transactions.In using the accounts, the defendants needed to avoid setting off the anti-money laundering controls in place at the banks. An email from Mr. Murgio quoted in the complaint instructs a customer of Coin.mx not to send $100,000 by wire because it would get flagged by the bank. In a lament undoubtedly repeated by those trying to launder money, he wrote that “if the U.S. was not so damn screwed up about this stuff, we wouldn’t have to deal with this.”The complaint estimates that about $1 million went through the accounts at the two banks, which is not a trivial amount but hardly enough to conduct a major illicit money transmission business, especially if the transactions have to be kept small enough to avoid setting off inquiries. The next step in the program described in the complaint was a creative one: gaining access to the banking system by taking control of a credit union. An ordinary bank customer has to worry about being monitored, but if you control the financial institution, then you do not have to worry about the money laundering rules.Mr. Murgio and Mr. Lebedev took over a tiny credit union in Jackson, N.J., called Helping Other People Excel Federal Credit Union, in May 2014 by paying one of its executives. New directors with ties to Mr. Murgio, including Mr. Lebedev, were then installed on the board. Given its small size, with less than 200 members, and modest operations, it was no surprise that the credit union did not have anti-money laundering controls in place because it did not need them.After Mr. Murgio was put in charge, an account for a payment processor was opened through which as much as $30 million a month in bank wires was transmitted. For a credit union with only about $200,000 on deposit by its members, this caught the attention of the National Credit Union Administration, the regulator of federal credit unions. It ordered the credit union to stop to the transfers and remove the new directors. But for a few months in 2014 there was unfettered access to the banking system to move money without any concern about anti-money laundering safeguards.Whether it is a global banking operation like Citigroup or a tiny New Jersey credit union, the potential for money laundering is always present. Anywhere money can flow, there is the danger that the proceeds of financial crimes will be washing through the financial system.Advertisement