AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Protess and Jessica Silver-GreenbergThe Promontory Financial Group occupies a position of trust in the global financial system, acting as a consultant to big banks, foreign nations and the Vatican. Its influence has soared over the years, positioning it as a sort of shadow regulator that provides government authorities with a window into bank misconduct. And the firm’s political ties run deep, thanks to its founder and chief executive, Eugene A. Ludwig, a former top banking regulator and a law school friend of Bill Clinton.But an important driver of Promontory’s success — guiding New York State banks through regulatory problems — is now in jeopardy, and so is the firm’s reputation for independence.On Monday, New York State’s financial regulator effectively suspended Promontory from conducting most assignments for banks that are licensed in New York State and suspected of wrongdoing. The decision to suspend the firm indefinitely, an unusually aggressive move even for the Department of Financial Services, an agency known to scuffle with Wall Street, was detailed in a report that accused Promontory of helping to obscure some of the same bank misconduct it was supposed to unearth.The report will ignite a legal battle, as Promontory says it will seek a stay from the New York State Supreme Court. The case would represent the first significant challenge to the New York regulator’s authority, threatening to loosen the grip it holds over the financial industry and to institute a rare check on its power.“We will litigate the matter and defend our firm against this regulatory overreach,” Promontory said in a statement. “We stand behind the integrity of our professionals and the quality of our work, the accuracy of which the order does not dispute.”The regulator’s 15-page report, a scathing challenge to Promontory’s claims of independence, centered on the firm’s work for the British bank Standard Chartered, which was suspected of transferring through its New York branch billions of dollars in transactions for Iran and other countries sanctioned by the United States. Although Standard Chartered hired Promontory to conduct an “independent” assessment of the misconduct, and then detail its findings to government authorities, the New York regulator unearthed internal emails that called that independence into question.The emails, the report said, capture ”numerous instances” when Promontory, succumbing to pressure from Standard Chartered, sanitized the bank’s misconduct, either omitting red flags or editing presentations to “tone down” the language. The authorities relied, in part, on Promontory’s presentations when punishing the bank, which in 2012 agreed to pay $667 million to several agencies, including the New York regulator. In one email cited in the New York report, a lawyer for Standard Chartered pushed Promontory to make part of a presentation “more bland,” a request that the firm granted. On another occasion, the bank’s lawyers asked Promontory to remove a portion of an interim report because it referred to conduct that regulators were not yet aware of and may “draw questions which we’re not yet prepared to answer.” A Promontory employee concurred, saying “let’s do it. We’ve come this far, we might as well go for the three-pointer.”When confronted with those emails in depositions taken last month, some Promontory employees provided testimony that, according to the New York regulator, “lacked credibility.” In one exchange, a managing director said that an instruction to make the title of a chart “more sterile” was intended to make it “factually accurate.” In another, a former analyst explained that a directive to make certain language “more bland” simply meant make it “more accurate.” The Promontory statement said the emails were “taken out of context.” It maintains that none of the changes altered the substance of the report to regulators.The New York regulator did not accuse Promontory of a legal violation, or its employees of perjury, saying only that the firm “exhibited a lack of independent judgment” expected of consultants. The agency found only two transactions worth about $300,000 — out of roughly 133,000 worth some $590 billion — that Promontory failed to flag for the authorities.A New York regulator unearthed internal emails between Promontory Financial and the British bank Standard Chartered that call the firm’s independence into question.The New York regulator’s report on Promontory, and its suspension of the firm, hinges on an obscure state law dating to the end of the 19th century. Under that law, the regulator has the authority to withhold confidential documents that consultants need to advise a bank, effectively blacklisting firms like Promontory from some business in New York.In the report issued on Monday, the New York regulator said it “intends to deny all such requests until further notice.” The denial would affect assignments for all financial institutions chartered in New York — a cross-section of huge foreign banks and Wall Street firms like Goldman Sachs — potentially crimping the firm’s revenue. (Promontory earned $54.5 million from the Standard Chartered assignment.)The suspension is a surprising escalation of a broader crackdown on the consulting industry, a pursuit that began under Benjamin M. Lawsky, New York’s former financial regulator, and is now being overseen by Anthony Albanese, his interim successor and previous chief of staff. The Department of Financial Services has almost always settled its cases, including actions against PricewaterhouseCoopers and Deloitte, Promontory’s competitors.And until last week, it appeared as if the agency might settle with Promontory as well, according to people briefed on the investigation. The firm had already provided some of its employees for the depositions. And Mr. Ludwig traveled to New York from Washington, where the firm is based, to discuss a financial payout, the people said. The agency and Promontory were discussing a $20 million penalty.But certain demands caused Promontory to balk. For example, the firm declined to admit wrongdoing or accept a temporary suspension in New York, the people said. That would have set it apart from Deloitte and PwC.When the negotiations broke down last week, the tone turned hostile. In a letter to the Department of Financial Services, a copy of which was reviewed by The New York Times, Promontory’s lawyer asked the agency to hand off the investigation to another government authority, arguing that the New York regulator itself had a conflict. The conflict, the lawyer, Paul Shechtman, said, stemmed from Mr. Lawsky, New York’s former financial regulator, who recently left the agency to form his own consulting firm. Calling Mr. Lawsky a “direct competitor of Promontory,” Mr. Shechtman argued that any action against Promontory would “directly benefit” his firm.In a statement on Monday, a spokesman for the agency called the recusal request “a desperate and baseless attempt by Promontory to distract from the conduct outlined in our report, which speaks for itself.” Mr. Lawsky, the spokesman said, cannot represent any client before the Department of Financial Services for two years.The indefinite suspension of Promontory harks back to New York’s own action against Standard Chartered. In 2012, Mr. Lawsky took the rare step of running ahead of other authorities and issued an order against Standard Chartered without settling.Unlike Standard Chartered, which as a bank had little choice but to settle or risk losing its license, Promontory has greater flexibility to challenge the Department of Financial Services.But the litigation against the New York regulator could spawn a messy legal battle. And because the agency shaped its action as an informal report, rather than a legal order, it is unclear whether any court has authority to compel the agency to release confidential bank information.A lawsuit would also shine an unwelcome spotlight on the consulting industry and its conflicts. The long-running New York investigation stems from a concern that consultants, while professing objectivity, face a conflict of interest: They dissect the misconduct of the same banks that handpick and pay them.In defending their work, the consultants point out that they adhere to industry standards that require impartiality. Still, Promontory’s work for Standard Chartered, an assignment known as “Project Green,” highlights the industry’s potential conflicts.After reviewing a draft of Promontory’s report to regulators, Standard Chartered asked the firm to remove the names of the bank’s branches and the volume of suspicious transactions routed through New York. To list the branches, the bank made clear in a March 2011 email, could lead United States authorities “to ask further questions.” Advertisement