AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackThe medical laboratory Theranos, facing skepticism about the accuracy of its tests, is planning to announce that it has reduced the size of its unusual board of directors, eliminating members like Henry A. Kissinger and George P. Shultz.The board is also planning to issue a statement expressing its support for the company and its leader, Elizabeth Holmes.“We stand wholeheartedly behind the management, achievements, vision and commitment of this company,” the statement says.Theranos, a privately held company founded by Ms. Holmes, 31, after she dropped out of Stanford at age 19, has been trying to swat down suspicions that the capability it has promoted — being able to do a wide range of medical tests cheaply and quickly using only a finger prick of blood — is more hype than reality.Skeptics have also focused on the company’s board, which with one possible exception was notably lacking in people with expertise in medical testing. Besides aging former cabinet members like Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Shultz, the board included the former senators Sam Nunn and Bill Frist, a retired general, and a retired admiral.Now the board of directors has been shrunk to five people from 12, and will also be called the governing board, according to a statement from Ms. Holmes provided by a company spokeswoman.All the members of the old board, including Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Nunn and Mr. Shultz, have become members of a newly formed board of counselors, which will still give advice to the company. Theranos has also formed another board to give medical advice.In the statement, Ms. Holmes says the new structure “codifies the way we have been running the business for a number of years.”Ms. Holmes says in the statement that the changes were made in July, though late Wednesday night Theranos’s website still listed the old board of directors and made no mention of the new boards.The members of the old board that will remain on the new governing board are Ms. Holmes; the company’s chief operating officer, Sunny Balwani; the construction executive Riley P. Bechtel; and James N. Mattis, a retired Marine Corps general. The fifth member of the governing board will be David Boies, a noted lawyer who has been the company’s outside legal adviser.The medical board for now consists of two of the old board members, Senator Frist, who is a physician by training, and Dr. William H. Foege, a former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The other members are Dr. David L. Helfet of the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan and Dr. Jonathan W. Simons, chief executive of the Prostate Cancer Foundation.The statement in support of Ms. Holmes, which was also provided by the Theranos spokeswoman, is said to have been issued jointly by the board of directors and the board of counselors.“Theranos is a revolutionary business, founded and led by a remarkable engineer and businesswoman — joined by a team of professionals who have, at their core, embraced her mission to serve humanity through innovation in health care,” it said. “Theranos’s technology is both transformative and transparent: Our blood tests are faster, less expensive and require less blood than traditionally required.” The statement concludes, “As a group, we embrace this promise and stand with Theranos.”Advertisement