By CHRIS HORTONAUG. 3, 2015
China’s fast-growing business aviation market has hit a rough patch.During an eight-year run beginning in 2005, deliveries of new jets expanded by about 20 percent a year, according to industry data. But now the country’s economy is growing at its slowest rate in nearly a quarter-century. Customers have less to spend. And those who can spend are afraid of becoming casualties in the government’s anti-corruption austerity campaign.Growth hit only 15.5 percent in 2014, according to a report by the Asian Sky Group consultancy, released in mid-April. With deliveries lagging one to two years behind orders, the worst may be yet to come, one analyst said.“I don’t think anybody’s been spared,” said Jeffrey Lowe, managing director at the Asian Sky Group. “If you look at all the other high-end commodities that have been impacted as far as China sales, it’s certainly not surprising that business jets are feeling the crimp.”Asian Sky’s report said the combined markets of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan were “very much in decline.” The net number of aircraft added to the combined fleets was more than 100 in 2012, a number that dropped to 64 in 2013 and 59 last year, it said.AdvertisementDeer Jet, the largest charter operator in the region, was, in 1995, the first company to offer charter services inside China. The company has been forced to adapt as demand has evaporated, said Fang Xinyu, Deer Jet’s vice president. Mr. Fang said the company had reduced its fleet by more than 30 percent in the last two years, because of a slowing economy and “some factors not related to the industry itself.”AdvertisementMr. Lowe estimated that China’s large charter companies have had a 40 percent drop-off in business since President Xi Jinping began his austerity campaign after assuming power in late 2012.“Charters have gone away, just like gift-giving and banquets,” he said, noting that for most large Chinese charter operators, the central government had been one of the biggest sources of business. Chartering a large aircraft from Deer Jet for a domestic flight costs 60,000 to 80,000 renminbi, or $9,600 to $12,900, an hour. But even if government demand bounces back, Mr. Fang said, many challenges remain, particularly in terms of regulation and infrastructure.“We need more airspace, more flexible scheduling, more parking slots and more professionals,” he said. “These things will play a decisive role in China’s business aviation development.”The industry’s uncertainty was reflected in April at the three-day Asian Business Aviation Conference and Exhibition in Shanghai, a gathering of multinational manufacturers, charter and management companies, and other service providers.Recent installments have been upbeat affairs, often featuring announcements of large orders. At last year’s exhibition, Minsheng Financial Leasing confirmed it had placed orders for 70 business jets. This year, there were no major jet orders.“Clearly, China is going through a time of change,” said Ed Bolen, president and chief executive of the National Business Aviation Association, a Washington-based industry organization that co-hosts the Chinese aviation exhibition. “If you look at the past two years, it has cooled down a little.”Mr. Lowe of Asian Sky said the slowdown has touched all aspects of the market. He added that many of China’s state-owned banks — including the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China and the China Development Bank — had entered the business-jet leasing market following the lead of Minsheng, which placed its first order in July 2010.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now many of those banks are looking to sell underused aircraft, creating sales competition for manufacturers like Gulfstream, Bombardier and Dassault Falcon. But even without external pressures, the business-jet market may simply be hitting its natural level, Mr. Lowe said.Advertisement“We’re seeing more financings, we’re seeing more refinancings and a lot more pre-owned aircraft, too. But those are all the things that should be happening in a maturing market,” said Mr. Lowe, who has worked in sales at Gulfstream and Bombardier. For plane manufacturers, “I don’t think China was their top-performing market last year, let’s put it that way. Whether that’s 50 percent down, I’m not sure, but I wouldn’t be surprised.”Exactly how much new jet sales have cooled is difficult to pin down, as manufacturers would not disclose details of jet orders. China is not the only market that has slowed recently; Russian and Latin American demand has decreased as well, leading Bombardier to announce in May that it would slash 1,750 business-jet division jobs.Gulfstream is the most popular aircraft manufacturer in China, accounting for 32.3 percent of business jets there. Roger Sperry, the company’s regional senior vice president for international sales for Asia Pacific, described the mood of the industry in China as “cautiously optimistic.”“Customer interest continues to be strong — it’s just taking longer to close deals,” Mr. Sperry said. He added that Gulfstream’s customers were primarily public and private companies, followed by individuals.Michael Han, regional vice president for sales for greater China at Bombardier Business Aircraft, which is close behind Gulfstream, declined to discuss specifics, but said his company had faced “some challenges” in the Chinese market in the last few years.Yet the slowdown in sales, leases and charters is hardly chasing anyone out of the Chinese market, analysts say. One is even predicting a comeback year.Jason Liao, chief executive of the China Business Aviation Group, said he expected orders to grow more than 15 percent this year on the back of China’s most recent stock boom. He said he was aware of “five or six” orders in recent months by people who had become rich on the bull market’s high returns before sudden share price slumps in June and July.“The amount of wealth that has been created by the stock market in the past six months is staggering,” Mr. Liao said in early June. “We have people calling us now saying, ‘I’ve made so much money on the stock market, now I want to buy a jet.’ ”Even if stock market volatility continues or prices decline further, some data suggests China’s business aviation market will continue to find new ways to make money. Most notably, business jets are still used at only a fraction of the rate they are in all other regions. According to Bombardier, greater China had four aircraft for every $100 billion of gross domestic product in 2013, compared with 23 in Africa, 42 in Latin America and 69 in North America. Bombardier is projecting 11 percent compound annual growth for aircraft delivery to greater China through 2023.Advertisement“The Chinese business aviation industry is still in an early stage of development; the potential market is still huge,” Mr. Fang said. “This is just the beginning.”A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: After Years of Hurtling Growth, China’s Business-Jet Sector Cools a Bit .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.