AdvertisementSupported byYour Money AdviserBy Ann CarrnsAugust is time for back-to-school shopping — and, in many states, that means so-called sales-tax holidays as well.In at least 17 states this year, shoppers may buy school supplies, clothing and other items on designated dates without paying the usual state sales tax. In some cases, purchases are also exempt from local sales taxes.State sales taxes range from less than 2 percent to more than 7 percent, but local option sales taxes can push the overall rate to 9 percent or higher in some areas.Some states have already held their temporary tax-free periods, but most will occur over the next month or so. Most last for a weekend, but Connecticut will offer tax-free shopping for seven days, starting Aug. 16. Florida’s lasts for 10 days, starting Aug. 7.According to the National Retail Federation, the average family with children in kindergarten through grade 12 will spend about $630 this year on electronics, clothes and other school needs. A family living in a state with a 7 percent tax rate would save about $44 by shopping during a tax-free period.Sales-tax holidays have been around for nearly two decades. While they are most common in the South, New York was one of the first states to offer such a holiday, in 1997, in a bid to keep shoppers from traveling to New Jersey in search of lower tax rates. (The state abandoned the temporary tax-holiday concept, but exempts clothing and footwear of under $110 from the state’s 4 percent sales tax all year. Additionally, New York City and eight counties offer the exemption for the local sales tax, according to the state tax department.)Sales tax holidays are frowned upon by many tax policy experts, who say they merely shift the timing of consumer spending, rather than raising overall sales, and do little to give lower-income consumers a meaningful tax break. “Sales tax holidays come off largely as a gimmick,” said Jared Walczak, a state tax policy analyst at the Tax Foundation.Still, the appeal of the holidays endures. Ohio will offer its first sales-tax holiday this year, from Aug. 7-9.Other states offering back-to-school tax holidays are Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. (The Massachusetts legislature has voted to hold a tax holiday this month; the measure is awaiting the governor’s signature.)Details of the tax holidays vary widely. Carol Kokinis-Graves, a senior state tax analyst for Wolters Kluwer Tax & Accounting, advises consumers to check their states’ revenue department websites for details, and print out a list of eligible items to take with them to stores: “I would plan my shopping,” she said.Note that states typically cap the cost of eligible items — say, an item of clothing would be eligible only if it costs $100 or less. And not all states include computers on their lists of tax-exempt items. Plus, some states may exempt purchases from state sales taxes, but not local sales taxes.Here are some questions and answers about state sales-tax holidays:■ What if I am improperly charged a sales tax during a tax-free period?In general, you should ask the retailer for a refund, said Ms. Kokinis-Graves. If the retailer disagrees with you, you can usually file for a refund with the state taxing authority; check your state’s website for details.■ Do the tax-free holidays apply to Internet purchases?As long as you make the purchase during the designated tax-free period, you shouldn’t have to pay a sales tax on your eligible items.■ Do states have tax holidays for other purposes besides back-to-school shopping?Yes. While back-to-school holidays are the most prevalent, some states designate sales-tax-exempt periods for other types of goods. Texas, for instance, offers a tax holiday for energy-efficient appliances. Alabama and other states offer tax holidays specifically for hurricane supplies. And Louisiana and Mississippi designate special tax holidays for the purchase of guns, ammunition and hunting supplies.Email: yourmoneyadviser@nytimes.comAdvertisement