AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben Protess and Peter EavisDeutsche Bank, the German financial giant with a big presence on Wall Street, is close to settling one of the many government investigations it currently faces.In a deal that is expected to be announced as soon as next week, Deutsche Bank would pay at least $200 million to resolve investigations into its dealings with countries like Iran and Syria, according to officials briefed on the matter. The investigations, led by New York State’s financial regulator and the Federal Reserve, have centered on whether the bank’s New York branch processed transactions for clients in those countries in violation of United States sanctions laws.The people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the negotiations, cautioned that the deals were not yet final. The Fed, in particular, was still negotiating a penalty, and the final sum is not known.The settlement with the Fed and the New York State Department of Financial Services would not put to rest a parallel criminal investigation into the bank. The Manhattan district attorney’s office and the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan are expected to continue pursuing their own investigations into potential sanctions violations at Deutsche Bank.Even so, the looming regulatory settlements would come as a relief to the bank, representing the latest step in a broader effort to mollify its regulatory critics and clear a long docket of government investigations.The bank, which recently said it expected to set aside an additional $1.3 billion to cover future legal penalties, also faces investigations into possible money laundering in its Moscow unit and whether it manipulated foreign exchange rates.The scrutiny coincides with Deutsche Bank’s efforts to overhaul its ranks and streamline its businesses. On Thursday, when reporting its full third-quarter results, the bank is expected to detail a new strategic plan.That plan will follow a previously announced shake-up in its investment bank, splitting it in two and restructuring its top management. And on Wednesday, the bank said that the plan would also involve paying no dividends until 2017.Since the financial crisis, Deutsche Bank has struggled on several fronts. For one, its returns have lagged those of other large global banks — particularly those of its American rivals. And its former leaders took a relatively combative approach with regulators in the United States and Germany. Shareholders increasingly grew dissatisfied with the bank’s efforts to adapt to the postcrisis era.The problems culminated in July, when John Cryan became co-chief executive of Deutsche Bank, taking over from Anshu Jain, who had led efforts to make the bank a dominant player on Wall Street.The new leadership is trying to revive the bank’s fortunes even as legacy issues remain. While the bank has set aside billions of dollars for legal settlements, shareholders are still concerned about the potential size of the litigation bill. So far this year, Deutsche Bank’s shares are up nearly 10 percent, after slumping 24 percent last year.A lack of criminal prosecutions of banks and their leaders fueled a public outcry over the perception that Wall Street giants are “too big to jail.”Deutsche Bank declined to comment on the settlement talks with the Fed and the Department of Financial Services, but in the past it has said that it “is providing information to and otherwise cooperating with the investigating agencies.”The bank has noted that in 2006, it “voluntarily decided that it would not engage in new U.S. dollar business with counterparties in Iran, Sudan, North Korea and Cuba and with certain Syrian banks.”The Fed declined to comment, as did a spokeswoman for Anthony J. Albanese, the acting head of the Department of Financial Services, and a spokesman for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan. A spokesman for Cyrus R. Vance, the Manhattan district attorney, also declined to comment.On Thursday, investors will get a chance to assess Mr. Cryan’s turnaround plans.Deutsche Bank had previously flagged that a dividend cut was coming when it announced that it expected to report a loss of nearly $7 billion for its third quarter. Perhaps to reassure shareholders, Deutsche said it expected to recommend that dividend payments resume in 2017, at a “competitive payout.”When a bank cuts a dividend, it is typically a sign that it is trying to conserve its capital, the financial buffer that insulates a bank against shocks and losses. The bank has not paid out any dividends for its 2015 fiscal year.Deutsche Bank’s announcement on Wednesday also contained some of the objectives that will be in the strategic plan, including two goals relating to crucial regulatory measures of capital. The bank said that it was aiming for its so-called common equity tier 1 capital to be equivalent to at least 12.5 percent of its assets from the end of 2018. It was at 11.4 percent at the end of June.Deutsche Bank also announced targets for expenses, which have run higher than at some other banks. In addition, the bank said it was aiming for its profits to be equivalent to at least 10 percent of its tangible common equity, another measurement of capital, by 2018.At JPMorgan Chase, a rival of Deutsche Bank, that particular measurement of profitability reached 14 percent in the first nine months of this year.Deutsche Bank is the latest in a long line of banks to pay big fines for doing business with Iran and other countries blacklisted in the United States.The biggest case came last year when France’s biggest bank, BNP Paribas, pleaded guilty to criminal charges and paid a record $8.9 billion penalty to federal and state authorities. Last week, another big French bank, Crédit Agricole, which was suspected of transferring billions of dollars on behalf of Iran and other countries, agreed to pay $787 million to resolve regulatory and criminal investigations.With a Deutsche Bank settlement in the works, only the investigations into Société Générale and UniCredit would remain unresolved.Those cases are winding down as a political and diplomatic shift has taken hold, with the United States easing its sanctions against Iran as part of a global deal to stunt that nation’s nuclear ambitions.But many Iranian sanctions remain in place. And Mr. Albanese indicated when announcing the Crédit Agricole case that other sanctions investigations were proceeding.“Our agency will continue to aggressively investigate and uncover misconduct at banks meant to circumvent U.S. sanctions laws — both past and present,” he said.Advertisement