By BRETT COLEAUG. 4, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — Just two companies are listed on the Asia Pacific Stock Exchange in Sydney, and it has to rely on its biggest Australian rival to clear and settle trades.But that has not diminished the ambitions of George Wang, the chairman of the AIMS Financial Group, which acquired the exchange in October 2008. Mr. Wang, who arrived here from China in November 1988 as a 26-year-old English language student, hopes to capitalize on the voracious appetite for stock market listings by Chinese companies despite the recent downturn.Before this year’s plunge in Chinese shares, which at one stage wiped out more than $3 trillion in market value, 500 mainland Chinese companies were lined up to list on the Shanghai and Shenzhen A stock markets, according to investment bankers and fund managers in Hong Kong.Now the plans of these Chinese companies are in limbo after Beijing froze initial public offerings, which were blamed for contributing to a stock market bubble. In the 12 months through May, Chinese stocks available to mainland investors soared 119 percent in Shanghai and 121 percent in Shenzhen.AdvertisementThe stock turmoil has not curbed Mr. Wang’s optimism that his stock exchange can act as a bridge between capital-hungry Chinese companies and the $1.53 trillion in Australia’s pension funds.AdvertisementMr. Wang also thinks his stock market can be a tonic for the Chinese market volatility that can scare off everyday investors. In 2015, Chinese initial public offerings on average rose about 44 percent on their first day of trading, according to a banker based in Hong Kong, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Such offerings sometimes rose by their 10 percent daily limit for a few days after that.“China’s market is up and down, but Asia Pacific exchange is market for long term,” said Mr. Wang, whose gregarious personality features plenty of smiles and a touch on the arm or leg of the person he speaks with.“Australia has unique position, can be important financial hub Asia Pacific,” Mr. Wang said.There is still a lot of work to do, though. Regulators in Australia and China have not yet approved Mr. Wang’s vision for trading renminbi-denominated stocks on the Asia Pacific Stock Exchange. And the exchange’s existing trading system, criticized as being outdated, is being replaced with the Nasdaq OMX platform.Still, Mr. Wang expects the business to break even next year. By the end of 2017, he predicts that more than 30 companies will be trading on the exchange. Two years ago, he predicted that 200 companies would be trading on the exchange. Still, Mr. Wang has spent considerable time wooing Chinese officials and chief executives, judging by the photographs in his office at the AIMS Financial Group, which also has offices in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen.Mr. Wang, who is 53, has always seen the potential in Australia.Born in Qionghai on the island of Hainan to a local government official and a stay-at-home mother, Mr. Wang studied environmental engineering at Donghua University in Shanghai, graduating in 1984. He got a job with the government in Guangdong, the Chinese province that borders Hong Kong.But Mr. Wang grew dissatisfied and restless and he looked for a new start. He decided to go to Australia where he felt there were more opportunities for him to make a mark because its smaller population meant less competition.After 12 months of English and computer courses, Mr. Wang got a job as a salesman for AMP, Australia’s biggest insurer, paid only if he persuaded people to buy an insurance or investment product. After three months without earning money, Mr. Wang put an advertisement in The Australian Chinese Daily asking Chinese immigrants if they would like to “save thousands of dollars” in taxes by investing in the country’s new pension plan. The next day he made about $15,000.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But by 1991, Mr. Wang had tired of AMP and the spotty record of its fund managers, which made him uncomfortable when he spoke to his clients. He started AIMS.AdvertisementMr. Wang’s ready smile vanishes and his features harden when asked about AIMS’s shareholders, its annual sales and profits and his personal stake in the company. “Confidential,” is his reply.He is similarly tight-lipped about his personal life.In the few snippets that he will let slip, Mr. Wang, who became an Australian citizen in 1994, said he had been married for more than 15 years to a “wife from China.” The Wangs live with their daughter in Sydney’s exclusive eastern seaside suburb Rose Bay where Mr Wang tries as often as he can to go for ocean swims.Mr. Wang says he needs just four hours of sleep, and he rises at 5 a.m. to meditate for as much as an hour. He carries and often fiddles with Buddhist prayer beads in meetings.AIMS has arranged about $6.2 billion worth of home loans and about $2.3 billion worth of mortgage-backed securities, according to its website. The company has also raised about $770 million from foreign investors to invest in Australian real estate.Australia grants permanent residency to people who have at least 5 million Australian dollars, about $3.6 million, to make “complying investments in Australia.” Under Australia’s business migration program, China’s affluent immigrants have bought prime real estate, opened bank accounts and sent their children to live in their new homes in the face of an anti-corruption drive by President Xi Jinping.In 2007, Mr. Wang was having dinner with John Howard, the prime minister of Australia, who warned the group of about a dozen businessmen that Deutsche Bank, among others, was predicting a crash in the United States housing market. Mr. Wang decided to stop issuing mortgage-backed securities, thus avoiding losses that crippled other financial firms.“Important to listen to people who know more,” he simply said of his business decision.The next year, Mr. Wang was among the top sponsors of Australia’s Olympic team at the Beijing Olympics, rubbing shoulders with Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who speaks Mandarin Chinese. Weeks later, he was asked if he wanted to buy the Asia Pacific Stock Exchange from the Australian stockbroker Austock just after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.“I wanted to be bridge of Australia, Asia,” Mr. Wang said.In May, AIMS acquired the failed stockbroker BBY, which Mr. Wang envisions as part of his growing empire.Mr. Wang wants to open BBY offices throughout Asia and transform BBY into an important broker of capital flows in the region as he lobbies regulators to approve his plans for the Asia Pacific Stock Exchange.AdvertisementIt is in discussing his vision of the future that his optimism turns steely serious.“I know I can’t make a mistake,” Mr. Wang said.An article on Wednesday about George Wang, owner of the Asia Pacific Stock Exchange in Sydney,Australia, misidentified the university where he studied engineering. It was East China Textile Institute of Science and Technology in Shanghai, now known as Donghua University; it was not Chinese Eastern University.A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Exchange in Australia Woos Listings From China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.