By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and HIROKO TABUCHIAUG. 4, 2015
After more than a decade under private equity ownership, and two different sets of investors, Neiman Marcus — home to $10,000 gowns and sometimes outlandish Christmas presents — is preparing to head back to the stock market.The high-end retailer filed on Tuesday for an initial public offering, paving the way for its current owners to exit after their $6 billion takeover of the company just under two years ago.The two investors, Ares Management and the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, bought the century-old company from Warburg Pincus and the Texas Pacific Group (now known as TPG Capital), which bought out the retailer in 2005 for about $5.1 billion.Warburg Pincus and TPG had looked at selling Neiman a number of times before they did. They filed for an initial offering of the department store chain in 2013 while also pursuing a potential sale.AdvertisementNeiman, which is still based in Dallas, its hometown, now operates 41 full-line stores as well as 42 lower-priced outlets and the even higher-end Bergdorf Goodman department store in Manhattan.AdvertisementThe retailer, which said in its prospectus that almost 40 percent of its customers had a household income of more than $200,000, has been investing in its full-line stores in an effort to tap into a rebound in luxury spending in the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Neiman is remodeling over half of its Neiman Marcus stores, including its most prominent locations in Boston, Houston and Palo Alto and Beverly Hills, Calif., as well its Bergdorf Goodman store. The retailer is also planning to open its first Neiman Marcus store in New York City, at the Hudson Yards retail complex on the West Side of Manhattan, in 2018.Neiman has also bolstered its offerings online and overseas, last year acquiring the fast-growing Munich-based online fashion business MyTheresa.com. Sales at MyTheresa jumped 38 percent in the 12 months through June 30, to about $148 million, adding to Neiman’s top line.The company reported $47.8 million in profit for the 39 weeks ended May 2, swinging from a $134.1 million loss in the 39 weeks ended Aug. 2 of last year. Sales rose slightly through May 2 of this year, to $3.9 billion.When it begins trading, Neiman plans to use the ticker symbol NMG.The prospectus did not include other major details about the planned stock sale, including how many shares the retailer and its owners planned to sell or on which exchange it will list. It also did not say which investment banks would lead the I.P.O.A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Luxury I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.