AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaJournalists at The Economist speak, half-jokingly, of a mythical, perfect sentence for the news and business weekly. It is some version of this:“Wrong.”That implies, said Chris Anderson, who worked there for seven years in the 1990s, and Bill Emmott, who edited it until 2006, that the conventional wisdom has been outlined in a preamble. It further assumes that the writer has the intellectual heft to dismiss it in a single word. And that the subsequent paragraphs will go on to outline a more astute, nuanced argument.Clive Crook, who was with the publication for 23 years until 2005, said he had heard another tongue-in-cheek characterization of The Economist’s style, “simplify, then exaggerate.”That distinctive voice, often featuring acerbic British understatement — a recent article described the alleged behavior of a British lord as “gadding about with prostitutes” — runs through The Economist’s blend of pithy news summaries, deeply reported analyses and quirky asides.Widely viewed as a magazine, it nevertheless calls itself a newspaper. It has no bylines. It has a dedicated following for its idiosyncratic photo captions (“You’re the Yuan that I want”). Its goal, outlined in a kind of mission statement on its website, is to “take part in a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.”Either because of or in spite of these eccentricities, The Economist, now poised for a change in ownership, occupies a widely envied position.It has, perhaps fittingly for an unabashed supporter of free markets, been consistently profitable for decades. The Economist Group made about $93 million for the year that ended March 31, on revenue of more than $500 million, according to its annual report. Though it is privately held, the company releases its financial records each spring. The Economist’s circulation has increased to about 1.6 million in 2015 from around a million in 2006. It largely reaches the kind of affluent, educated people who travel to international conferences on private jets, and its many admirers include the former mayor of New York City, Michael R. Bloomberg.Karl Marx, on the other hand, dismissed it as “the European organ of the aristocracy of finance.” The writer James Fallows described it as a purveyor of “smarty-pants English attitudes on our shores,” revered strictly as a fashion accessory for those who seek to appear erudite and worldly. The politics and culture writer Andrew Sullivan largely agreed. He called it “a kind of Reader’s Digest for the upper classes.”The impending ownership change is unlikely to settle the debate. A 50 percent stake in The Economist Group, which includes CQ Roll Call, has been put up for sale by the education company Pearson, which recently sold The Financial Times to Nikkei of Japan as part of an effort to streamline its businesses. Pearson is negotiating, according to two people briefed on the matter, with the publication’s current shareholders — including Exor, the investment company controlled by the Agnelli family, which has declared its interest publicly.Others who had coveted the publication, including Mr. Bloomberg, have not been mentioned as contenders, perhaps because the company has a complex trust system that essentially ensures it cannot be taken over by an owner keen to impose his or her whims.The Economist Group has four kinds of shares: Ordinary ones, for employees, past employees and founding members of the company. “A” shares, held by illustrious names like the Cadburys, Rothschilds and Schroders. “B” shares, which represent about half, are the ones for sale. And trust shares, which control transfer of “A” and “B” shares, and are held by trustees who are responsible for ensuring “the continued independence of the ownership of the company and the editorial independence of The Economist.”It has, in other words, carefully shielded itself from the free market forces it so vociferously defends. (Mr. Emmott argued that the position was consistent, as The Economist has no objection to private companies managing themselves as they see fit.)The newspaper, founded in 1843, is put together in offices in the heart of London, a short stroll from the Ritz and a slightly longer walk from Buckingham Palace. The newsroom staff declined to move to Canary Wharf, a modern office development favored by financial firms, when its business staff did. Journalists usually either stay for a short period, and find The Economist is not for them, or for years, even decades, Mr. Crook said.Its culture, said Mr. Anderson, who went on to edit Wired magazine, is based on debate. During his tenure, every Monday morning the staff would gather in the editor’s office, to figure out, by means of argument, the leader articles that would form the backbone of the next issue. “It was the classic Oxford debating society style,” he said. “I’ve never seen more of an intellectual meritocracy. It was a classic example of sink or swim. How did people end up with The Economist voice? That’s it right there.”It has also been shaped, said Mr. Crook, who rose to deputy editor, by the lack of bylines. “There is a genuine sense that we’re all in it together,” he said. Writers edit, and editors write, which makes each considerate of the other. And writers can contribute on unexpected subjects — a recent article, headlined “Girlfriend in a Conga,” focused on the popularity of the singer Morrissey in Mexico — because readers do not associate their names with one topic.It appeals so widely, Mr. Emmott suggested, because it has responded to the spread of the English language, the end of the Cold War, the rise of China and other world economies, all multiplied by the effects of the Internet. It has become, he said “the house magazine of globalization.”Mr. Crook suggested that economy of expression might be the key. “The main thing” he said, “is not to waste the readers’ time.”Advertisement