AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — As the Walt Disney Company extends its growth streak, it is bumping into a challenge faced by high-flying companies of all kinds: With great success comes even greater expectations.Disney said on Tuesday that revenue in its fiscal third quarter totaled $13.1 billion, a 5 percent increase from the same period last year. But analysts had expected $13.22 billion, and shares in the entertainment conglomerate dropped about 6.4 percent in after-hours trading, to $114.The disappointment over the difference, which was mostly due to unfavorable exchange rates, came despite an 11 percent quarterly increase in profit, which totaled $2.48 billion. That profit translated to $1.45 a share. Analysts had expected $1.42 a share, so for the 17th straight quarter Disney exceeded Wall Street’s profit outlook.Disney’s results reflected the shifting fortunes of television and movies inside the media conglomerate. For years, cable television — primarily ESPN — drove results while movies and related businesses like consumer products took a back seat. At least lately, however, the roles have been reversed.Walt Disney Studios was a major driver of the company’s quarterly results. The movie operation, citing the box office success of “The Avengers: Age of Ultron,” said operating income totaled $472 million, a 15 percent increase.Although “Age of Ultron” received weaker reviews and sold fewer tickets than the first “Avengers,” particularly in the United States, the film still generated $1.4 billion at the global box office, and the results were big enough to spare Disney from taking a widely expected write-down on its underperforming “Tomorrowland.”Also contributing to Disney’s results for the quarter was a surging consumer products division, where sales of “Avengers,” “Star Wars” and “Frozen” merchandise delivered operating income of $348 million, a 27 percent increase from a year earlier. The acquisitions of Pixar, Marvel and Lucasfilm can notably be seen in Disney’s improved results in movies and consumer products.Television results, however, were mixed.Disney’s cable networks division, which includes ESPN, Disney Channel and ABC Family, posted operating income of $2.1 billion, a 7 percent increase. ESPN benefited from contractual increases in payments from affiliates, but had lower advertising revenue, largely from lower ratings and rates; in the year-earlier quarter ESPN was able to charge higher rates for its World Cup soccer programming.Disney’s broadcast television division, which includes ABC, reported a 15 percent decrease in operating income, to $300 million, because of higher programming costs and lower ad revenue. The drop in ad revenue was largely a result of lower ratings in news and daytime programming, where “The View” has been struggling in particular.Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chairman and chief executive, emphasized ESPN’s marketplace strength in prepared remarks during Disney’s conference call. He said ESPN was better poised than perhaps any network to take advantage of new ways of delivering programming to viewers.But he also seemed to acknowledge that cable television may become less of a driver for Disney in the near term. “We’re realists about the business,” Mr. Iger said, acknowledging that some consumers were putting “both the cost and value” of cable subscriptions under “a microscope.”Speaking on a conference call, Christine M. McCarthy, Disney’s chief financial officer, told analysts that lower cable subscriber levels would modestly affect growth at Disney’s Media Networks unit in the coming year.Disney and other television companies collect billions of dollars in revenue each year by selling a bundle of networks to cable and satellite distributors. But investors have become worried that those dollars could be in jeopardy because of cord-cutting by consumers. Cable and satellite companies have also started to resist efforts by entertainment companies to sell their networks à la carte, directly to consumers.Without singling out Disney — which has been less aggressive than some competitors in selling its networks through so-called skinny bundles — Charter Communications executives warned on Tuesday that television groups will have less pricing power the more they offer their networks on an à la carte basis.“They’ve devalued their core product, and they may or may not be carried in the future as a result of that,” Thomas M. Rutledge, Charter’s chief executive, said on a separate conference call.For the quarter, Walt Disney Parks and Resorts had operating income of $922 million, a 9 percent increase from a year earlier, with results partly offset by costs associated with new attractions at Disneyland, which is promoting its 60th anniversary. Ms. McCarthy said that attendance at the company’s parks in Florida and California increased 4 percent in the quarter and that occupancy at Disney-owned hotels in North America was a strong 87 percent.Also reporting earnings on Tuesday was DreamWorks Animation, where losses deepened as the boutique studio struggled to get past broad layoffs and a retrenchment in its feature film division. For the quarter that ended June 30, DreamWorks Animation had a net loss of $38.6 million, or 45 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $15.4 million, or 18 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier.Adjusting for costs related to its restructuring, DreamWorks Animation reported a net loss for the most recent quarter of $11.6 million, or 13 cents a share. The company, which successfully released its alien caper “Home” in China in the quarter, had revenue of $170.8 million, an increase of about 40 percent from a year earlier.Emily Steel contributed reporting from New York.Advertisement