By DAVID BARBOZAAUG. 4, 2015
SHANGHAI —  GlaxoSmithKline said on Tuesday that it had rehired a former executive whom the company once suspected of being the whistle-blower in a scandal at its Chinese operations.The decision came after a devastating period in China for the British pharmaceutical giant. Two years ago, investigators in China detained senior executives and sales managers. Eventually, five senior executives were convicted and the company was fined nearly $500 million for bribing doctors, hospitals and others to bolster sales in China.The company has acknowledged widespread misconduct in China and pledged to revamp the operation. In a news release on Tuesday, Glaxo acknowledged only that the executive, Vivian Shi, whom the company investigated over making accusations of fraud and corruption, had rejoined the company. Ms. Shi, who could not be reached for comment, was fired from her job as the head of government relations in China in December 2012.“We can confirm we have rehired Vivian,” the company said in the statement. “We are not going to comment further on an individual employee.”AdvertisementThe decision to rehire Ms. Shi, which was reported on Monday by The Financial Times, is an odd twist in the company’s operations in China.AdvertisementGlaxo executives have never publicly said they suspected Ms. Shi of being the whistle-blower. But several people who had worked for Glaxo said the company believed she had spurred a campaign against Glaxo in China in 2012 and 2013. At that time, anonymous emails with allegations of fraud and corruption were sent to Chinese government agencies and Glaxo’s headquarters. In early 2013, one of the emails sent to Glaxo contained a sex video of Mark Reilly, a British national and the company’s China general manager at the time, recorded covertly in his Shanghai apartment bedroom, according to people who were briefed on the situation and spoke only on the condition of anonymity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Glaxo responded to the claims by conducting an internal investigation, which found no wrongdoing in China. The company’s Shanghai office then hired ChinaWhys, a private investigative firm, to look into the background of the whistle-blower and the recording.In June 2013, though, the Chinese authorities began raiding Glaxo offices on suspicion of bribery and fraud. Investigators also detained the founders of ChinaWhys, Peter Humphrey, a British citizen, and his wife, Yu Yingzeng, a Chinese-born American citizen. The couple was later accused by the authorities of illegally obtaining private information on Chinese citizens and sentenced to prison terms of about two years. Friends of the couple say they were detained for their work looking into the background and political contacts of Ms. Shi, and trying to determine the origins of the recording involving Mr. Reilly. The couple was released from prison in June and is now living in Britain.A year ago, Mr. Reilly and four other senior executives were sentenced to two to four years in prison for their role in the bribery and fraud scandal. Mr. Reilly was given a suspended sentence and deported. He has since left the company.A spokesman said Glaxo, which had also been hit by a large fine in the United States, had dropped incentives and made significant changes to its sales program in China and globally.A version of this article appears in print on August 5, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Glaxo Rehires an Executive Linked to Exposing Bribes in China .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.