AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The British government said on Tuesday that it had raised 2.1 billion pounds, or about $3.3 billion, in the first sale of part of its stake in the Royal Bank of Scotland.The share sale is an important milestone as the British government seeks to cut its ownership of R.B.S. and the Lloyds Banking Group, which both received large bailouts during the financial crisis.In a news release, U.K. Financial Investments, which oversees the government’s holdings in R.B.S. and the Lloyds Banking Group, said that it had sold a 5.4 percent stake in R.B.S. at 330 pence a share in a private placing to institutional investors.That is below the bank’s closing price of 337.50 pence a share on Monday, and well below the price the government paid when R.B.S. received a bailout of £45 billion in 2008.The government has said it hopes that returning more of the bank’s shares to private hands will improve the marketability of its remaining holdings in the lender. After the sale, the government has a stake of about 72.9 percent in R.B.S.George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said in June that it was time to begin reducing the government’s holdings in R.B.S., even if it had to do so at a loss. He had said in a speech in June that he believed the British state would ultimately make a profit from the bank bailouts.The investment bank Rothschild, which is advising the British government, estimated in a report in June that the government could eventually recoup £14.3 billion more than what it spent to bail out lenders, including Northern Rock, through repayments and other stock and asset sales, whose values fluctuate.The report noted that the government had estimated in 2008 that it could lose £20 billion to £50 billion from those bailouts.U.K. Financial Investments had announced plans to proceed with the sale of part of the stake on Monday.“This is an important first step in returning the bank to private ownership, which is the right thing to do for the taxpayer and for British businesses,” Mr. Osborne said in a news release on Tuesday. “It will promote financial stability, lead to a more competitive banking sector and support the interests of the wider economy.”He continued, “Now is the time for R.B.S. to rebuild itself as a commercial bank, no longer reliant on the state, but serving the working people of Britain.”Mr. Osborne said the proceeds from the sale would be used to pay down the national debt.Shares of R.B.S. were down 0.5 percent in midday trading in London on Tuesday.The government has had an easier time reducing its stake in Lloyds in recent years, as the lender’s profitability has improved. The government had a stake as large as 40 percent in Lloyds after extending a bailout of £17 billion to the lender in 2008.The British government has since reduced its stake in Lloyds to just under 14 percent and has recovered about £13.5 billion of the bailout money given to Lloyds.The turnaround at R.B.S. has been slower than the government had hoped. In February, the bank, which is based in Edinburgh, reported its seventh consecutive annual loss and announced a major reshaping of its business, including the dismantling of its global investment bank.The lender has announced its intentions to become a much smaller, British-focused retail and corporate bank.Last week, R.B.S. announced its results for the second quarter, with profit up 27 percent compared with the same period a year earlier, ahead of analysts’ expectations.The bank said, however, that it was not likely to return capital to investors through share buybacks and dividends before the first quarter of 2017, and it again recorded a large restructuring charge tied to its overhaul.“I’m pleased the government has started to sell down its stake,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said in a statement on Tuesday. “It’s an important moment and reflects the progress we are making to become a stronger, simpler and fairer bank.”“There is more work to be done,” he added, “but we’re determined to build a bank the country can be proud of.”Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and UBS coordinated the R.B.S. offering.Advertisement