By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 6, 2015
The activist investor William A. Ackman has built up a $5.5 billion stake in Mondelez International, the maker of Oreo cookies and Cadbury chocolate, in a bet that the food company may be a target as the industry consolidates.Pershing Square Capital Management, Mr. Ackman’s $20 billion hedge fund, announced on Wednesday night that it intends to notify the Securities and Exchange Commission that it has a 7.5 percent stake, which includes options and forward contracts, in the company.Mr. Ackman, who has made bets on other food companies like McDonald’s, believes that Mondelez must increase its revenue and slash costs or put itself up for sale, said a person briefed on the investment but not authorized to speak publicly about it.In June, Mr. Ackman took a 22 percent stake in Nomad Holdings Ltd., a so-called special-purpose acquisition company, or SPAC. Such a vehicle raises money from investors to make acquisitions. Nomad is focusing on food companies, and in April, it announced that it had reached a deal to to buy Iglo Foods Holdings, which sells fish sticks and frozen foods in Europe, for about $2.9 billion.AdvertisementThings could get heated at Mondelez, where another activist investor, Nelson Peltz, sits on the board. Mr. Peltz’s multibillion-dollar hedge fund, Trian, began agitating for change at the company several years ago. He pushed for a merger between PepsiCo and Mondelez in July 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A spokeswoman for Mondelez, Valerie Moens, said in a statement: “We welcome Pershing Square as investors in our company. We’ll continue to focus on executing our strategy and on delivering value for all our shareholders.”AdvertisementSpeaking at an investor conference in Manhattan this summer, Mr. Ackman gave some indication of how things might pan out between him and Mr. Peltz.“If I ran a company, I would be delighted to have Nelson on my board,” Mr. Ackman said, referring to a discussion about Mr. Peltz’s campaign to break up the chemical maker DuPont.“I really mean that. I think it’s very, very helpful to a C.E.O. to have a major shareholder on the board, so that you can get input from a shareholder before you — you can test something internally,” Mr. Ackman told the audience of hedge fund managers and investors at the Waldorf Astoria.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Pershing Says It Has Stake in Mondelez.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.