AdvertisementSupported byBy Graham Bowley and Sydney EmberBill Cosby will be questioned under oath in October in a second case involving accusations that he sexually assaulted a young woman, a judge said on Wednesday.The deposition of Mr. Cosby, 78, in the case involving Judy Huth, a California woman who said she was molested by the entertainer in 1974, when she was 15, was allowed to go forward last month, when the California Supreme Court denied Mr. Cosby’s petition for review.But the date had not been set, and Monique Pressley, one of Mr. Cosby’s lawyers, indicated there would be further efforts to fight it.One issue before the court was whether Mr. Cosby or Ms. Huth would be questioned first.But on Wednesday, the judge said Mr. Cosby’s deposition would take place on Oct. 9 and Ms. Huth’s on Oct. 15.Ms. Huth’s case is one of the few complaints against Mr. Cosby that can proceed in civil court because, she says, the alleged abuse happened when she was a minor. The statute of limitations in California is extended for adults who claim they were victims of sexual abuse as children, said her lawyer, Gloria Allred. Ms. Huth has claimed that Mr. Cosby forced her to perform a sex act on him at the Playboy Mansion.“We are pleased that we will now be able to move ahead without further delay on Ms. Huth’s case, and we look forward to taking Mr. Cosby’s deposition on Oct. 9, 2015,” Ms. Allred said in a statement.Ms. Pressley could not immediately be reached for comment. Andrew Wyatt, a spokesman for Mr. Cosby, declined to comment.Mr. Cosby’s deposition now appears to be set, unless there is a move by his side to delay the proceeding.More than two dozen women, including Ms. Huth, have accused Mr. Cosby of assault. He has consistently denied the accusations and has not been charged with a crime.In an earlier deposition involving another woman, Andrea Constand, taken in 2005 and 2006, Mr. Cosby acknowledged that he gave drugs to women he wanted to have sex with.He has portrayed both the drug-taking and the sex as consensual.The 2005-6 deposition became public this year. The court case involving Ms. Constand was settled in 2006, with Mr. Cosby paying an undisclosed settlement.In addition to the civil case in California, Mr. Cosby also faces two defamation cases, in Massachusetts and California.Advertisement