AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsWhile chief executives generally prefer not to say how much more money they make than their typical employee, some have found it advantageous to do just that.Some companies like Whole Foods, the NorthWestern Corporation and Noble Energy began disclosing the difference between their top executives’ pay and their workers’ well before the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a rule on Wednesday requiring that the information be made public.While the exact reasons vary, the companies seem to be united by two common themes: The calculations were easy, and they made the company look good.“This gives companies the ability to say that they took the high ground, instead of kicking and screaming as so many others have done,” said Vineeta Anand, the chief research analyst at the A.F.L.-C.I.O.’s office of investment.The NorthWestern Corporation, a utility company that provides gas and electricity to customers in Montana, Nebraska and South Dakota, began sharing its C.E.O. pay ratio six years ago, according to Timothy P. Olson, NorthWestern’s senior corporate counsel and corporate secretary.In 2014, the company’s chief executive, Robert C. Rowe, earned nearly $2 million — 24 times as much as the median pay of full-time employees. But that is tiny compared to the average for companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. On average, those C.E.O.s earn 373 times more, according to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. (NorthWestern, though, is considerably smaller, with a market capitalization of $2.5 billion.)“At a time of high income inequality and questions being raised about social disparities in our country, it gives these companies the bragging rights to say we treat our workers fairly,” Ms. Anand said.In an interview, Mr. Olson said that analyzing the numbers wasn’t hard, and the results showed investors how much value they were getting for executive pay compared to NorthWestern’s peers. “It is a point of pride,” he said.The company got “no feedback” from shareholders, Mr. Olson said. “My personal opinion is that this is not meaningful to investors.”In that respect, Mr. Olson agrees with many people who oppose the new rules. Businesses say making the calculations is more onerous to the company than helpful to the public.But Ms. Anand suggested one reason companies like NorthWestern might not have heard from shareholders: The companies hadn’t been very vocal about their pay ratios.“Had they done that, they would have attracted far more attention,” she said. “I’ve been talking about these companies for the last two or three years, but the only time I’m getting phone calls is now.”The ratio may become a persuasive measurement for investors who vote on a company’s pay, policies and practices, she added.Not every company that has made an effort to show the pay gap between workers and their top executives has disclosed everything that the S.E.C. now wants to know. The agency has a specific directive for determining which employees must be compared, and requires total compensation to be accounted for.But the efforts that companies like Whole Foods have made are still meaningful, according to Dean Baker, the co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, a left-leaning think tank.“I assume that many of the companies that don’t disclose C.E.O.-median-worker pay ratios expect this disclosure to hurt their public image since it is otherwise difficult to see why they would have put up such resistance to the rule,” he said in an email. The requirement announced on Wednesday was provided for under the Dodd-Frank financial reform act passed in 2010. Whole Foods, one of the most prominent companies to compare its chief executive’s pay to that of its workers, has capped total cash compensation at 19 times as much as the average worker. The S.E.C. requires firms to look at “median” employees, those midway between the highest-paid and the lowest-paid earners.“I could absolutely see that for a bigger company, this could be a tremendous undertaking,” said Sheryl G. Sharry, the chief financial officer at the Bank of South Carolina. The company, which has fewer than 100 employees, does not calculate its pay ratio, but provides the annual compensation for its median employee, who earns about one-fifth as much as the chief executive. “If this had been something that would have taken days and days of research and pulling things together to calculate, we wouldn’t have done it,” Ms. Sharry said.M.B.I.A., the bond insurer, disclosed its median employee compensation in S.E.C. filings for three years, and calculated the pay ratio explicitly for 2010, according to a spokesman, Kevin Brown. But the company stopped, deciding to wait for more clarity in the final rule.“We haven’t had a lot of questions about why we stopped,” he said. Advertisement