By REUTERSOCT. 28, 2015
The chief of Fiat Chrysler, Sergio Marchionne, said on Wednesday that the company would make a new large S.U.V. for the American market, taking aim at one of the most profitable franchises for its rivals General Motors and Ford.Mr. Marchionne used a conference call scheduled to coincide with third-quarter results to outline new details of his strategy to increase profits in North America. He signaled he was adjusting strategy for the luxury brands Alfa Romeo and Maserati to compensate for slowing demand in China.The automaker’s shares skidded in Milan and New York after it reported a loss of 299 million euros for the third quarter, reflecting a €602 million charge ($667 million) mainly to cover costs related to safety recalls in the United States. The company said operating profit rose 35 percent, not including the charges.Mr. Marchionne suggested Fiat Chrysler could use its Ram truck brand in the United States to field a bulked-up competitor to the Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban from G.M. and the Ford Expedition. In April, Fiat Chrysler showed a prototype of a large Ramcharger S.U.V., borrowing the name from a pickup-based vehicle of the same name discontinued more than a decade ago.AdvertisementG.M. commands about 70 percent of the large-S.U.V. market in the United States, and last week reported record $3.3 billion pretax profits from North American operations for the third quarter. Mr. Marchionne has also said Fiat Chrysler should make a large luxury S.U.V. to compete with the Range Rover from Jaguar Land Rover.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have a reasonable chance to get at least a part of that market,” Mr. Marchionne said, adding that cheap gasoline should encourage enough demand for such vehicles to accommodate new entries.AdvertisementBuilding more S.U.V.s and fewer cars like the compact Dodge Dart could help Fiat Chrysler to attain the same double-digit North American operating profit margins G.M. and Ford have, Mr. Marchionne said.Fiat Chrysler’s North American operating margin was 6.7 percent, better than the 4.2 percent from a year ago but for the quarter much lower than G.M.’s 11.8 percent and Ford’s 11.3 percent. Mr. Marchionne has vowed to close the gap with Ford and G.M. profit margins by 2018.He said the company was sticking with a plan to sell 400,000 Alfa Romeo vehicles worldwide by 2018, but said the brand would have to shift focus to North America and Europe because of lower expectations for sales in China.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Fiat Chrysler to Challenge U.S. Rivals With an S.U.V.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.