AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Olaf StorbeckThe best chapter of Pearson’s breakup is yet to be written. Selling a 47 percent stake in the book publisher Penguin Random House to the co-owner Bertelsmann might generate twice as much as The Financial Times, which the British company sold to Japan’s Nikkei for 844 million pounds ($1.3 billion) last month. Pearson’s chief executive, John Fallon, can unshackle himself from the publisher of “Fifty Shades of Grey” as early as October, when a lockup ends. Yet it makes sense to wait.Pearson and Bertelsmann pooled their English-language book businesses in an all-share deal in mid-2013. The Germans have a 53 percent stake and managerial control. For Pearson, now focusing entirely on education, the stake is a financial investment, recorded in its accounts as having a value of $1.7 billion.Comparable valuations suggest it is worth more. A rival, Bloomsbury Publishing, trades at 7.6 times last year’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, Thomson Reuters data shows. Penguin Random House has better pricing power and a wider stable of authors, raising its chances of generating best sellers. Applying a multiple of 10 to the venture’s 2014 Ebitda of around $460 million, Pearson’s stake in the virtually debt-free division could be worth $2.2 billion.One reason to wait is that the joint venture isn’t yet fully grown. The publisher should be able to squeeze costs by, say, 4 percent of revenue as a result of the original 2013 merger, and those benefits aren’t yet reflected in its accounts. Take that roughly $142 million in savings, tax and capitalize it, and Pearson’s share of the cost savings could be worth up to $547 million. That’s not including the revenue benefits from negotiating from a better position with retailers like Amazon.This lifts the price tag of Pearson’s stake to about about $2.7 billion. Bertelsmann, which is family owned, could easily afford this — its net debt of 1.7 billion euros, or roughly $1.9 billion, is less than one year’s worth of the company’s Ebitda. But there’s no need to move now.Selling The Financial Times gives Pearson cash to play with while the book joint venture gets up to speed, and maybe expands through acquisitions, as in last year’s purchase of the Spanish publisher Santillana Ediciones Generales. Compelling stories shouldn’t be rushed.Olaf Storbeck is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement