AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Brooks BarnesIf ESPN is having trouble, is the rest of television burnt toast?Late on Tuesday, Disney reduced growth expectations for its vast cable network division, which contributes roughly half of its annual operating income and is anchored by what is considered the strongest channel around: ESPN.Never mind that Disney’s chief executive, Robert A. Iger, aggressively defended ESPN’s overall health. By the end of trading on Wednesday, Disney shares had tumbled 9 percent, alarming investors across the entire entertainment industry.Along with Disney’s decline were sharp drops in the stocks of other large media companies. Shares in Comcast, Time Warner, 21st Century Fox, CBS, Viacom, Discovery Communications and AMC Networks all were down on Wednesday. Discovery plunged 12 percent.Some analysts cautioned that investors had mistakenly entered panic mode and that the companies largely delivered solid business results. Others said that the industrywide sell-off illuminated long-term fears about the fate of traditional media companies in a new digital world, where viewers are canceling their cable and satellite subscriptions as they spend more time watching on-demand streaming television that doesn’t include advertising.“There is almost an eeriness to this; it doesn’t seem fundamentally driven,” said David Bank, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets. “The concern is when you look at five to 10 years out, you become less certain about the ecosystem.”Not only has subscriber and distribution revenue come under pressure as viewers choose not to pay for traditional cable and satellite service, but so, too, has ad revenue in the face of huge declines in TV ratings.“You have both legs of the media stool being kicked,” said Richard Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG Research. “The consumer is shifting, and these media companies are not built to take advantage of technological disruption.”Fueling investor anxiety, some analysts said, is the fast rise of digital rivals like Netflix, which some analysts said was cutting into the time people spend watching traditional television, and Facebook, which is capturing a larger share of advertising dollars.In the second quarter this year, Netflix surpassed expectations, adding a record 3.3 million global streaming members, bringing its total memberships to 65.6 million. Its stock registered another record high on Wednesday. And at Facebook, whose shares are also near a benchmark high, advertising revenue surged 43 percent to $3.8 billion during the second quarter.Netflix and Facebook “are at a scale that we really haven’t seen historically in media in terms of the number of subscribers and the number of users,” said Anthony DiClemente, a media and web analyst at Nomura Securities.Charles W. Ergen, chairman of the Dish Network, acknowledged Netflix’s ascendance. “It’s totally, totally shifted to Netflix,” he said. “Netflix is the most powerful content aggregator in the world today, and there’s nobody that’s even close.”Mr. Ergen also outlined the challenges traditional television companies are facing. “Viewership is going down, advertising rates are going down, and everybody wants to go to the Street and say they’re still making the same amount of money,” he said.But as the large media conglomerates reported earnings on Wednesday, their executives insisted they were not worried.Time Warner, the home of HBO, the Turner cable networks and the Warner Bros. film studios, beat second-quarter expectations for profit and revenue. Total revenue increased 8 percent to $7.3 billion during the quarter, and all divisions of the company showed growth. Nevertheless, shares in the company closed down 9 percent, at $79.80.“We recognize the pace of change in our industry is accelerating, and that means we’re going to have to move even faster,” Jeffrey L. Bewkes, chief executive of Time Warner, said in a conference call.Time Warner has tried to position itself to take advantage of the fast rise in streaming by licensing programming to digital outlets and starting its own streaming offering for HBO, which does not require a traditional cable subscription.At 21st Century Fox, the company reported a 9.3 percent decline to $6.2 billion in adjusted revenue during the quarter that ended June 30 because of declining advertising sales in its TV business and because of smaller movies. Executives said that while the company had no plans to create an independent streaming service, it was benefiting from making its programming available to streaming services. Shares in Fox closed down 7 percent on Wednesday, and declined an additional 4 percent in after-hours trading.“Our industry has always been evolving and innovating,” Lachlan Murdoch, an executive chairman of 21st Century Fox, said in a conference call. “The scale and speed of this change will, to some, be overwhelming.”The market woes also affected CBS Corporation, whose shares dropped more than 4 percent. On Wednesday, the company reported that net earnings from continuing operations declined 20 percent during the second quarter to $332 million, in part because of a $55 million restructuring charge related to its radio and TV station operations.Leslie Moonves, chief executive at CBS, promised that his company was well positioned for a digital future, highlighting the introduction of stand-alone streaming services for its CBS and Showtime networks. “The future is now, and we are part of it across the board,” he said. At Discovery, which also reported earnings on Wednesday, profits tumbled 25 percent during the second quarter in large part because of foreign currency losses. Despite the weak results, David M. Zaslav, chief executive of Discovery Communications, was also optimistic.“We could be on every S.V.O.D. platform if we wanted to,” he said, referring to the streaming video on demand services. “But since we own all of our content, we could also go directly to consumer, which is very possible.”Here are some prominent services offering live TV, à la carte networks and other on-demand streaming options in the United States.Of all the media companies, Disney was perhaps the loudest in insisting that there was no cause for concern.In a lengthy interview on CNBC, Mr. Iger said, “We are very bullish about our cable business, and we are very bullish about ESPN.” He added, “The bundle is not going away. Not only is it not going away, it is going to continue to grow.”Disney unnerved the market for reasons beyond ESPN, starting with expectations. Analysts, investors and the news media have become used to quarter after quarter (after quarter) of blockbuster Disney results — what Michael Nathanson, an analyst at MoffettNathanson, has termed “the earnings beating machine.” So Disney “hitting a pothole,” as Mr. Nathanson put it, was startling.While still beating quarterly profit expectations, Disney on Tuesday reported lower revenue than analysts had predicted, largely because of unfavorable exchange rates. Disney also cautioned that a stronger dollar would lower 2016 operating income by about $500 million.Additionally, analysts saw weakness in Disney’s overseas theme parks. Results were soft at Hong Kong Disneyland, and the long-expected costs for a $5.5 billion resort Disney is building in Shanghai are starting to affect the bottom line. As the world’s largest entertainment company, Disney is perhaps better positioned than competitors to handle the bumps ahead. Unlike competitors like Viacom and, to a degree, Time Warner, Disney has an array of other businesses that can pick up cable’s slack.Advertisement