By REUTERSAUG. 5, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Growth in private payrolls slowed in July, but a surge in services industry activity to a near-decade high suggested solid economic momentum in the United States economy. Another report on Wednesday showed an increase in imports of food, automobiles, industrial supplies and consumer goods in June.The Institute for Supply Management said its services sector index jumped to 60.3 last month, the highest reading since August 2005, from 56 in June. A reading above 50 indicates expansion in the services sector, which accounts for more than a third of the American economy.The index was buoyed by a 5.5 percent increase in the new-orders gauge, which also hit its highest level since August 2005. A measure of service industry employment soared 6.9 percent to its highest reading in a decade.The institute’s survey, however, most likely overstates the services sector expansion. Another survey from the data firm Markit showed the sector growing moderately in July.AdvertisementStill, the services sector is helping to offset the drag on the economy from weak manufacturing.The jump in service sector employment in July also eased concerns on Wednesday of a sharp slowdown in job growth after the ADP National Employment Report showed private employers hired only 185,000 workers last month. The report, which is jointly developed with Moody’s Analytics, came ahead of the federal government’s more comprehensive employment report on Friday and is not considered a good predictor of nonfarm payrolls.AdvertisementAccording to a Reuters survey of economists, nonfarm payrolls probably increased 223,000 last month, matching June’s job gains. Job cuts in the energy sector after the sharp drop in crude oil prices have taken some edge off the labor market in recent months.“Nonetheless, even at this slower pace of growth, the labor market is fast approaching full employment,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics in West Chester, Pa.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a separate report on Wednesday, the Commerce Department said the United States trade deficit increased 7.1 percent to $43.8 billion in June.But May’s trade gap was revised down by $1 billion, to $40.9 billion, leading economists to expect that the second-quarter gross domestic product estimate will be revised up from the 2.3 percent annual pace the government reported last week.May construction and factory inventory data released this week also have suggested second-quarter growth could be revised to at least a 3 percent annual rate when the government publishes its second G.D.P. estimate later this month.June’s trade deficit was driven by a 1.2 percent rise in imports, as domestic demand grew solidly in the second quarter. The dollar, which has gained 15 percent against the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners since June 2014, is also making imports cheaper.Imports of food and automobiles were the highest on record in June. Dollar strength and sluggish global demand crimped exports, which slipped 0.1 percent in June. It was the second straight monthly drop in exports.Though exports to Mexico rose solidly, they were outpaced by a jump in imports, putting the trade deficit with that country at the highest level since May 2012. The politically delicate United States-China trade deficit rose 3.3 percent to $31.5 billion.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.