By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 5, 2015
John A. Paulson, the billionaire investor who rose to fame betting against the housing market bubble, is having a rocky 2015. And at least one major investor may have had enough.The wealth management arm of Bank of America Merrill Lynch is liquidating $81 million of its clients’ money from one of Paulson & Company’s funds and has put another fund under “heightened review,” according to two people with knowledge of the hedge fund.The bank told its financial advisers on Tuesday that it had submitted a full redemption request for client money in Paulson’s Advantage fund. The bank has also closed another Paulson fund, the Special Situations fund, to new client money and put it under review, citing concerns “regarding significant concentration in illiquid investments, as well as heightened volatility and risk profile for the funds,” according to a document that was sent to advisers and was reviewed by The New York Times.The move by the bank was based on months of discussions and related to multiple factors, according to one person knowledgeable about the bank’s thinking, who spoke on condition of anonymity.AdvertisementA spokesman for Paulson & Company declined to comment.Some of Mr. Paulson’s biggest bets have turned sour this year. He is one of a handful of bold hedge fund managers who poured hundreds of millions of dollars into Greece, wagering that its economy would recover after years of crisis. Mr. Paulson is also one of Puerto Rico’s biggest hedge fund investors, betting that the commonwealth will emerge from its debt crisis. Many analysts say that prognosis looks increasingly tenuous this week after Puerto Rico’s first bond default.AdvertisementInvestors in the Special Situations fund have seen particularly wide swings, in part because of its exposure to Greece. The fund, which was set up in 2008 to make bets on a recovery in the United States and is now focused on Europe, has lost 3.8 percent this year through June. The fund is the second-biggest shareholder after the government in Greece’s largest bank, Piraeus Bank Group. It also bought a 10 percent equity stake in the Athens water monopoly, Athens Water Supply and Sewage, in 2014 for $137 million. At the time, the company had little debt and investors expected it to be privatized. Today, it has yet to be privatized and is unable to collect payments on its bills.At the end of June, the Greek government announced that it would close all Greek financial institutions in an effort to stop their collapse, as the country teetered on the brink of financial ruin. It also closed the Athens stock exchange.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When the stock exchange opened on Monday after a five-week shutdown, shares of some of Greece’s biggest companies plummeted. The banks were particularly hard hit.The Advantage fund, which has $2.5 billion of investor money, makes bets on mergers and acquisitions and buys debt in bankrupt companies, holding the investments until they are converted into equity. Once this year, two positions in the fund grew to 40 percent of the entire fund, causing some investors to worry about the risks of such concentration.Bank of America client money in Paulson’s Advantage fund will be returned to investors by the beginning of October, according to the letter sent internally to Bank of America financial advisers. Through June, the fund returned 2.2 percent for investors.“As part of our commitment to our clients, we provide rigorous initial due diligence and ongoing detailed analysis of all funds on our platform, and remain in constant dialogue with fund managers regarding changes to the funds or their management,” Julia Ehrenfeld, a spokeswoman for Bank of America, said.The bank’s financial advisers are in discussions with clients to determine if a replacement investment in another Paulson fund would be appropriate, said one person with knowledge of the discussions who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Client money remains in two other funds, one focused on gold and another on mergers and acquisitions bets.Bank of America advised its clients to consider investing in one of Mr. Paulson’s merger funds or another hedge fund, York Capital Management, if they were not comfortable with Mr. Paulson’s risk profile, documents sent to the bank’s advisers said.An article on Thursday about Bank of America’s decision to withdraw clients’ money from a Paulson & Company investment fund misidentified the company that provided investment alternatives to Bank of America clients uncomfortable with the risk profile of Paulson & Company’s funds. It is Bank of America, not Paulson & Company.A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of America Starts Pulling Its Clients’ Money From a Paulson Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.