By ANITA RAGHAVANOCT. 28, 2015
LONDON — Ben S. Bernanke, former chairman of the Federal Reserve, told an audience at the London School of Economics on Wednesday evening that emerging markets represented the one risk to financial stability today.In a conversation with Professor Erik Berglof, Mr. Bernanke assured students and faculty members that the financial system was “a lot safer” today as banks have more capital and are subject to greater regulatory oversight. But he said that emerging markets and the way they react to rising interest rates in the United States were “a risk area,” though it was hard to know the magnitude and nature of the risk.Mr. Bernanke also expressed concern over the monetary firepower of central banks especially with interest rates languishing at historic lows. The risk, he said, is that whenever the next slowdown comes, “we will quickly go close to zero and it will be difficult for the central banks to get traction.”“Hypothetically, if the economy was to slow down again, fiscal policy would have to be involved,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Bernanke, whose book, “The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath,” was published this month, drew laughter from the audience when he described an episode with George W. Bush, the former president. Before becoming chairman of the Fed, Mr. Bernanke served as head of the Council of Economic Advisers under the president.AdvertisementMr. Bernanke said that one day when he was giving President Bush an economic briefing, as he routinely did, the president pulled up the pant leg on Mr. Bernanke’s suit. For effect, Mr. Bernanke hitched up his pant leg before the London audience. He was dressed in a gray suit, much like the one he was wearing Wednesday evening, and tan socks.“Ben, this is the White House. We have certain standards,” President Bush admonished, according to Mr. Bernanke. “What is it with the tan socks?”Seeking to appeal to the president’s fiscal conservatism, Mr. Bernanke said he replied, “I got these four for $10 at the Gap.”The next day, at a meeting at the White House, everyone in the room, including Vice President Dick Cheney, had their suit pants hiked to reveal tan socks, Mr. Bernanke said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At one point during their conversation on Wednesday, Mr. Berglof asked Mr. Bernanke to answer the question Queen Elizabeth II posed when she visited the school during the peak of the financial crisis: “Why did nobody notice it?”“The queen had a very good question,” Mr. Bernanke said. “While we saw housing prices were very high and subprime lending was performing poorly, those two things alone were not sufficient to cause the crisis we had. What we missed is that there was more vulnerability in the financial system than we knew.”Many Wall Street investment banks had derivatives contracts and other securities that were tied to subprime mortgages, making the systemic risk arising from a subprime crisis far greater than was apparent at first.During his remarks, Mr. Bernanke sought to dispel a perception that the Fed and other policy makers made a conscious decision to let Lehman Brothers fail. Even today, nearly a decade after the financial crisis, the view still persists among some.Advertisement“The tools we had were inadequate” to save Lehman, Mr. Bernanke said. Early efforts to line up a buyer for Lehman – first Bank of America and then the British bank Barclays — failed. The only remaining option was for the Fed to lend Lehman money. But Mr. Bernanke said that Lehman was “so deeply in the red” that the Fed did not have the financial muscle to bail it out.Before Mr. Bernanke became Fed chairman, he was well known in academic circles but was not a household name. During his talk, he recalled that his daughter, Alyssa, was starting college the fall after he took the job as Fed chairman. One day, Alyssa’s roommate asked her what her father did. When Alyssa replied that her father was the chairman of the Federal Reserve, her roommate’s jaw dropped as she declared: “Your father is Alan Greenspan.”Today, Mr. Bernanke is known around the globe and has many legacies, including, he noted, a highway “exit in South Carolina.”Anita Raghavan is the author of “The Billionaire’s Apprentice: The Rise of the Indian-American Elite and the Fall of the Galleon Hedge Fund.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.