AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Alexandra StevensonBy putting $5.5 billion into Mondelez International, a hedge fund billionaire is wagering that the company, which makes Oreos, Cadbury chocolates and Trident gum, could be prodded into selling itself.That would make it only one of many possible takeover targets in the food industry.The emergence of William A. Ackman and his Pershing Square Capital Management as a major investor in Mondelez highlights the widespread belief that opportunities for deals abound in the food sector.Though Pershing Square’s regulatory filing on Thursday disclosing its 7.5 percent stake does not elaborate on the hedge fund’s investment thesis, a person briefed on the move has said that the firm believes Mondelez must cut costs, or consider a sale.Mr. Ackman is said to like the aggressive cost-cutting measures announced by the company’s chief executive, Irene Rosenfeld, last year, according to another person with knowledge of Mr. Ackman’s thinking. Both people spoke on the condition of anonymity.The cuts followed months of pressure from another activist investor, Nelson Peltz, who had built a stake of more than $1 billion in the company and suggested that Mondelez merge with PepsiCo’s Frito-Lay snack business. He later dropped the campaign and joined the Mondelez board.Analysts on Thursday said that with Mondelez having already made headway in improving its operations — “we think many of the low-hanging Oreos already have been plucked,” Ken Goldman of JPMorgan Chase wrote in a research note — Mr. Ackman’s play must be pushing for a sale. A representative of Pershing Square declined to comment.A sale would fit into the economic forces bearing down on the packaged foods and snacks company.As a shift in consumer preference for more healthful foods bites into sales, traditional manufacturers are under pressure to improve their performance and cut costs. Upstarts like Chobani, the popular maker of Greek yogurt, have taken meaningful market share from traditional brands like Yoplait. Moreover, while a number of big manufacturers abound, much of the business is still made up of smaller manufacturers, many of which are owned by families or foundations, said Alexia Howard, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein. “This is still the most fragmented staples sector in the developed world,” Ms. Howard said in a telephone interview.Mr. Ackman and his team see value in the vast array of brands in the Mondelez stable — which includes Ritz Crackers, Peek Freans and Chiclets, according to someone briefed on Pershing Square’s investment who also spoke on the condition of anonymity.One natural defense would be for manufacturers to combine and shed production, marketing and delivery expenses. Getting bigger would also give those companies more negotiating leverage with retailers, helping their efforts to gain more space and greater prominence on supermarket shelves.Mondelez has participated in that deal-making drive in a way, carving out its coffee business and merging it with D.E Master Blenders 1753 last year to create a hot beverages powerhouse.Still more potential targets abound. Besides Mondelez, one possible takeover candidate is General Mills, whose products include Cheerios cereal, Betty Crocker cake mix and Häagen-Dazs ice cream.Other companies that may be in acquirers’ sights include Kellogg and Campbell Soup, Ms. Howard said.Among investors, however, hopes for mergers were muted on Thursday. Shares of Mondelez and Campbell Soup climbed about 1 percent, while shares of General Mills and Kellogg rose just slightly.Still, the Kraft Heinz Company appears ready to be one of the main consolidators in the industry. The food giant was assembled by 3G Capital, the Brazilian-American investment firm that has made a fortune turning food and drink companies into acquisition machines.In a twist, Mr. Ackman owns a 19 percent stake in Restaurant Brands International, a 3G company that owns Burger King and Tim Hortons. The 3G playbook has wavered little over the years, but has proved enormously successful. It helped transform a collection of small breweries into Anheuser-Busch InBev. It also combined Burger King with Tim Hortons, a staple of the Canadian coffee-and-doughnut landscape.In March, the firm used Heinz — which it bought two years ago with help from Warren E. Buffett — to buy Kraft, creating a colossus of packaged foods. Around the same time, Mr. Ackman set out to build his $5.5 billion stake in Mondelez.“We are uncertain whether in the near term, 3G would be willing to add another massive integration to the current one (down the road, we think more deals for KHC are likely), given added execution risk,” Mr. Goldman, the JPMorgan analyst, wrote in a research note on Thursday, citing Kraft Heinz’s stock ticker.But given its heritage, more acquisitions appear likely, Ms. Howard said.Nevertheless, Mr. Ackman may have to wait awhile for a sale of Mondelez.Kraft Heinz only recently closed the merger that gave it life, and digesting that combination is likely to take at least a year. Another possible buyer, PepsiCo, with its Frito-Lay division, has shown no particular interest in a huge acquisition to bolster the snacks business.“One should never say never, but there have been strong indications that PEP may not be a willing buyer,” Mr. Goldman wrote in his research note, referring to Pepsi’s stock ticker.Mondelez could do well on its own, too, say people knowledgeable about Mr. Ackman’s thinking. That gives Mondelez time to show more improvement in its results — “get its socks up,” as Ms. Howard put it — before facing a reckoning.“With the breathing room that Mondelez has, it faces a choice,” Ms. Howard said.videoAdvertisement