By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAUG. 6, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — As Informatica closes its $5.3 billion sale to private equity on Thursday, the enterprise software maker will count two of its big technology partners as new investors as well.Joining Permira and the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board in buying Informatica are Microsoft and Salesforce Ventures.The two will join the biggest leveraged buyout of the year to date, taking ownership stakes in the company, whose products combine and analyze customers’ data.Under the terms of the transaction, Informatica shareholders will receive $48.75 a share in cash.According to Brian Ruder, the co-head of Permira’s technology investment team, his firm had been in talks with both Microsoft and Salesforce Ventures, the latter of which is the investment arm of Salesforce.com, even before striking the leveraged buyout in April.AdvertisementPart of the rationale behind bringing them on board were the relationships that each had with Informatica. The company had established a relationship with Salesforce years ago and is a regular participant in the big Dreamforce conference every year, while it also makes use of Microsoft’s cloud offerings.Advertisement“We’ve had great relationships investing alongside technology giants for a long time,” Mr. Ruder said in a telephone interview. “The key motivation was around aligning the companies with our strategy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Already, Permira and its co-investors have helped push for change at Informatica. The chairman and chief executive at the time the deal was struck, Sohaib Abbasi, will drop his chief executive title. Picking it up on an interim basis is Anil Chakravarthy, currently the company’s chief product officer.Under private ownership, Informatica will continue to focus on its main product areas, including cloud services, data security and “big data” analysis. But the company, with the support of its new backers, will also search for potential takeover targets as part of an effort to be a consolidator.“In going private, it gives us a great opportunity to plan for the long term,” Mr. Chakravarthy said. “It lets us invest in products that can really shape our future.”In a statement, Microsoft said, “Informatica has been a strong part of Microsoft’s partner ecosystem as a data integration leader and we are excited to support Informatica in this new stage of growth as a private company.”A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Joining Up.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.