AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Johanna Quandt, the matriarch of the family that controls the automaker BMW and one of the wealthiest people in Germany, died on Monday in Bad Homburg, Germany. She was 89.BMW confirmed her death on Thursday. Ms. Quandt was the third wife of Herbert Quandt, a German businessman whose financial backing allowed BMW to resist a takeover bid in 1959 from Daimler, helping to set the stage for BMW to become one of the world’s best-known car brands and a symbol of German engineering.Ms. Quandt, who ranked 77th on Forbes magazine’s 2015 list of the world’s richest people, with an estimated net worth today of $11.8 billion, took over Mr. Quandt’s seat on the BMW supervisory board after he died in 1982. She established the family as a powerful, if discreet, force in the company, which is based in Munich.At her death, Ms. Quandt owned a 16.7 percent stake in BMW. Her two children with Mr. Quandt also own significant stakes: Susanne Klatten, 12.6 percent, and Stefan Quandt, 17.4 percent. Ms. Klatten and Mr. Quandt are both members of the BMW supervisory board. Ms. Klatten is the richest woman in Germany, according to Forbes, just ahead of her mother.Detailed information on Ms. Quandt’s survivors was not immediately available.Though BMW stock is publicly traded, the Quandt family stake has provided the company with a degree of independence from outside shareholders and allowed it to pursue initiatives that were not immediately profitable, like a push into battery-powered vehicles.Johanna Bruhn was born in Berlin on June 21, 1926. The daughter of an art historian, she trained as a medical assistant, but in the 1950s began working in the office of Mr. Quandt, the scion of a German industrial family whose holdings included Varta, a maker of batteries. They married in 1960.Ms. Quandt was a member of the BMW supervisory board from 1982 to 1997, most of that time as a deputy chairwoman.Norbert Reithofer, chairman of the BMW supervisory board and former chief executive, described Ms. Quandt as a warm and uncomplicated person. “She actively led the development of BMW for many years,” Mr. Reithofer said in a statement.Ms. Quandt, who lived in Bad Homburg, near Frankfurt, also established a foundation, named after her, that provides training to aspiring business journalists and that awards prizes for outstanding business journalism.Advertisement