By RAVI SOMAIYAAUG. 6, 2015
The New York Times Company reported net income of more than $16 million for the second quarter on slightly lower revenue, as digital growth and cost declines offset a continued drop in print advertising across the industry.The company said on Thursday that it had added 33,000 net digital subscribers in the quarter, higher than in the same quarter in the previous two years. It also disclosed that last week, for the first time, it passed the one million mark for digital subscribers.That, combined with an increase in home delivery prices in January, more than offset a decline in print copies sold. Total circulation revenue increased about 1 percent to almost $212 million. The company reported adjusted earnings of 13 cents a share, surpassing analyst expectations of 11 cents.In a week when media companies were shaken by volatility in the industry, The Times’s results seemed to reflect a new reality for many publishers — that of seeking smaller victories and aiming to adapt nimbly to a shifting landscape. Shares in the company closed down by nearly 3 percent on Thursday.AdvertisementDigital advertising, a bright spot for the company the last several quarters, was up 14 percent, and accounted for about $48 million of revenue, or about a third of total advertising revenue. Mark Thompson, the company’s chief executive, said the growth was driven by mobile and video advertising, as well as native advertising, which the company calls paid posts.AdvertisementPrint advertising revenue, the bedrock of most print publications until a precipitous decline in recent years, dropped nearly 13 percent, contributing to a drop of nearly 6 percent in overall advertising revenue. The falloff in print advertising, Mr. Thompson said, was primarily responsible for a decrease of 1.5 percent in revenue, to about $383 million, from about $389 million in the same quarter a year ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A 5 percent reduction in operating costs outpaced that drop, and Mr. Thompson said managing expenses would “remain a top priority as we head into the second half of 2015, although our emphasis on digital investment and execution is also more intense than ever.”Other revenue, including that from the company’s crossword product and rental income, was up 4.5 percent. The company also highlighted new relationships with companies like Facebook, Apple and Starbucks, which Mr. Thompson said could “enable us to reach new audiences for our journalism, as well as provide incremental revenue.”In a call with investors on Thursday, the company’s executives outlined a series of strategies. International readers make up 13 percent of the digital subscriber total, Mr. Thompson said, a figure that has room to grow. New endeavors, such as the relationship with Facebook, fed into a broader initiative to increase The Times’s audience, and thus its advertising revenue and potential subscribers.New digital advertising strategies could be shaped by shifts in the industry at large, the executives said, and could even mean that the Times Company might compete with cable networks and others that have traditionally been a separate market for advertisers.A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Times Co. Reports Profit and Digital Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.