By CHAD BRAYAUG. 6, 2015
LONDON — Three Coca-Cola bottlers in Europe said on Thursday that they had agreed to combine their businesses to form the world’s largest independent bottler of Coca-Cola products.The deal would combine the independent bottlers Coca-Cola Enterprises and Coca-Cola Iberian Partners with Coca-Cola Erfrischungsgetränke, a subsidiary of the Coca-Cola Company in Germany.The transaction would give the bottlers a larger geographic footprint in Europe and allow them to compete more effectively for sales of nonalcoholic beverages, the companies said.The combined company would be based in London and operate under the name Coca-Cola European Partners. It would serve more than 300 million consumers in 13 countries in Western Europe. It is expected to post pro forma revenue of about $12.6 billion in 2015.Advertisement“The creation of a larger, unified Coca-Cola bottling partner in Western Europe represents an important step in our global system’s evolution,” Muhtar Kent, the chairman and chief executive of the Coca-Cola Company, said in a news release. “With the strong leadership that will be assembled from across the three organizations, Coca-Cola European Partners will be well positioned to deliver better and more effective service to customers throughout Western Europe and drive profitable growth across multiple beverage categories.”AdvertisementThe deal is subject to approval from regulators and the shareholders of Coca-Cola Enterprises. It is expected to close in the second quarter of 2016.The newly created independent bottler would have more than 50 bottling plants and about 27,000 employees. Its products would be sold in Andorra, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Iceland, Luxembourg, Monaco, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands.As part of the deal, investors in Coca-Cola Enterprises would receive one share in the combined company and a one-time cash payment of $14.50 per share, or about $3.3 billion.After the transaction, shareholders in Coca-Cola Enterprises would own 48 percent of the combined company, while investors in Coca-Cola Iberian Partners would own 34 percent. The remaining 18 percent would be owned by the Coca-Cola Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Coca-Cola European Partners would be publicly traded on Euronext in Amsterdam, on the New York Stock Exchange and on the Madrid Stock Exchange.Sol Daurella, the executive chairwoman of Coca-Cola Iberian Partners, will serve as chairwoman of the combined company, while John Brock, the chairman and chief executive of Coca-Cola Enterprises, will serve as chief executive.The deal would provide “the scale to better serve the needs of our customers and consumers in Western Europe, to become an even stronger partner to the Coca-Cola Company and create increased value for C.C.E.’s share owners,” Mr. Brock said in a news release.The Coca-Cola Company said it intended to enter into a new 10-year bottling agreement with Coca-Cola European Partners, with an option to renew for an additional 10-year period.AdvertisementThe combined company expects to achieve annual cost savings of $350 million to $375 million within three years of the transaction’s completion.Deutsche Bank and the law firms Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton and Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom advised the Coca-Cola Company. Lazard and the law firms Cahill Gordon & Reindel and Slaughter and May advised Coca-Cola Enterprises.Rothschild and the law firms Allen & Overy and Uría Menéndez advised Coca-Cola Iberian Partners.A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Coke X 3.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.