By NELSON D. SCHWARTZAUG. 6, 2015
Founded 150 years ago, the Faribault Woolen Mill in Minnesota survived the Great War and the Great Depression, not to mention World War II. But it almost did not make it through the Great Recession.The mill went dark for 18 months in 2009 and 2010, and liquidators tagged its looms for shipment overseas. All its workers were laid off.Faribault has staged a remarkable comeback, though, as consumer demand has increased for its blankets and throws. The company has won new customers like Bloomingdale’s and Restoration Hardware, said Bruce Bildsten, Faribault’s chief marketing officer.While virtually all the laid-off workers have been brought back and 30 new positions have been filled this year, employees still sometimes find it difficult to shake off the trauma. “It doesn’t keep us awake at night, but we all think about it,” said Mr. Bildsten, who joined the company during its recovery. “We’re growing slowly and steadily. But we’re prepared for the inevitable downturn.”AdvertisementThe company’s trajectory parallels the course of the overall American recovery in the last six years. Growth has resumed and hiring has picked up, but a lingering unease remains, with workers in particular wondering how long the good times will last, and whether this is as good as it gets.AdvertisementBy some measures, the economy is doing just fine.Unemployment stands at 5.3 percent, the lowest since the dark days of 2008. Economists are expecting another healthy report on Friday, when the Labor Department announces the latest data on hiring in July.Last week, the government estimated that the economy grew by 2.3 percent in the second quarter. In late August that figure is likely to be revised higher in light of new data showing healthy factory orders and construction spending in June.The numbers tell only part of the story, however. Wages for most workers have barely kept up with inflation, even though inflation has been very low since the recession, and even many experienced employees outside specialized fields have little bargaining power when it comes to securing raises.“Total employment and consumption is rising but that’s different from everybody’s average income rising,” said Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays.“More people are finding jobs, but nobody feels optimistic about their income prospects,” he added. “That’s likely why it doesn’t feel like the economy has really recovered even though the statistics say it has.”Another big cloud has been the economy’s consistent inability to grow by more than 2.5 percent annually. That is a far cry from the 4.5 percent growth rate of the late 1990s, or the 3.5 percent annual gains recorded a decade ago.Even otherwise optimistic economists do not expect the American economy to see a sudden pickup in momentum.
            Consumer confidence over the last four years has generally grown much more quickly among wealthier households than among less affluent ones.        Consumer confidence,by income levelHOUSEHOLDINCOME, INTHOUSANDSINDEX: 1985 = 100$100 to $125140Over $125130120110$75 to $100$50 to $75100$35 to $5090$15 to $258070$25 to $35Under $156050403020100June’11June’12June’13June’14June’15AUG. 6, 2015
“I’d be surprised if we can do much better than 2.5 or 3 percent,” said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at IHS, a research firm in Lexington, Mass. “Some of it is due to longer-term trends like slower population growth and lower productivity growth. And some of it is a hangover from the deep recession and financial crisis.”AdvertisementMore recently, the obstacle to better economic performance has been the dismal track record of many overseas economies. Europe has been weak, a situation complicated by the slow-motion crisis in Greece.Onetime bright spots like Brazil, Russia and China have also experienced slowing growth.The absence of overseas stimulus means the United States is largely on its own in terms of finding ways to increase overall economic output, Mr. Gapen said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Domestic consumer consumption has been growing at about a 3 percent annual rate. But that has been dragged down by sharp cuts in spending by energy companies as oil prices have fallen, along with lackluster exports.“You’d need domestic consumption to be at 3.5 percent or 4 percent to get us over 3 percent, given the international backdrop,” Mr. Gapen said.Patterns of economic growth and retrenchment are notoriously hard to predict. Few economists foresaw the tech-led boom of the late 1990s or that the unemployment rate would fall below 4 percent by 2000. Similarly, even the most astute seers on Wall Street and at the Federal Reserve failed to anticipate just how great the damage from the bursting of the housing bubble a few year later would be, or the depth of the recession that followed.Some academic experts have suggested that for all the promise of the Internet and digital technology today, the current economic shift will not yield the kind of growth or job gains brought about by earlier industrial transformations.What is more, most mainstream economists concede that the bulk of the gains from the current expansion are going to wealthier Americans, especially those with large holdings of assets like stocks and real estate, rather than those simply earning salaries.“Fairly large chunks of the population have a job, but it’s not a great job, or their income has barely grown,” Mr. Behravesh said. A recent analysis by IHS shows that consumer confidence since 2010 has been closely correlated with income. Households earning more than $100,000 feel very optimistic, while those earning $24,000 to $34,000 remain much more cautious.AdvertisementIn Faribault, Minn., about 50 miles south of the Twin Cities, employees did not expect the roller coaster ride that awaited them when the family that had controlled the Faribault Woolen Mill for five generations sold it to an investment group in 1998.An expansion binge followed, with the new owners buying mills in other parts of the country, only to see demand plunge and credit dry up in the recession. The Faribault mill closed and century-old looms and other equipment were being boxed up to be sent to Pakistan, a growing destination for textile manufacturers, Mr. Bildsten recalled.Then two Minnesota businessmen, the cousins Paul and Chuck Mooty, bought the factory and the trademark, pumping in millions to bring the company back to life. While the investment has paid off for them, employees are eager to avoid the boom and bust cycle.“You have to be aware that there are ups and downs,” said Dennis Melchert, 60, who has worked at the mill for more than 40 years and is now vice president for product development and research. “The worst part of what we went through was when the company was unable to pay its bills. Everything in textiles is based on trust.”“The overall economy is picking up,” Mr. Melchert added. “But we’re more grounded in our decision making, and we’re not growing whole-hog. The biggest challenge is that you should grow slowly and not go kaboom.”A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Comeback Story’s Unwritten Ending .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.