By RAVI SOMAIYAAUG. 7, 2015
Some staff members at Vice Media have voted to unionize, according to two people familiar with the matter, joining other digital media outlets that have recently moved to organize.The writers will join Writers Guild of America, East, the union that the websites Gawker and Salon chose for their unionization efforts. The moves are seen by some as a sign of maturity in a previously anarchic sector, defined by its start-up sensibility and employees’ youth. There was speculation on Friday that other major digital media companies might follow suit, though a representative for the union declined to comment.Vice, which was founded about 20 years ago as an irreverent print magazine, has since grown, with investments from 21st Century Fox among others, and now values itself in the billions.The staff members delivered a letter to Vice executives Friday, one of the people familiar with the matter said, adding that the company had signaled that it was willing to engage in the process, which would probably involve negotiations with staff members and W.G.A. officials, as did the similar efforts at Gawker and Salon.AdvertisementIt was not clear whether the employees had made specific demands. The precise number of those who chose to organize was also not immediately clear, though one person familiar with the effort suggested that it was fewer than 100. The company has about 700 employees in the United States.In June, 107 of 118 journalism employees at Gawker Media voted on whether to be represented by the Writers Guild of America, East, with 80 voting in favor. The news staff at Salon followed in July, with 26 members signing a letter that was posted on the same union’s website.AdvertisementThe American arm of The Guardian, the British newspaper, also voted to unionize, through the NewsGuild-CWA, at the end of July. “Digital media is growing up,” Bernard Lunzer, president of the NewsGuild-CWA, said in a statement at the time, “and it’s time our digital reporters received the same benefits and protections as their print media colleagues.”A version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Vice Media Staff Latest to Choose Unionizing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.