By ANDREW POLLACKAUG. 7, 2015
A federal judge said on Friday that the Food and Drug Administration could not prohibit the truthful promotion of a drug for unapproved uses because doing so would violate the protection of free speech.The decision, by a district judge in Manhattan, could inhibit the ability of the F.D.A. to regulate one aspect of pharmaceutical marketing. Pharmaceutical companies have collectively paid billions of dollars in fines in recent years after being accused of marketing drugs for unapproved uses.Lawyers who represent pharmaceutical companies said it was too soon to say how far-reaching the ruling would be, in part because technically it applies only to the district in which it was handed down. Also, while the F.D.A. declined to comment, the lawyers said they expected the agency to appeal. For now, some said, pharmaceutical manufacturers would probably remain cautious about openly promoting their products for unapproved uses.That will not be the case for Amarin, the small drug company that won at least a temporary victory in Friday’s ruling. It sells the drug Vascepa to treat extremely high levels of certain fats, known as triglycerides, in the blood.AdvertisementThe company said on Friday that it would now begin to promote the use of Vascepa for patients with somewhat lower levels of triglycerides, a use that the F.D.A. declined to approve.Advertisement“This is the first decision, I think, that clearly and unequivocally rebuffs the government’s view that off-label promotion can be prosecuted, even if truthful and nonmisleading,” said Joel Kurtzberg, a lawyer with the firm of Cahill Gordon & Reindel who represented Amarin.Doctors are allowed to use approved drugs in ways not explicitly approved by the F.D.A., and such so-called off-label use is extremely common. But the government has long maintained that it is illegal for drug companies to actively promote such off-label uses.The government’s ability to stop such promotions suffered a blow in 2012 when the federal appeals court based in Manhattan vacated the conviction of Alfred Caronia, a pharmaceutical company sales representative who had been caught on tape promoting an off-label use for the narcolepsy drug Xyrem.The appellate court ruled 2 to 1 that as long as Mr. Caronia’s speech was truthful and not misleading, it was protected by the First Amendment.In the case against Amarin, the F.D.A. had argued that the Caronia decision hinged on the specifics of that case and was not meant to be a blanket protection for off-label marketing. The agency said Amarin’s efforts represented a “frontal assault” on the federal framework for regulating drugs.But in his ruling issued Friday, Judge Paul A. Engelmayer of the Federal District Court in Manhattan said the Caronia ruling was more general and applied to the Amarin case.“The court’s considered and firm view is that, under Caronia, the F.D.A. may not bring such an action based on truthful promotional speech alone, consistent with the First Amendment. A fair reading of that decision refutes the F.D.A.’s view that the Second Circuit’s ruling was limited to the facts of Caronia’s particular case.”Judge Engelmayer wrote that for the most part even the F.D.A. agreed that the information that Amarin wanted to provide to doctors was accurate. He agreed to some statements that Amarin could make to doctors.AdvertisementThe decision was welcomed by the Medical Information Working Group, a coalition of big drug companies that has been pressing the F.D.A. to allow them to provide doctors with more information on off-label uses, such as studies published in medical journals.“We expect this latest court decision will lead F.D.A. to expedite review of its promotional policies to align them with First Amendment principles,” Alan Bennett, a lawyer at the firm Ropes & Gray who represents the working group, said in an email.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The F.D.A. has said it was working on new guidelines. It had also said it would hold a public meeting on the issue this summer, though nothing has been scheduled. It is possible the agency has been waiting for Friday’s decision before deciding on its next step.Some experts fear that allowing off-label promotion would undermine the incentives for companies to do the studies necessary to win approval for new diseases. And they say that what is considered truthful information can be open to interpretation.Manufacturers might “present clinicians with cherry-picked studies that may look good in isolation but could be methodologically inadequate or fail to present a balanced picture of a drug’s benefits and risks,” Dr. Jerry Avorn, a professor at Harvard Medical School, wrote in the Annals of Internal Medicine in June. His commentary was titled “In Opposition to Liberty: We Need a ‘Sovereign’ to Govern Drug Claims.”Stephen Paul Mahinka, a lawyer at Morgan Lewis & Bockius, some of whose lawyers advised Amarin, said the decision might give drug companies a weapon to resist large settlements. But he said the government would continue to bring cases for off-label marketing because of the large possible settlements. He said the government also often accused companies of activities that went beyond what might be considered protected speech, such as payments to doctors to prescribe certain drugs.Vascepa contains an omega-3 fatty acid, similar to what is found in fish oil. While the F.D.A. approved it in 2012 to treat people with extremely high triglyceride levels — over 500 milligrams per deciliter of blood — Amarin also sought approval for people with so-called persistently high levels, from 200 to 499.While a clinical trial involving such patients showed that the drug reduced triglyceride levels, the F.D.A. in April rejected the drug for that use. The agency said that some studies involving other drugs had raised questions about whether lowering triglyceride levels would help such patients avoid heart disease or heart attacks. Amarin is conducting a trial to determine that, but results are not expected until 2018.AdvertisementIn its letter to Amarin rejecting the new use, the F.D.A. said it might take legal action if Amarin promoted the drug for that use without approval.Amarin sued in an effort to lift that threat, and was granted preliminary relief in Friday’s decision.Amarin might be eager to promote Vascepa to the new group of patients because it is almost 10 times as large as the group for which the drug is now approved. There are about 36 million Americans with triglyceride levels between 200 and 499, compared with 3.8 million with levels above 500, according to information provided by a company spokesman.Sales of Vascepa were only $17.7 million in the second quarter of this year, up from $12.6 million in the second quarter of 2014.Amarin’s American depositary receipts rose 14 percent Friday to $2.33. The company is officially based in Dublin, though it conducts many operations out of Bedminster, N.J.An article on Saturday about a judge’s ruling regarding the promotion of drugs for uses not approved by the Food and Drug Administrationmisstated the role of Stephen Paul Mahinka, a lawyer who commented on the ruling. Other lawyers in his firm, Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, advised Amarin, the plaintiff in the case; Mr. Mahinka did not.A version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Cites Free Speech in Drug Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.