AdvertisementSupported byBy Hiroko TabuchiAbercrombie & Fitch said on Friday that it would no longer require workers to be on call for shifts that may be canceled with little notice, after a regulator’s inquiry into the practice.The office of the New York State attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, said in April that it was investigating 13 large retailers over whether the increasingly unpredictable work schedules adopted by some retailers violated state labor laws.Abercrombie & Fitch said in a statement on Friday that all of its brands would end the practice for workers paid by the hour. As of the end of January, the company ran 799 Abercrombie & Fitch and Hollister stores in the United States.“Over time, we will discontinue the use of call-in shifts throughout the United States and will begin that process in New York this September,” Michael Scheiner, a company spokesman, said in a statement.Retailers often rely on sophisticated software to track the flow of customers, assigning just enough employees to handle ever-changing demand, resulting in far less predictable work hours for much of their part-time work force.Employers in New York, however, are bound by labor laws that require them to pay workers who report for scheduled shifts at least four hours of pay, even if managers send them home.Labor advocates have long criticized the practice, along with low pay, saying it forces workers to grapple with uncertain hours and paychecks.In a letter dated Wednesday and sent to Mr. Schneiderman’s office, Abercrombie said that its store workers would receive schedules a week in advance. Employees can choose to receive email alerts about unexpected scheduling needs, but will not be under obligation to accept any changes, said the letter, which was signed by Robert E. Bostrom, Abercrombie’s general counsel.Mr. Bostrom said that Abercrombie had “at all times been complying with the law relating to call-in shift scheduling” in New York and throughout the United States. Still, he wrote, the new policy was meant to “create as stable and predictable a work environment as possible for our employees.” Other retailers named in Mr. Schneiderman’s investigation include Gap, Target, J. C. Penney and Victoria’s Secret. Victoria’s Secret said in June that it would halt the practice. Target and J. C. Penney have denied that they engaged in on-call scheduling. A spokeswoman for Gap, Laura Wilkinson, said that the company was evaluating its scheduling policy. “Each of our brands have made a commitment to evaluate their practices and determine where we may be able to improve scheduling stability for our employees, while continuing to drive productivity in stores,” Ms. Wilkinson said in an email.Advertisement