AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinFox News’s telecast of Thursday night’s Republican debate drew a staggering 23.9 million viewers, making it the highest-rated presidential primary debate ever and among the most-viewed events in cable TV history.The debate smashed Fox News’s previous record for viewership and it became the ninth-most-viewed cable program ever, according to Nielsen. The top eight were college football bowl games broadcast on ESPN. The debate also had 7.9 million viewers in the 25-to-54-year-old demographic that is coveted by advertisers.Indeed, Fox got the sort of viewership generally reserved for elite sporting events, and, in some cases, the debate did even better than those. It drew more viewers, for instance, than this year’s Game 6 of the N.B.A. finals, which was broadcast on ABC; it attracted about 10 million more viewers than the average “Monday Night Football” game on ESPN.The most viewed non-sports program in cable television history was an episode of AMC’s “The Walking Dead” last year, but even that drew 6.6 million fewer viewers than the debate.The raucous gathering Thursday featured 10 presidential candidates, with Donald J. Trump, the Republican candidate leading in the polls, drawing the most airtime and providing some of the night’s most memorable moments.And Mr. Trump’s bombastic presence is a big reason Fox did as well as it did.“Given the size of the field and the fact it’s the summer you would expect a respectable to healthy audience for the debate,” Andrew Heyward, the former president of CBS News, said in an interview. “You also have colorful characters like Chris Christie, but Trump has literally taken this to an unprecedented level of interest.”“It isn’t just curiosity about Trump,” Mr. Heyward continued. “He drove awareness. Normally a Republican debate wouldn’t even be on the radar for a lot of people but you couldn’t miss the buildup to this. Trump has been on the trail and mixing it up with the other candidates at a distance but people couldn’t resist the opportunity to see them all on the same stage.”The debate significantly eclipsed the viewership of the first Republican debate in 2011, which drew 3.2 million viewers. But it fell well short of a debate featuring top presidential candidates in a general election. The first debate between President Obama and Mitt Romney in 2012, for instance, drew 67.2 million — but of course had the benefit of being shown on broadcast and cable television, as well as Spanish language and other outlets. The Fox News moderators, Chris Wallace, Megyn Kelly and Bret Baier, were pointed in their questions and drew praise for the performance, helping to lead the way for two hours of lively and spirited television. The previous record-holder for a prime-time cable news show belonged to a November 1993 edition of CNN’s “Larry King Live,” when 16.8 million people tuned in to watch Al Gore debate Ross Perot over the North American Free Trade Agreement, according to Nielsen. The preliminary debate Thursday, which featured the seven candidates whose polling figures were too low to qualify for the main debate, also drew a strong number: It had 6.1 million total viewers, making it the third highest rated primary debate for Fox News, an impressive figure considering it was broadcast from a mostly empty arena and in the afternoon.Fox’s previous record-holder was during its coverage of the 2012 election, when it brought in 11.8 million viewers, according to Nielsen.Advertisement