By HIROKO TABUCHIOCT. 28, 2015
Over his lifetime as a health industry magnate, Stefano Pessina says he has completed more than 1,000 acquisitions — and is now adding Rite Aid to his Walgreens-Boots empire.And at 74, he is still not finished.Though “consolidation is close to an end” in the United States, Mr. Pessina said in an interview on Wednesday, “we are still willing to make acquisitions in Europe or Asia or anywhere else.”He added: “To be honest, if we’d had the opportunity to buy something somewhere else instead of buying Rite Aid, we’d have done it. But the U.S. market is just so important, so dynamic, so irrational and expensive. The need for consolidation, and the need for reducing costs, is much stronger here than in other parts of the world.”Walgreens’s $9.4 billion purchase of Rite Aid, if approved by regulators looking at antitrust issues, would result in the biggest retail pharmacy chain in the United States, and in a global drugstore behemoth with estimated combined revenue of almost $150 billion.AdvertisementThe Federal Trade Commission could require the combined firm to divest itself of stores in some areas where their presence would amount to a monopoly, crushing competition.AdvertisementBut Mr. Pessina has been through antitrust battles before, navigating Walgreens through its acquisition of the European drugstore chain Alliance Boots, which has been followed by a series of store divestitures.And analysts have said there is minimal overlap between Walgreens and Rite Aid stores in the United States — except in several markets in the Northeast and in California. The combined company would have 12,800 locations nationwide.Under questioning by investors Wednesday morning, Mr. Pessina declined to speculate about how many stores Walgreens might need to shed to satisfy antitrust regulators. He did say that Walgreens would be “rational” rather than “emotional” in dealing with some Rite Aid stores that its own executives have said are underperforming.He also shied away from addressing the matter of the clout that a combined Walgreens-Rite Aid would wield over pharmacy benefits managers and health insurers, which have squeezed drugstores with higher fees and lower reimbursement rates.“We have not done this to increase our negotiating power,” Mr. Pessina said, stressing instead the $1 billion in cost savings and additional revenue that he expected the merger to yield. “We have not counted on that,” he said.David Larsen, managing director at the equity research firm Leerink Partners, said he did not see scrutiny by the Federal Trade Commission as a dealbreaker.“The F.T.C. will typically seek to ensure that patients can actually gain access to their drugs,” Mr. Larsen said in a research note. “This means that for cash-paying customers in rural communities with a few stores, the F.T.C. will make sure that Rite Aid or the Walgreens Boots Alliance divests stores when there are only two options in a town.”AdvertisementHe added: “Since big-box stores and mail-order pharmacies compete with retailers now, we believe the F.T.C. will define the market in very broad terms,” he said. “We do not expect Rite Aid or Walgreens to need to divest large numbers of stores.”Walgreens certainly faces mounting competition. Walmart, whose in-store drugstores already make up the nation’s third-largest pharmacy chain, has made strides into the health space, recently announcing that it would offer free blood pressure readings and other tests at a nationwide health fair meant to draw attention to its health offerings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In June, CVS announced that it would bolster its store footprint by buying Target’s pharmacy and clinic business for $1.9 billion. The pharmacy chain earlier acquired the drug fulfillment company Omnicare for $10.4 billion.Most analysts said that they see significant potential in a Walgreens-Rite Aid merger, including the ability to draw more volume to the combined network. And on the cost side, the merger would lead to significant reductions in drug procurement and administrative costs, George Hill, a Deutsche Bank analyst, said in a note.The credit ratings agency Moody’s sounded the alarm on the mounting debt levels at Walgreens, saying it had put the chain under review for a downgrade pending its Rite Aid acquisition, which is set to be heavily financed with debt.“Given how quickly W.B.A. is making another acquisition, we view its financial policy as being more aggressive” than its current rating assumes, Margaret Taylor, a senior vice president at Moody’s, said in a research note, referring to Walgreens Boots Alliance.Still, Mr. Pessina was contemplating his next moves Wednesday morning. Born in the Italian port town of Pescara, he built up his drugstore empire through a vigorous appetite for buying companies — including the family business of his eventual life partner, Ornella Barra, now an executive at Walgreens.With an estimated net worth of $13.6 billion and a home in Monaco, Mr. Pessina has said he no longer chases “the money or the glory.” But his own words suggest otherwise. .For one, his health empire still reaches just a handful of countries outside the United States, Mexico and Britain, he acknowledged somewhat wistfully. The Walgreens Boots Alliance has a small presence in Chile and Thailand, and in a number of small European markets.“Due to my age, I won’t have a possibility to make many more acquisitions,” he said. “And unfortunately, I cannot amuse myself dealing directly with small acquisitions, and dealing directly with owners and so on.”AdvertisementBut he quickly added: “But if we see an opportunity, at the right time, we will take it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.