AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromHaving shaken up the yogurt world, Hamdi Ulukaya, the founder of Chobani, now has his sights on a much tougher target — coffee.Mr. Ulukaya has taken a stake in La Colombe Coffee Roasters, one of the many coffee brands that have sprung up over the last 10 years to cater to the tastes of coffee drinkers who consider themselves connoisseurs.“Anyone will tell you, I am a tea maniac,” Mr. Ulukaya said. “I travel with my own tea bags.”Then he opened the Chobani SoHo Cafe in a neighborhood in New York populated with start-up companies and their pierced and picky employees, and fast figured out that he had better find a coffee to serve in it.Which was a challenge, because Mr. Ulukaya did not like coffee, or at least American coffee. A native of Turkey, coffee in his mind was thick and sweet, brewed in a copper pot lined with silver called a cezve and served in tiny, delicate glasses. American coffee, he said, made his stomach hurt.Americans are the biggest drinkers of coffee and coffee-based drinks in the world — only water is more popular. About 90 percent of adults here down at least one coffee beverage a day, and almost every week, journalists covering the food business get at least one pitch about a new coffee, a new twist on coffee or a new coffee business.Credit for much of that mania belongs to Starbucks, the Seattle-based coffee company with market capitalization of nearly $85 billion that has made it its mission to ensure every American can get a decent coffee any way she or he wants it. For a generation of Americans, Starbucks is what McDonald’s was to their parents — and now, even McDonald’s serves a decent cup of coffee for $1 or a little more.“We’re in what I call the third generation of coffee,” said Todd Carmichael, the co-founder and chief executive of La Colombe Coffee Roasters. “For your grandfather, coffee was basically a commodity, roasted dark, quick, hot, hard to differentiate. For you and me, it was discovery of lattes, milk-based coffee drinks. And for this generation, it’s about different beans and how a coffee grown in Ethiopia tastes different from one grown in Costa Rica.”Mr. Carmichael once set a record for an American crossing Antarctica on foot without assistance. “The reason I did that is really just because I told people I would,” he said, explaining how he plans to grow La Colombe into a coffee empire with 150 stores, a thriving online store and robust sales into restaurants.The company already has cafes in its home base, Philadelphia, as well as in Chicago, Washington and New York, where one has a chance of seeing its red and blue logo on cups being carried around SoHo.It says it has 3,000 wholesale customers, including restaurants like Jean Georges, and has grown 40 percent over the last year. La Colombe also sells its coffees directly to consumers online.And the company has developed a “draft latte,” a chilled latte dispensed via a tap similar to those used for craft beers. It is paired with a tap for cold-pressed coffee and can be installed in any bar or restaurant. Mr. Ulukaya tried dozens of coffees before deciding that La Colombe Coffee Roasters was the brand he wanted for the Chobani cafe, and Mr. Carmichael developed a coffee exclusively for Chobani. The two traveled together to Turkey, where Mr. Carmichael worked on an episode of his TV show, “Dangerous Grounds,” a Travel Channel program about coffees around the world. “It’s not only about how it’s prepared, it’s about how you drink it,” he explained. “You kind of have to get your lip up over the edge of the cup to best appreciate it, which is why they use glasses instead of mugs.”Mr. Ulukaya was not really looking to make an investment. “People come to me all the time and say invest in this, invest in that, but I really never contemplated anything before this,” he said. In La Colombe, he saw a chance to mount an insurgency in a food category dominated by two or three major players and dozens of boutique roasting businesses, rather like the opportunity he saw in yogurt.The consumer market for yogurt was less mature when Chobani joined it in 2005. But Americans already drink a lot of coffee. Still, consumption grew 10 percent last year, according to the National Coffee Association, and the International Coffee Organization projects demand will grow globally by almost 25 percent over the next five years.“I’m not aiming for Starbucks,” Mr. Ulukaya said. “What I think we can do is appeal to a large number of people like me who think they don’t like coffee — until they taste this one.”La Colombe does not release its revenues, and Mr. Ulukaya would not say how much he has invested. But he has bought out Goode Partners, a small private equity firm that invested $28.5 million in La Colombe last year. The coffee company used the money to expand.“It was kind of like boot camp, but I don’t regret it one bit,” Mr. Carmichael said of the experience. “I needed that.”Mr. Ulukaya stressed that he will not have any management role at La Colombe or even a seat on the board. “My energy and my heart are still devoted to Chobani,” he said.Advertisement