AUG. 9, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.07 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.21 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $307.7 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYDavis, Utah, Board of Education, $67.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Industrial Development and Export Authority, $66 million of power revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementAnchorage Convention Center, Alaska, $90 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementCharlotte, N.C., $475 million of water and sewer revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Essex County, N.J., Improvement Authority, $90 million of solid waste disposal revenue bonds. Bank of America.Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia, $253.2 million of power project revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Harlandale, Tex., Independent School District, $64.7 million of unlimited tax school refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kansas Development Finance Authority, $1 billion of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Klickitat County, Wash., Public Utility District No. 1, $79.5 million of electric system revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Los Angeles County Public Works Financing Authority, $218.2 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michigan, $129.3 million of general obligation environmental program refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.University of Minnesota, $89.1 million of special purpose revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital Markets.Missouri Housing Development Commission, $73.1 million of single family mortgage revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.AdvertisementMohegan Tribe, Conn., $53.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $86.1 million of Kean University issue revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Oakland Redevelopment Successor Agency, Calif., $108.1 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Orange County, N.Y., $53.8 million of various purpose refinancing bonds and O.C.C.C. project bonds. Raymond James.Rogers, Ark., $63.5 million of sales and use tax bonds. Raymond James.Santa Clara University, Calif., $110 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Tarrant County, Tex., $65.7 million of limited tax refinancing and improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Wyandotte County/Kansas City, Kan., $65 million of special obligation sales tax revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.