By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAUG. 9, 2015
Warren E. Buffett has long spoken about his “elephant gun,” the huge pile of cash at Berkshire Hathaway that is reserved for big deals, and his itchy trigger finger.Now, the billionaire appears to be ready to fire that gun and claim his largest-ever acquisition.Berkshire Hathaway, the sprawling industrial empire that includes Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad and Fruit of the Loom underwear, is near a deal to buy the metal parts manufacturer Precision Castparts, a person briefed on the matter said.An agreement is expected as soon as this week.Such a deal would probably be worth more than $30 billion, given Precision Castparts’ market value of about $27 billion. It would not only be the largest takeover in Mr. Buffett’s five-decade investing career at Berkshire, but also a standout in a banner year for mergers in general, with $2.7 trillion in acquisitions already announced.Yet it had been time — past time, by Mr. Buffett’s reckoning — for Berkshire to strike another of its big-game deals. The conglomerate was sitting on nearly $67 billion in cash as of June 30, drawn in large part from its vast insurance empire that generates an enormous and quickly refilling pile of capital that needs to be invested.Advertisement“In effect, the world is Berkshire’s oyster — a world offering us a range of opportunities far beyond those realistically open to most companies,” Mr. Buffett wrote in his most recent annual letter to Berkshire shareholders.AdvertisementAnd increasingly, Berkshire, whose market value stands at $354 billion, needs to strike enormous deals to continue growing its profits and revenue. (The conglomerate reported a 37 percent decline in its second-quarter earnings on Friday.)Hence a deal for Precision Castparts, which is in many ways the type of business that would draw Mr. Buffett’s eye. Based in Portland, Ore., the 62-year-old company makes products that include turbine airfoils and valves and bolts and nuts for airplanes. The company reported $1.5 billion in profit for the year ended March 29, on top of $10 billion in sales.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Precision Castparts may not have the name recognition of H.J. Heinz, which Berkshire bought along with the investment firm 3G Capital in 2013. But it fits in solidly with many of the conglomerate’s other acquisitions, including the chemical maker Lubrizol and the industrial manufacturer Marmon.The company has also grown by acquisitions, something that businesses under Mr. Buffett’s watch do as well.At the same time, Precision Castparts may also represent something that Mr. Buffett prizes highly: a good value. The company’s stock has fallen 17 percent this year, hurt by falling demand for products used by energy producers.Precision Castparts is familiar to Mr. Buffett and his team, since Berkshire already owns a roughly 3 percent stake in the company.News of the talks was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.
            Though the companies in Berkshire Hathaway’s portfolio are diverse — ranging from candy makers to insurance companies — they have a few important attributes in common. Chiefly, they provide products or services that never go out of fashion. The businesses that Warren Buffett likes to acquire are also leaders in their industries, have stable management, and reliably produce lots of cash. Here are Berkshire’s five biggest deals, which all fit the mold.        By DAVID GELLESAUG. 10, 2015
A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Berkshire Hathaway Is Said to Be Close to Deal to Buy Precision Castparts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.