
Political Economy By                     
HUGO DIXON

AUG. 9, 2015
Greece’s banks are the weakest point in its economic system. They need to be repaired to lift capital controls, restore depositor confidence and finance a future recovery. There are good and not-so-good ways of doing this.The banks have been hit hard since the radical-left government of Alexis Tsipras came to power in January. Deposit flight, which has been a periodic feature of the Greek crisis, took off again. The banks were then closed and capital controls imposed after Mr. Tsipras introduced a referendum, held in July, on whether to accept the demands of the country’s eurozone creditors and the International Monetary Fund.What’s more, the long recession, briefly interrupted last year, has returned with a vengeance. Soured loans, which reached 35 percent of all loans in Greece at the end of last year, will increase to well over 40 percent in 2015-16, Moody’s Investors Service predicts.As a result, the banks, which have already been recapitalized several times during the crisis, need an additional equity injection of 10 billion to 25 billion euros, or about $11 billion to $27 billion. Until that happens, the European Central Bank, which has been authorizing emergency liquidity for the lenders, will not be willing to lift the capital controls. And as long as those last, more and more companies will go bust, landing the banks with yet more bad loans.AdvertisementFortunately, there are reasons to be mildly optimistic. Although the people voted in the referendum against the terms demanded by Greece’s creditors, Mr. Tsipras performed a U-turn and is now engaging in constructive talks. There’s a good chance that a deal, offering Athens up to €86 billion in exchange for deep reforms, will be agreed upon by the end of August.AdvertisementMeanwhile, the E.C.B., which supervises the Greek banks, is moving fast to complete an assessment of how much capital they need.The creditors also seem to have excluded the worst option for recapitalizing the banks: bailing in their uninsured depositors. This would have involved forcibly converting a portion of their deposits into bank equity. It is a good idea, in theory, to bail in a busted bank’s creditors rather than bailing them out with taxpayers’ money. But this is sensible in practice only when there is enough equity and debt to take the hit without harming depositors. Greek banks do not have much of a cushion.But the best option isn’t making much headway either. This is for the European Stability Mechanism, the eurozone’s bailout fund, to take direct stakes in the banks. Instead, it looks as if the fund will lend money to Athens, which in turn will inject capital into the banks. A direct recapitalization would be preferable because it would cut the link between the government and the country’s lenders. A further advantage is that if the eurozone directly owned the banks, depositor confidence would be immediately restored and capital controls could be swiftly lifted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One reason direct recapitalization has not been favored is that the European Stability Mechanism guidelines require a bail-in before it can inject equity. However, if the eurozone wished, it could change these guidelines.A further issue is whether Greece should create a so-called bad bank. The idea would be for the banks to sell problem corporate loans to a new asset management company at a deep discount to their official value. Experts in distressed debt would run the bad bank. In some cases, they would liquidate companies; in others, they would kick out the management; and in yet others, they would convert debt into equity. After shedding their dud loans to the bad bank, the “good” banks could then focus on lending to good companies.Spain and Ireland have both had success creating bad banks after they were bailed out a few years ago. So far, though, the creditors have not been keen on a similar arrangement for Greece. One reason is that they worry that Athens would pull the bad bank’s strings, favoring cronies.But there’s an obvious solution: ensure that the asset management company is controlled by private investors.Yet another issue is whether the Greek banks should be allowed to count “deferred tax assets” as part of their capital. The term refers to the right not to have to pay future taxes because past losses have been so big. They are a controversial form of capital because they cannot be used to absorb more losses in the present and so, arguably, aren’t really capital at all. They now account for over half Greek banks’ capital.Greece’s lenders are its Achilles’ heel. There is now a chance to clean them up properly. It would be a shame if this were wasted.AdvertisementHugo Dixon is a freelance columnist and the author of “The In/Out Question: Why Britain Should Stay in the EU and Fight to Make It Better.”A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »