
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

OCT. 28, 2015
The business model of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company is predicated on finding assets that it considers undervalued and snapping them up. The private equity firm, which is led by Henry Kravis, is applying the same rationale to its own publicly traded securities.It took the unusual step among its peers of authorizing a share-repurchase plan and simultaneously paying a fixed quarterly dividend. If it cannot alter perceptions about the value of its business, however, there’s a logical end to this strategy.Mr. Kravis is not alone in his frustration. The Blackstone Group chief executive, Stephen A. Schwarzman, has been railing for years about the unwillingness of public investors to ascribe to his firm the higher valuation multiple they give to more traditional asset managers like BlackRock. Blackstone’s shares trade around their June 2007 initial public offering price and are valued at nearly 11 times expected earnings, compared with BlackRock’s multiple of more than 16 times, according to Thomson Reuters data. K.K.R.’s shares, meanwhile, trade at seven times.Kohlberg Kravis, whose portfolio of companies includes First Data and Toys “R” Us, is devoting $500 million – equal to about 6 percent of the public float – to buy back its units periodically. And instead of doling out roughly 75 percent of its profit in distributions, it will instead pay out a lower, flat 16 cents per unit each quarter. It will shovel the extra money into its own funds and other investing strategies.The 64-cent annual dividend is down from the $1.90 the firm paid out last year. It nevertheless amounts to a 3.6 percent yield, compared with 2.5 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, and its steady nature may appeal to some investors who otherwise worry about the year-to-year fluctuations in K.K.R.’s profit. By the firm’s own reckoning, if it had put this plan into effect in 2010, when it went public, it would have delivered an additional $3 billion of book value at the roughly 20 percent return on equity it generated over that span.However reasonable the theory sounds, investor behavior may not be so easily changed. Private equity, though a relatively new so-called asset class, is better suited to investors willing to lock up their money in funds for a decade than to more capricious public markets. If K.K.R.’s stock stays cheap, of course, Mr. Kravis and his colleagues could just keep buying until they own it all — just like before.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »