AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinWall Street’s chief regulator, the Securities and Exchange Commission, appears to some to be in need of a makeover.Critics say it is too focused on minor cases, it is not aggressive enough in forcing wrongdoers to admit liability and yet it is too aggressive in seeking an unfair advantage for trying cases.The agency contends that it has been ramping up enforcement. And it is quietly pursuing some high-profile cases that could enable it to redefine its regulatory role and reclaim some momentum.In one case, the S.E.C., in tandem with other authorities, is poised to file charges soon in an unusual investigation that combines insider trading with cybersecurity, according to people briefed on the investigation but not authorized to speak publicly.It is also pushing ahead with another insider trading case that involves trading activity in the shares of Dean Foods by the golfer Phil Mickelson and the professional sports gambler William T. Walters, according to several other people briefed on those investigations but not authorized to speak publicly.And the agency is pursuing a major investigation into Wall Street’s hiring of the children of China’s elite.Progress in the insider trading cases comes as the criminal investigation of insider trading in New York has slowed, with federal prosecutors’ efforts stymied by a recent appellate court ruling that has made it harder to mount cases.Coming out ahead on any of these fronts would be a boon for the agency, but for the moment the S.E.C. finds itself on the defensive.In a public dressing-down earlier this year, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, called on the agency to be more aggressive in pursuing Wall Street banks. Ms. Warren has faulted Mary Jo White, the S.E.C. chairwoman, for not being quicker to enforce her own policy change of requiring parties that settle to admit liability and wrongdoing.At the same time, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and some law professors have criticized the agency’s use of administrative courts, where S.E.C.-appointed judges hear cases. A number of defendants have filed lawsuits arguing that these courts give the S.E.C. an unfair home field advantage.Many within the S.E.C. have expressed frustration at what they see as a one-sided look at the agency’s track record.Addressing the critics, Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division, pointed to the agency’s record number of enforcement actions across the securities markets.“Under Chair White’s leadership, the enforcement division has demonstrated tremendous momentum over the last couple of years, with an unprecedented level of enforcement activity leading to innovative cases in every area of the securities markets,” Mr. Ceresney said.“We continue to bring significant cases against senior executives and financial institutions, utilize market experts, data and analytical tools to detect misconduct and advance investigations as never before, and litigate cases aggressively and successfully to protect investors and our markets,” he added.But settlements of cases have been slowed by a broader political fight at the agency between its Republican and Democratic commissioners. In an accounting fraud case against the Computer Sciences Corporation, back-and-forth negotiations between the commissioners and the enforcement division delayed a settlement by months.Much of the scrutiny directed at the S.E.C. stems from the constraints of an environment in which a once-steady stream of blockbuster cases has disappeared. Five years after Congress handed the S.E.C. new tools to regulate the markets under the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul, the agency continues to adapt its role as a regulator in the markets. In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, it was tasked with bringing cases against billion-dollar frauds like the one perpetrated by Bernard L. Madoff.Recently, the S.E.C. has been active on less-splashy Wall Street cases. In June, the agency accused the private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company of breaching its fiduciary duty by passing on “broken deal” expenses to investors, the first case of its kind and one that has laid the groundwork for other similar actions.In addition, the S.E.C. is considering filing an enforcement action against Pimco, the giant asset manager, over potential trading infractions in one of its exchange-traded bond funds, Pimco recently disclosed. And the agency is examining what JPMorgan Chase disclosed to its wealth management clients when it sold the bank’s products and how it guided clients to hedge fund investments.But bigger cases are on the horizon. The agency is gaining traction in a corruption investigation that involves Wall Street banks and their recruitment of the children of China’s political elite.That case, which will involve more than one financial institution, could be brought within a few months.And two major insider trading investigations are expected to show that the S.E.C., despite its challenges, is not afraid to pursue bigger cases.In its cybersecurity case, the investigation centers on whether overseas hackers broke into the networks of American companies to secure inside information about corporate deals, later passing on that information to traders.Elsewhere, the S.E.C.’s investigation into whether Mr. Mickelson and Mr. Walters possessed inside information about the plan by Dean Foods to announce a spinoff in August 2012 has escalated. The authorities suspect the tip about the spinoff came from a board member at the company who knows Mr. Walters, who then shared the information with Mr. Mickelson, the people briefed on the investigations said.Mr. Walters’s lawyer did not respond to a request for comment. A spokeswoman for Mr. Mickelson declined to comment. Representatives for Mr. Mickelson and Mr. Walters have previously said the men did nothing wrong.Late Friday, Dean Foods announced the immediate resignation of Thomas C. Davis, the company’s chairman, in a regulatory filing. Jamaison Schuler, a company spokesman, declined to comment on the resignation of Mr. Davis, 67, an investment banker who has been on the Dean Foods board since 2001.Thomas M. Melsheimer, a Dallas lawyer representing Mr. Davis, said in an email statement on Friday evening that his client “voluntarily decided to step down from the board today.”In his statement, Mr. Melsheimer, a lawyer with Fish & Richardson who has worked on insider trading cases, according to his law firm biography, did not address the S.E.C. investigation.As with any S.E.C. investigation, it is possible that regulators may conclude there was no wrongdoing and not bring an enforcement action. It is also possible that if any information was shared by a Dean Foods board member, it may have been inadvertent, the people briefed on the investigation cautioned.Mr. Schuler, the company spokesman, said: “Dean Foods has cooperated with the government’s requests for information and will continue to do so. Because there is an ongoing government investigation, it would be inappropriate to comment further at this time.”A parallel investigation by regulators and prosecutors into trading by Mr. Walters and the billionaire investor Carl C. Icahn in Clorox shares appears to have been largely abandoned, said two of the people close to the investigation.Federal prosecutors have proceeded more cautiously in pursuing new insider trading cases because of an appellate court ruling in December that overturned the insider trading convictions of two hedge fund managers — Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman — and that raised the burden of proof. The ruling created a new definition of what constitutes the exchange of a personal benefit to the person who passes an inside tip.“In the criminal context, the prosecutor would now have to show that the defendant had actual knowledge of the underlying benefit and the breach by the insider,” said Thomas A. Sporkin, a lawyer with BuckleySandler and former S.E.C. enforcement lawyer.The ruling, which could undermine numerous convictions if it stands, poses such a threat to the government that on July 30 the Justice Department filed a petition with the Supreme Court to review it.Whatever the Supreme Court decides, the S.E.C. may be in a better position to bring such cases before the courts.The agency, which has its San Francisco and New York offices working on the investigation into Mr. Mickelson and Mr. Walters, could file lawsuits in federal court in California or Nevada, two states where the courts have been slower to adopt the ruling that overturned the two hedge fund managers’ insider trading convictions.Advertisement