AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinLOS ANGELES — Stephen Colbert discussed his plans for his new late-night show for the first time Monday — as well as his restlessness about being off the air and the challenges of breaking from the satirical character he’s played for years.Mr. Colbert, who will debut as the host of “The Late Show” on Sept. 8, said he has been “twitching” in the nine months since signing off from his Comedy Central show and is desperate to get back on television.“I want to get in front of the audience and hear the laughter,” he said here at a Television Critics Association press event. “The emotion I have right now, it’s not anxiety over doing the show. It’s anxiety of the eagerness to get onstage.”Mr. Colbert said he feels liberated about the prospect of interviewing guests without playing the character he embodied on “The Colbert Report.” The number of guests he will interview every week is about to jump from four a week to roughly 15.“One of the reasons why I most wanted to drop the character is that I felt I had done everything I could do with him other than have my honest interest in my guest,” he said. “Which is almost constant. Now I feel actually more freed up. That was in some ways the most energetic, the most exciting part of the show to me and now I don’t have to hold back at all.”“Now I can just talk,” he added.He said his CBS show would have a wide variety of guests, including politicians, actors, intellectuals, writers and sports stars. His first guest will be George Clooney and the first musical guest will be Kendrick Lamar.Mr. Colbert said he met with his predecessor, David Letterman, about 10 days before Mr. Letterman retired, and asked him what he would have done differently if given the chance. Mr. Letterman said he might have put his desk on the opposite end of the Ed Sullivan theater stage. As a result, Mr. Colbert is doing just that.The Ed Sullivan Theater has been completely revamped, he said, bringing it closer to its original 1927 state, and it will look more like a Broadway theater than Mr. Letterman’s set. “I find it to be a very intimate space now because we’re sort of acknowledging that we’re in a theater together,” he said.Mr. Colbert said he was reluctant to participate in the late-night skirmishes that Mr. Letterman had famously battled over the years.“The idea of war between hosts makes no sense to me,” he said. “It’s not like my success takes away from anybody else. And fighting amongst each other doesn’t sound funny. There’s no joke there, so I’m not interested.”There’s one thing Mr. Colbert is very interested in: talking about Donald J. Trump.“Every night before I go to bed, I light a candle and pray that he stays in the race and I also pray that no one puts that candle anywhere near his hair,” he said.videoAdvertisement