By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 10, 2015
The investment arm of Guggenheim Partners has agreed to pay $20 million to settle charges by the Securities and Exchange Commission that it failed to disclose a $50 million loan by a client to one of its senior executives.The executive at Guggenheim Partners Investment Management took the loan in July 2010 and used it to make a personal investment in a corporate acquisition that was put together by Guggenheim Partners, the S.E.C. said on Monday.Other senior executives were aware of the loan but did not inform the company’s compliance team, the S.E.C. said. And Guggenheim did not disclose the loan or raise the possibility of a conflict of interest.“As fiduciaries, investment advisers must be vigilant about disclosing all material facts to their clients, including actual and potential conflicts of interest,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C. enforcement division.AdvertisementThe S.E.C. also said on Monday that Guggenheim’s compliance program was not intended to prevent federal securities law violations. The firm failed to ensure that employees followed a code of ethics, for example, when employees took dozens of unreported trips on the private airplanes of clients, it said.AdvertisementHighlighting violations across multiple areas of Guggenheim’s business, Michele Wein Layne, director of the S.E.C. office in Los Angeles, said, “Guggenheim fell short in preventing these violations in numerous core areas of its investment advisory business.”Guggenheim sought to put the actions from 2010 behind it with a statement saying it had “implemented new, comprehensive, best practice compliance policies, procedures and controls, including those that address the issues set forth in the S.E.C. settlement.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The firm, which has offices in Chicago, Santa Monica, Calif., and New York, also emphasized that the S.E.C. did not say any client was “financially harmed” and added that no charges were brought against any individuals.Guggenheim has attracted unwanted attention in recent years over its relationship with Michael R. Milken, the so-called junk bond king, for whom it has managed money.In February 2013, Guggenheim confirmed that it had received an inquiry from the S.E.C. with respect to its relationship with Mr. Milken. It said that Mr. Milken did not have an ownership or managerial role in the firm.Mr. Milken was banned from the securities industry for life, after pleading guilty to a securities fraud charge in 1990.The agency did not include the names of the client of the senior executive and stopped short of seeking an admission of the government’s allegations. Under a new policy enacted by the current chairwoman, Mary Jo White, the S.E.C. in certain cases has extracted admissions of wrongdoing from defendants as part of the settlement process.The investment arm of Guggenheim Partners also billed a client $6.5 million for fees that it should not have charged, according to the S.E.C. While the company identified the mistake, it took it nearly two years to pay the client back, the S.E.C. said.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Guggenheim Partners Pays $20 Million to Settle With S.E.C.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.