AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Last fall, Yodlee, an online hub for consumer financial apps, went public after 15 years as a private company.Less than a year later, it is selling itself — at a significantly higher valuation.Yodlee agreed on Monday to sell itself to Envestnet, a provider of software for financial advisers, for about $660 million. That figure is nearly twice as high as Yodlee, based in Redwood City, Calif., was valued in its initial public offering.The deal is meant to build up Envestnet’s capabilities as it caters to financial advisers who are not affiliated with a big firm like Bank of America Merrill Lynch or Morgan Stanley. Yodlee, which gathers data from the likes of Credit Karma and LearnVest and puts it in one place, is meant to give Envestnet customers a new tool for managing their clients’ money.Judson Bergman, Envestnet’s chairman and chief executive, said that the two companies had discussed a commercial partnership for more than a year. But as the two sides spoke, they realized that an acquisition of Yodlee made more and more sense.“What Yodlee does is, it enhances and strengthens the data-driven services that our advisers and enterprises and investment managers are looking to provide more of,” Mr. Bergman said in a telephone interview. Under the terms of the deal, Envestnet, which is based in Chicago, will pay $18.88 a share in cash and stock. That is a premium of about 50 percent to Yodlee’s closing price on Friday.Yet Mr. Bergman said that in the three or four months of acquisition discussions between the two companies, the price had not changed much, despite the fluctuations in Yodlee’s stock price. (In the 10 months that Yodlee has been public, the company’s shares have fallen more than 6 percent.)Anil Arora, Yodlee’s chief executive, said that the decision to sell was driven simply by a recognition that putting the two companies together would help independent financial advisers compete against their rivals.“At the core, what we will do together is enable financial advisers to drive better relationships and lifetime value,” he said. “There’s an enormous transformation going on in financial services, and we’re going to accelerate that.”Advertisement