By BEN PROTESSOCT. 28, 2015
When a former federal regulator applied to Goldman Sachs last year, the bank did what it could to woo him.A senior partner took the applicant, a former Federal Reserve Bank of New York employee, to lunch and dinner, regulatory records released on Wednesday show. The partner, among other executives, interviewed and called the applicant “several times,” hoping to hire the person “in large part for the regulatory experience and knowledge.”But what started with a friendly lunch has now ended with Goldman paying a $50 million penalty and the applicant facing prison time.New York State’s financial regulator announced an action against Goldman on Wednesday for the firm’s failure to supervise the former regulator, who after being hired obtained several confidential documents from a source inside the New York Fed.AdvertisementGoldman also took the rare step of admitting the failure and accepting a three-year ban on access to certain sensitive regulatory information, concluding an embarrassing episode that highlighted the blurred lines between the bank and its regulator.AdvertisementBanks and their regulators routinely swap employees. But the leak cast a harsh light on this so-called revolving door, offering ammunition to critics who fear that regulators and bankers, when intermingled, might cross ethical and legal lines.“This case underscores the critical need for financial institutions to put in place strong controls and policies for employee conflicts screening and the use of confidential regulatory information,” Anthony J. Albanese, the acting head of the New York State Department of Financial Services, said in a statement.In its own statement, Goldman emphasized that the banker, Rohit Bansal, worked for the firm for less than three months, and that the bank “immediately began an investigation and notified the appropriate regulators” once it detected the leak.The settlement, whose terms were reported by The New York Times on Monday, is the first of several actions to stem from the leak.Mr. Bansal and his source, Jason Gross, have agreed to plead guilty to criminal charges, according to lawyers briefed on the matter, who said federal prosecutors in Manhattan offered them deals that involve misdemeanor theft charges. The men, who were both fired after the leak, face up to a year in prison as well as lifetime bans from banking.The plea deals, expected to be announced next week, stem from a rare criminal action against a Wall Street employee. After the financial crisis, not one Wall Street chief executive was charged, and prosecutors have charged bankers or traders in only a handful of investigations.Still, Mr. Bansal and Mr. Gross were relatively low-level employees. Mr. Bansal, 29 at the time, was an associate at Goldman.Bruce Barket, a lawyer for Mr. Gross, said, “Although we would have liked to see him escape any criminal liability, we are thankful that the U.S. attorney’s office took what we think is a reasonable approach,” adding that “misdemeanor pleas in federal court are rare.”AdvertisementScott Morvillo, a lawyer for Mr. Bansal, declined to comment.The problems for Mr. Bansal began soon after his arrival at Goldman, where he joined a unit in the investment bank that advises other financial institutions on mergers and other deals. Initially, he informed supervisors that ethical restrictions prevented him from advising one particular banking client that he used to oversee at the New York Fed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And yet, according to the Department of Financial Services, “Goldman affirmatively placed” Mr. Bansal on matters involving that same midsize bank “beginning on his first day.” The bank also added Mr. Bansal to the “official Goldman database as a member” of the team that advised that bank.That team was led by the same partner who took Mr. Bansal to lunch and dinner, according to the state agency. While the order does not name the partner, people briefed on the matter identified him as Scott Romanoff, a longtime and well-known Wall Street executive.The state agency did not accuse Mr. Romanoff of any wrongdoing, and it did not allege that he knew Mr. Bansal obtained confidential information or even that he worked behind the scenes for the midsize bank. Mr. Romanoff is credited for detecting the leak and reporting it to the bank’s compliance department.In a statement, Goldman said: “The partner did the right thing.  As soon as he noticed something was wrong, he confronted the associate and escalated to the head of investment banking compliance within five minutes.”The state agency did, however, state that “Goldman, including the partner and the legal department, failed to take any steps to screen the associate from such prohibited work.”Soon after Mr. Bansal started on those assignments, Mr. Gross began to send him confidential information about the midsize bank and other issues. Ultimately, Mr. Bansal received about 35 different documents on 20 occasions, according to the settlement order. The documents, the order said, included internal Fed memorandums regarding examinations of the midsize bank.It is unclear why Goldman failed to halt the leak immediately. Mr. Bansal had received compliance training, in which he was told not to take any material from his previous employer. And when Mr. Bansal forwarded confidential information to other Goldman employees, he often indicated that the documents were “highly confidential.”AdvertisementLast August, for example, he sent a senior colleague some documents, warning in an email that they were “highly confidential as it’s not public and has not been issued.” Later in the email, he directed the colleague: “Don’t distribute.” The colleague, Joseph Jiampietro, replied, “I won’t.”A month later, when Mr. Romanoff detected the leak after Mr. Bansal circulated some confidential information in a conference call, Goldman compliance officers went to Mr. Jiampietro’s office. There they discovered 17 confidential documents from the New York Fed on Mr. Jiampietro’s desk, the order said. Other hard copy documents were found on the desks of two other Goldman employees, an unnamed vice president and an associate.Mr. Jiampietro is not accused of any wrongdoing, and he has told the authorities that he never read the documents. Peter Chavkin, a lawyer for Mr. Jiampietro, declined to comment.Days before the leak was detected, Mr. Bansal attended the birthday dinner of a New York Fed employee at the Peter Luger steakhouse. After the dinner, according to the order, he emailed Mr. Jiampietro details he learned about the midsize bank, remarking the bank “should have listened to you with the advice.”“Hopefully,” the email continued, the chief executive “will now know you didn’t have phony info.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Goldman to Pay Penalty in Case of Leaked Papers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.