By STEPHANIE STROMAUG. 10, 2015
Shake Shack, one of the many upstart burger chains that are redefining the American fast-food hamburger, reported quarterly sales on Monday that surpassed Wall Street’s expectations.The company said that profits rose 2.3 percent, to $1.1 million, in the quarter that ended July 1, while same-store sales, or what it calls “same-shack sales,” grew 12.9 percent compared with 4.5 percent in the same quarter last year. Revenues over all, which include licensing payments, increased 74.7 percent to $48.5 million.Randy Garutti, chief executive of Shake Shack, said the company benefited from increases in customer traffic and price increases, as well as a return to crinkle-cut French fries, which, a spokesman said, arrive “ready to cook” making them less labor-intensive than the hand-cut fries they replaced. There are more than 70 Shake Shacks in the United States and overseas.“It’s exciting to see how we’ve capitalized on the wind at our backs,” Mr. Garutti said.The company raised its outlook for the year, predicting that same-store sales would grow in the mid- to high single digits. It also announced it would open more stores than planned.AdvertisementShake Shack, founded by the New York restaurateur Danny Meyer, has garnered attention from the news media and investors that is the envy of burger chains like Elevation Burger, which has more than 50 stores, and Smashburger, with more than 300 stores.AdvertisementShake Shack’s stock price has risen more than 200 percent since its initial public offering in January, when its shares went on sale for $21 apiece. It closed on Monday at $70.64 and was up 7 percent in after-hours trading.While most investment analysts do not recommend buying the shares at such prices, Shake Shack’s stock has become a favorite to sell short, meaning that an investor places a bet that the price will fall.In Shake Shack’s case, however, individuals known for selling short are not making that bet. Rather, the traders say, computers that routinely scour the stock market for overvalued stocks to offset undervalued stocks are responsible for the run-up in price.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many of the questions in a conference call with investment analysts were about how increasing labor costs might affect business. Shake Shack has long paid its employees above minimum wage, but the improving economy as well as efforts by states and localities to mandate higher pay are affecting costs in the restaurant business at large.Mr. Garutti said that Shake Shack had given its employees a good raise about a year and a half ago and that the move to crinkle-cut fries had reduced its labor costs. Still, he said, he did not think pressure to raise wages would end anytime soon.The company raised prices 3 percent in September, and then again in January. It said it has no plans to increase them further during the rest of fiscal year, despite continued cost increases for beef and for eggs, which it uses in custards and some sauces.In addition to crinkle-cut fries, Mr. Garutti said limited-time menu promotions had helped increase sales. Sales of the ShackMeister, a cheeseburger topped with ShackSauce and crispy shallots that won the 2014 Food Network South Beach Wine and Food Festival Burger Bash, ended last month.But it was replaced by another limited-time offering, the Roadside, a cheeseburger topped with a mound of caramelized onions and bacon steeped in beer.The company is also testing a chicken sandwich in three of its stores in the New York area.Analysts on the conference call repeatedly asked about plans to roll the chicken product out across more stores, but Mr. Garutti declined to say what plans the company has for it.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Shake Shack’s Sales Are Up, Thanks Partly to Its Fries .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.