
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

AUG. 10, 2015
It could be said that Berkshire Hathaway’s latest multibillion-dollar deal — its biggest ever — lacks precision. Berkshire, Warren Buffett’s industrial empire, is paying $37.2 billion, including debt, for the aircraft components maker Precision Castparts. The acquisition fits Mr. Buffett’s mold, but coincides with cyclical highs in plane orders, stock valuations, and mergers and acquisitions.Precision Castparts is a large, entrenched manufacturer working in industries with a high barrier to entry. The company’s shares have tumbled 40 percent since their peak in June of last year — just the sort of opportunity Mr. Buffett is known to relish. The premium is modest, at 21 percent.When Berkshire bought Burlington Northern, a rail operator, for $44 billion in 2010, it paid 31 percent more than Burlington Northern’s undisturbed share price.While the falling price of oil has hurt Precision Castparts, the aircraft industry — which accounts for most of Precision Castparts’s revenue — is being helped by optimal tailwinds. Commercial aircraft orders have increased by an average of 44 percent since 2010, according to SpeedNews, an aviation news and information publication. The nearly 4,000 orders placed last year are the most since SpeedNews started tracking data in 2000.AdvertisementIt is not yet obvious if this pace can be sustained. Credit Suisse, whose bankers advised the target on the takeover, said that Precision Castparts would need “sustained M.&A.” to increase earnings. And only seven of the 18 analysts whose estimates Reuters publishes have the equivalent of a buy rating on Precision Castparts’s stock. That makes the deal somewhat of a contrarian investment, a style of investing in which market trends are shunned.Berkshire, which disclosed on Friday a big drop in second-quarter earnings compared with a year ago, is also paying almost 19 times expected earnings for this acquisition. Even Mr. Buffett describes the valuation as “right there at the top.” Doing a deal in an environment where the S.&P. 500-stock index fetches 19.4 times earnings, just off its 10-year peak, is a curious move for a value investor.AdvertisementThe M.&A. market is also on a tear. With some $2.8 trillion in deals already announced globally so far this year, a 38 percent increase from last year, 2015 could set a record. A long-term thinker like Mr. Buffett might be less worried about matters of timing, but it’s an odd deal nonetheless.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this column misstated Credit Suisse’s role in the deal. Its bankers advised Precision Castparts, not Berkshire Hathaway.Antony Currie is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »