
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

AUG. 10, 2015
It certainly seems odd that speaking the truth can violate the law. Yet the Food and Drug Administration takes the position that when it approves a drug for a particular treatment, the manufacturer of that drug cannot promote it for other uses even if those statements are true.But that policy has been called into question in a decision by Judge Paul A. Engelmayer of the Federal District Court in Manhattan, who found that the First Amendment protects drug companies that want to make truthful statements about their drugs, even if it is for an unapproved use. His decision sets up a likely appeal to determine just how far the government can go to punish speech that is truthful.The case arises out of a provision of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act that prohibits pharmaceutical companies from selling a drug if it is “misbranded.” The F.D.A. takes the position that a drug manufacturer’s statements about its product are limited to promoting its “intended use,” which is the particular treatment for which it was approved. If a company wants to promote a drug or medical device for a non-F.D.A. approved use, known as off-label, then it must undertake additional clinical trials to receive approval before it can tell doctors about it.Amarin Pharma, a small drug manufacturer, challenged the F.D.A. when it sought to promote the off-label use of its cardiovascular health drug, Vascepa, for patients with a different condition. An F.D.A.-approved study showed that the use of the drug was effective, but the agency had denied approval for use by those patients.AdvertisementThe company and four doctors sued the F.D.A. after it threatened to bring civil charges against them if they used the study to help sell off-label use of Vascepa. They claim that the agency’s rule on off-label promotion violates their First Amendment right to free speech, asking the district court to block any enforcement action.AdvertisementJudge Engelmayer sided with the company, pointing out the many incongruities in the F.D.A.’s approach to off-label marketing. The agency does not prohibit doctors from prescribing medications for nonapproved uses because it does not have direct authority over them. The judge pointed out that “the therapeutic — indeed, sometimes lifesaving — value of off-label uses of F.D.A.-approved drugs has been widely recognized.” For some conditions “off-label prescription is the norm rather than the exception,” a fact the F.D.A. is aware of and even encourages on occasion.A 2012 appeals court decision played a crucial role in Judge Engelmayer’s analysis. In United States v. Caronia, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan overturned the conviction of a sales representative caught on tape promoting an unapproved use of a drug to a group of doctors. In a 2-1 decision, the appeals court found that “the government cannot prosecute pharmaceutical manufacturers and their representatives under the F.D.C.A. for speech promoting the lawful, off-label use of an F.D.A.-approved drug.”The key to Judge Engelmayer’s decision is that the statements Amarin wants to make are truthful and not misleading, as the F.D.A. largely acknowledged. He found that the decision in the Caronia case prevents the agency from taking any enforcement action based on statements about a drug that are true.The First Amendment protects truthful speech, but as the Supreme Court pointed out in Illinois v. Telemarketing Associates, it “does not shield fraud.” Other courts have rejected First Amendment challenges to the F.D.A.’s prohibition of off-label promotion in cases that included charges of fraud for misleading doctors and the agency about the use of drugs and medical devices.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In United States v. Harkonen, a federal appeals court in California upheld the conviction of a drug company executive for issuing a news release promoting the off-label benefits of a drug based on a study. The defendant’s statement was misleading because it misrepresented the results of the study, so there was no First Amendment protection that would preclude prosecution.In United States v. Caputo, a federal appeals court in Chicago rejected a First Amendment claim of a defendant sentenced to 10 years in prison for marketing a medical device to hospitals. The F.D.A. had not approved the device for any use, only a companion product that worked differently, so it was not an off-label promotion but an unlawful sale, which receives no constitutional protection.Fraud changes the nature of the statements from an exercise of free speech to a deception that the government is authorized to police. The dividing line is whether promotional statements are actually truthful, and even if they are, was there sufficient information disclosed so that they were not misleading. It is often the case that it is not what was said, but what was left unsaid that creates a problem. Many securities law cases involve incomplete disclosure, not outright falsity, that leads to a violation.Making truthful statements in certain contexts may not be subject to prosecution even if the speaker tries to mislead the listener. In Bronston v. United States, the Supreme Court found that a literally true but unresponsive answer, even one by a “wily witness” trying to derail the inquiry, could not be the basis for a perjury prosecution. A federal appeals court in California overturned the conviction of the home run king Barry Bonds because “a single truthful but evasive or misleading answer” made before a grand jury was insufficient to prove obstruction of justice.AdvertisementThere is a good chance the F.D.A. will appeal Judge Engelmayer’s decision because it could knock out an area in which the agency has taken an aggressive approach to police marketing by pharmaceutical companies. Over the last few years, the government reached major criminal and civil settlements with GlaxoSmithKline ($3 billion), Abbott Laboratories ($1.5 billion), Merck ($950 million) and Amgen ($762 million) related to off-label promotions of their products.That appeal would go to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, however, and the conclusion in the Caronia case that the First Amendment protects truthful statements about off-label drug use will be difficult to overcome, especially when there is no evidence of fraud or other deception by Amarin. Pursuing the issue to the Supreme Court may also present substantial hurdles for the F.D.A.’s regulation of off-label marketing. The justices have been receptive in the last few years to First Amendment claims by corporations, as the decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission shows, so they may well side with companies that want to make truthful statements about their products.Judge Engelmayer’s decision is not a license for pharmaceutical manufacturers to start bombarding doctors with promotional materials for new uses of their products. They need to be careful to stay well within the requirement that any statements be truthful and not misleading, lest they cross the line into fraud. As long as they do, then the type of blockbuster settlements for off-label promotions may be a thing of the past.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »