AdvertisementSupported byBy Diane CardwellFor years, lighting companies have been predicting a time when LED bulbs will become the standard, replacing not only traditional incandescent lights, but halogen and compact fluorescents as well.That time has come for one global retailer, Ikea. Beginning Sept. 1, the company said Monday, it will sell only LED bulbs, part of its overall sustainability efforts. The company had planned a major investment in compact fluorescent lights, but it redirected it to LEDs.“Some of these technologies have to be driven faster,” Steve Howard, chief sustainability officer of the Ikea Group, said of the lighting decision. “People are concerned increasingly about climate change but also about household energy bills. So how can you try something that doesn’t take 15 years to develop in this space but takes three or four years?”Ikea is also working to reduce its energy use and to include more renewables, with a goal of producing as much renewable energy as the total it consumes globally by 2020. By the end of this year, the company said it expects that its investments in renewable energy in the United States will produce four times more energy than the amount it uses in its American operations.Compact fluorescents, which still far outsell LEDs in the United States, were the first big alternative to emerge to replace standard incandescents, which can no longer meet government standards for energy efficiency in the United States and abroad. But they often failed to satisfy consumers who complained about the harsh quality of light of the early models. Compact fluorescents could also be slow to warm up and difficult to dim, and they contain trace amounts of mercury.LEDs are more expensive. Just a few years ago, an LED that was meant to replace a standard incandescent could cost $30. But those who favor them say they offer better light quality. And as prices have steadily dropped, in part because of government regulations making it easier for more LEDs to qualify for generous discounts, customers have been migrating toward them. General Electric, Philips and TCP, an outfit that makes energy-efficient lighting under its own brand as well as for Home Depot and Walmart, have LEDs on the market for less than $5.At Ikea, where, Mr. Howard said, the company had been able to work with manufacturers and suppliers to reduce costs because of its scale, a two-pack of 40-watt replacement LED bulbs will cost $4.50, while the 60-watt equivalent bulbs, which can dim, will run $4.50 each. A 75-watt equivalent bulb, which also can dim, will be priced at $11, the company said.Advertisement