AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressA resurgent energy sector and another big acquisition by Warren E. Buffett propelled the stock market to its best session in three months on Monday.Energy stocks rose, following the price of oil. Crude rebounded after dropping to its lowest level of the year in early trading. Industrial stocks also climbed sharply after Berkshire Hathaway, Mr. Buffett’s company, agreed to buy Precision Castparts, a maker of industrial components, for $37.2 billion.The pace of corporate deal-making has been surging this year as borrowing costs have stayed low, making it easier for companies to pay for acquisitions. That tends to push up stock prices because buyers typically pay a premium to make the deal attractive to shareholders.“Any time you have mergers and acquisitions, especially of this size, that’s a good sign because corporate America is feeling good about the economic prospects,” said Peter Cardillo, chief market economist at Rockwell Global Capital.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index rose 26.61 points, or 1.3 percent, to 2,104.18. It was the biggest gain for the index since May 8.The Dow Jones industrial average rose 241.79 points, or 1.4 percent, to 17,615.17. The Nasdaq composite climbed 58.26 points, or 1.2 percent, to 5,101.80.The gains also ended a seven-session losing streak for the Dow Jones industrial average, its longest run of losses in four years. Some mixed earnings reports and the decline in oil have weighed on the 30-member index in the last three weeks.Some investors are also anticipating that the Federal Reserve may raise interest rates next month.Precision Castparts was the biggest gainer in the S.&P. 500. Energy stocks were also among the biggest gainers as oil rose, rebounding from heavy losses last week. The sector jumped 3 percent as shares of companies including Exxon Mobil and Chevron climbed.The price of oil posted a strong gain after briefly dipping below its lowest close for the year. United States crude climbed $1.09 to settle at $44.96 a barrel in New York. Early Monday, oil dipped a penny below its $43.46 March 17 close, its lowest in six years. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils used by many United States refineries, rose $1.80 to settle at $50.41 in London.Despite Monday’s rebound, oil is still down almost 60 percent from its peak last year.About 90 percent of the companies in the S.&P. 500 have reported their second-quarter results, and average earnings for companies in the index are flat for the period. However, that’s masking a big decline in energy company earnings. If the energy sector is excluded, profits rose 7.7 percent, according to S&P Capital IQ data.That’s a good sign for some investors.“Once you start digging into the numbers the only sector that is really messing things up is energy,” said Brad McMillan, the chief investment officer at Commonwealth Financial Network. “Everything else is doing pretty well.”United States government bond prices fell. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note climbed to 2.23 percent from 2.17 percent on Friday. The dollar rose to 124.62 yen. The euro rose to $1.1019. Advertisement