By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and CHAD BRAYAUG. 10, 2015
When a lieutenant to Warren E. Buffett first invested in Precision Castparts three years ago, the billionaire had hardly heard of the metal parts manufacturer.Now Mr. Buffett has bought the company in his biggest takeover ever.Berkshire Hathaway, his $354 billion industrial empire, said on Monday that it would buy Precision Castparts for $32 billion. The move will help move Mr. Buffett’s company — which includes earlier acquisitions ranging from the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad to Fruit of the Loom underwear — further into the industrial sector. Including debt, the transaction is worth $37.2 billion.Not only is the acquisition Mr. Buffett’s most ambitious — just weeks from his 85th birthday — but it is also a standout in what has been a banner year for mergers, with more than $2.7 trillion in deals already announced.It is also a bet that Precision Castparts — whose turbine airfoils and valves are used by companies like Boeing and Airbus — will benefit from growing numbers in airline travel, and more demand from aircraft manufacturers.AdvertisementDeal watchers and fans of Berkshire Hathaway have long expected the conglomerate to strike huge deals with regularity. The company generates an enormous amount of cash from its various operations, sitting on nearly $67 billion as of June 30.Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And Mr. Buffett has long spoken about his “elephant gun,” the huge pile of cash that Berkshire Hathaway has reserved for big deals, and his itchy trigger finger.AdvertisementPrecision Castparts would fit in well with the conglomerate’s other industrial acquisitions in the last decade, including the chemical maker Lubrizol and the industrial manufacturer Marmon.“I’ve admired P.C.C.’s operation for a long time,” Mr. Buffett said in a statement on Monday. “For good reasons, it is the supplier of choice for the world’s aerospace industry, one of the largest sources of American exports.”Under the terms of the deal, Berkshire will pay $235 a share for Precision Castparts, representing a 21 percent premium to its closing price on Friday.Even by Mr. Buffett’s admission, that is a high price to pay. And the billionaire said in an interview with CNBC that he was largely unaware of Precision Castparts until Todd Combs, one of his two investment managers, began investing in the metal parts company in 2012.Yet after talking with Mark Donegan, the industrial manufacturer’s chairman and chief executive, in a meeting at Berkshire’s headquarters in Omaha five weeks ago, he became impressed and began thinking about buying the company.Warren E. Buffett, Berkshire Hathaway’s chief executive officer, discusses the relatively high price that his company is paying for Precision Castparts.He formally made the offer to Mr. Donegan last month at the annual Allen & Company conference in Sun Valley, Idaho — birthplace to many a deal, including Comcast’s purchase of NBC Universal and the sale of The Washington Post to Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos.Advertisement“I made a bid, he took it to the board and before long, we had a deal,” Mr. Buffett told CNBC.The deal comes two years after Berkshire teamed up with the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital to buy Heinz for $23 billion. This year, 3G and Berkshire struck a separate deal to combine Heinz with Kraft, the maker of macaroni and cheese, Oscar Mayer meats, Planters nuts and Jell-O.Mr. Buffett dismissed the possibility of another big merger involving the Kraft Heinz Company, however. He told CNBC that he does not think Kraft Heinz would seek to buy Mondelez, the maker of Oreo cookies, anytime soon, even as the hedge fund manager William A. Ackman pushes for a sale of Mondelez to another food giant.Mr. Buffett suggested that Kraft Heinz would instead focus on setting its house in order after the merger earlier this year. “At Kraft Heinz, we have our work cut out for us for a couple of years,” he told CNBC.Monday’s deal also casts a light on Mr. Combs, 44, a former hedge fund manager whom Mr. Buffett hired five years ago to serve as one of his top lieutenants. Along with Ted Weschler, Mr. Combs has assumed responsibility for many of the investments that Berkshire makes, though his boss still makes the call on the big transactions.“Their contributions are just beginning: Both men have Berkshire blood in their veins,” Mr. Buffett wrote of the two men in his annual letter to investors last year.
            Though the companies in Berkshire Hathaway’s portfolio are diverse — ranging from candy makers to insurance companies — they have a few important attributes in common. Chiefly, they provide products or services that never go out of fashion. The businesses that Warren Buffett likes to acquire are also leaders in their industries, have stable management, and reliably produce lots of cash. Here are Berkshire’s five biggest deals, which all fit the mold.        By DAVID GELLESAUG. 10, 2015
The transaction for Precision Castparts, news of which emerged over the weekend, is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval, and is expected to close in the first quarter of 2016. The company will continue to do business under the Precision Castparts name and maintain its headquarters in Portland, Ore., after the deal is complete.Precision Castparts manufactures a variety of metal parts used in products like aircraft engines and gas turbines. The company reported $1.5 billion in profit for the year that ended March 29, on $10 billion in sales. It began operating under the Precision Castparts name in 1953, and employs more than 30,000 people at 155 plants worldwide.“We see a unique alignment between Warren’s management and investment philosophy, and how we manage P.C.C. for the long term,” Mr. Donegan of Precision Castparts said in a news release. “We believe that as part of Berkshire Hathaway, P.C.C. will be exceptionally well-positioned to support our customers’ needs into the future.”AdvertisementIn the CNBC interview, Mr. Buffett said that Berkshire was unlikely to make another major acquisition for the next year or so, saying that the Precision Castparts deal “takes us out of the market for an elephant.”After the Castparts deal, Mr. Buffett said that Berkshire would still be in the market for smaller acquisitions.“We’ll probably be buying a few small things in the next six months,” he said.Credit Suisse and the law firms Cravath, Swaine & Moore and Stoel Rives advised Precision Castparts, and the law firm Munger, Tolles & Olson advised Berkshire Hathaway.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Buffett Makes His Biggest Bet Yet, on an Aerospace Supplier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.