
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

OCT. 28, 2015
For the first time since the onset of the 2008 financial crisis — and the Federal Reserve’s response, which was to drive down the cost of money to near zero — some rational pricing seems finally to be seeping into the market for the riskiest debt securities. This correction in the price of bonds is good news for investors, for markets generally and for the rest of us who hope not to suffer another deleterious credit collapse fueled by fee-seeking underwriters and speculators on Wall Street.A little background: It turned out that the combination of the Fed’s recent policies of quantitative easing — an extensive $4 trillion effort to drive down long-term interest rates by bidding up the price of high-yielding debt securities — and its policy of keeping short-term interest rates as close to zero as possible for as long as possible have together been highly effective at keeping rates at low levels.The Fed’s not-incorrect logic was that in the face of congressional unwillingness to enact a robust fiscal stimulus program, its robust monetary policy would kick-start an economy moribund after the shocking events of 2008 by making borrowed money cheap.Of course, there was collateral damage. The Fed’s extraordinary intervention drove up the prices of many debt securities and lowered their yields, since the price of bonds trade in inverse proportion to their yields. As a result, for years investors have been engaged in the yield hunger games, scouring the world for higher returns on fixed-income securities than could be otherwise found in the safer confines of, say, the market for United States Treasury securities, where the yield on the 10-year bond is now around 2 percent.AdvertisementThe investor frenzy to find higher yields had the consequence of driving up the price of high-yield bonds — among the riskiest debt securities around — and pushing down their yields to around 5 percent, which is what, in normal markets, an investor might expect to receive from bonds offered by top corporate issuers like General Electric or Johnson & Johnson. For years, risk has been mispriced as investors bid up the high-yielding debt securities in an effort to find something that paid them a decent return. But, of course, that’s a fool’s game, because eventually reality sets in.AdvertisementAnd now it has. For the first time since 2012, the collective yield on junk bonds rose in early October to above 8 percent, an increase of nearly 300 basis points since May 2013, according to an index of domestic high-yield bonds published by Bank of America Merrill Lynch. For investors who bought bonds at par in May 2013, the collapse in prices that corresponded with the higher yield means they have suffered some serious losses on their bonds. (Of course, they should have anticipated that when they bought them in the first place at such dizzying prices.)Bonds issued by companies in the independent energy sector, the metals and mining sector and oil field services sector have been the hardest hit as commodity prices have fallen. But bonds in other industries are also likely to fall in price, too. Standard & Poor’s, the credit ratings agency, has downgraded the debt of more companies so far this year than in the last two years combined; in the third quarter alone it lowered ratings on some $211 billion of debt. According to Moody’s, a rival to S.&P., some $50 billion of bonds and bank debt have defaulted so far in 2015. Moody’s has compiled a list of another 44 companies it thinks might soon also default on their debt.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I asked Christina Padgett, a senior vice president at Moody’s focused on leveraged finance, why the bond market had suddenly come to its senses after years of insanity. She started working in the high-yield debt market in 1998. She conceded she was not exactly sure. “It is a confluence of factors,” she said, “and not necessarily the same for the loan and bond markets.” But she cited a few reasons: Increased volatility is “not good” generally for the leverage finance market, nor was the late summer “downdraft” in the equity markets. (The recovery in stocks in the last few weeks has also led to a bit of a recovery in the high-yield market.)Ms. Padgett also noted that a large portion of the high-yield market was composed of issuers in the energy sector, which has come under severe economic pressure as commodity prices have collapsed. She said she understood why investors in recent years had reached for yield. “There’s very little yield in the world today and still lots of liquidity,” she said. But she is still surprised at how badly risk has been mispriced.“There was no such thing as single-digit yields for single B’s,” when she started in the business, she said, referring to junk bonds with a B rating. Nevertheless, she told me, credit sensitivity seemed to be increasing as evidence mounted that the market was on the other side of the credit cycle. She added that the largest impact was probably a decline in opportunistic deals and dividends and the more aggressive leveraged buyouts.This is all good news. The time is long overdue for the insanity in the credit markets to come to an end. Investors need to be adequately compensated for the risks they are taking when they buy debt of tenuous credit quality. That’s the only way to make sure the credit markets operate smoothly.It’s healthy to see that investors are starting to wise up after seven years of a Fed-induced high. A big test of the newfangled investor sentiment looms: In the coming weeks, Dell, which is rated BB by S.&P. after of its leveraged buyout in 2013, will issue some $15 billion of high-yield debt to finance its audacious $63 billion takeover of EMC Corporation.The current thinking is that the pricing on that debt will be a yield of 6 to 8 percent, significantly above the 5.8 percent yield for BB-rated credits as a group. Dell “will have to come with some fairly accommodative terms,” Henry Peabody, a portfolio manager at Eaton Vance, told The Financial Times last week. “They will have to entice investors to buy it given the size and some concern over leverage.” Not a moment too soon.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »