AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Jane L. LevereRicardo Vice Santos, chief executive of an app start-up, missed a meeting with prospective investors in Stockholm this spring because his SAS flight from Paris was canceled.Although he lost out on the business opportunity, Mr. Santos received compensation for his disrupted trip, thanks to a European Union regulation mandating compensation in the event of overbooked or canceled flights.He did not make the claim on his own. Mr. Santos sought assistance from AirHelp, one of an increasing number of online companies that help travelers make claims against airlines.Mr. Santos’s flight was canceled on March 26; he filed his claim immediately with AirHelp and received compensation of 300 euros, about $340, on May 19.“I missed an important meeting,” he said, adding that filing the claim “wasn’t so much about the money, but about someone exercising his rights, making a statement.”To file the claim on his own, he said, would have meant being on the phone for 30 minutes or more — time he could not afford to lose.“I like that it didn’t cost me any time, that someone is looking out for my rights,” he said.The European Union regulation, which has been in effect since 2005, stipulates that airline passengers must be compensated if their flight is canceled or overbooked. (The European Court of Justice has ruled that flight delays of three or more hours are equivalent to a flight cancellation.) Compensation, which can range from €250 to €600, is not required if a delay is forced by events beyond the airline’s control, like bad weather, a bomb threat or a strike.Henrik Zillmer, chief executive of AirHelp, estimates that fewer than 1 percent of travelers eligible for compensation collect it. Some travelers, he said, are not even aware they are owed it, while others cannot be bothered to apply for it.That gap has created an opening for companies like AirHelp, founded in 2013, and its competitors, which include AirRefund, Refund.me, FairPlane and Flightright. Established in 2010, FairPlane and Flightright focus on working directly with inconvenienced air travelers, whereas AirHelp’s customers include both travelers who apply for refunds on its website and those referred by online travel agencies and travel management companies.AirRefund gets its customers mostly from referrals by online travel agencies and travel management companies, while Refund.me works directly with travelers and travel agents in the Sabre network.Applying for compensation is straightforward enough: Once a company like AirHelp determines that a traveler on a canceled flight is eligible for compensation, the company applies on the traveler’s behalf and often must take legal action to obtain it.Fees are entirely contingent on the success of a claim and range from 15 to 25 percent of the compensation.Most companies report close to 100 percent success rates in obtaining compensation for travelers on eligible flights, though payment can be delayed if litigation is required. For example, a county court in Manchester, England, ruled in April that the family of Timothy Ash was owed compensation for a delay of over five hours on a Thomas Cook Airlines flight in 2011 from Antalya, Turkey, to Manchester. The airline’s claim, that the bird strike that caused the delay represented an “extraordinary circumstance,” was rejected by the judge, who noted that bird strikes occur daily.In the United States, consumers do not have the same level of protection. The Transportation Department does not require airlines to compensate passengers whose domestic flights have been delayed or canceled; international flights to and from the United States are governed by Article 19 of the Montreal Convention, which may allow a traveler to be reimbursed for expenses.But American laws allow travelers to be compensated after being involuntarily bumped. Last year, AirHelp began processing those applications as well. Compensation for those claims can run as high as $1,300.As for the European laws, there is no guarantee that they will remain in place. Although the European Union has proposed making its regulations more consumer-oriented, some large European carriers are lobbying against moves in that direction.Anina Klein, a psychiatric researcher in Orangeburg, N.Y., used Flightright to obtain compensation of $920 for herself and her mother for a trip, also on SAS, in June.The two women, who took SAS from Newark Liberty International Airport to Dublin, via Oslo, for a wedding, were supposed to fly home to Newark from Dublin, via Copenhagen, but their Copenhagen-Newark flight was canceled. It took them an extra day to return home, and their trip was anything but direct: They had to fly from Dublin to Copenhagen to Stockholm to Frankfurt and then to Kennedy International Airport, rather than to Newark.A lawyer by training, Ms. Klein said it was easier to apply for compensation for the trip through Flightright “rather than call internationally.”Next time, though, she might take a different approach to getting compensation. “The commission was worth it,” she said, “but if it happens again, I would do it myself.”Advertisement