AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackGlaxoSmithKline temporarily shut down a major pharmaceutical manufacturing plant in North Carolina on Tuesday after the bacterium that causes Legionnaires’ disease was discovered in a cooling tower. There was no immediate indication that anybody had become sick or that any products made at the factory had been contaminated with the bacteria. “G.S.K. is taking these precautions to ensure the health and safety of our employees as well as the safety and integrity of our products,” the company said in a statement. A spokeswoman for the company said that the cooling tower was a stand-alone structure and that the air and water from it did not enter the factory or come into contact with the products made there. The factory, in the Research Triangle town of Zebulon, is one of Glaxo’s most important plants, making products that include the inhaled respiratory drugs Advair and Breo Ellipta, as well as various pills. It employs about 850 people, the spokeswoman, Marti Skold Jordan, said. However, there are three separate clusters of buildings on the site and only one was closed, Ms. Jordan said. The buildings where the respiratory products are made were not closed. She said she did not know which products were made in the part of the facility that was shut but added that the company did not anticipate there would be any product shortages. Glaxo said the Legionella bacteria were discovered during a routine inspection. Employees were sent home and those scheduled to come to work were told to stay away until further notice. It said the cooling tower would be cleaned and inspected before operations at the plant resumed. It did not say how long that would take. City, state and federal officials, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, generally referred inquiries to GlaxoSmithKline. The Food and Drug Administration said it was monitoring the situation, but also referred questions to the company. At least 113 people have been sickened and 12 have died from Legionnaires’ disease in the Bronx since early July. New York City health authorities think that case was linked to a cooling tower as well. People can become sick from breathing the bacteria in a mist. The disease is not thought to spread from one person to another. Robert S. Matheny, the mayor of Zebulon, said in an email that the town had not been advised of any threat to the public. He said the tower used reclaimed water, which is separate from drinking water. The North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services said it was not aware of any Legionnaires’ cases associated with the facility, according to a spokeswoman. In 2010, Glaxo paid $750 million to settle criminal and civil complaints related to manufacturing problems at a factory in Puerto Rico. Advertisement