AdvertisementSupported byBy Ashwin SeshagiriA scheme, announced by federal authorities on Tuesday, to hack into three news wire services to steal copies of corporate news releases went on for years, and required a good deal of patience and persistence. For a while, it seemed to pay off.The information the hackers were getting about Clorox, Hewlett-Packard and other companies was so timely it generated as much as $100 million in illicit proceeds for them and the traders, according to securities regulators.Law enforcement officials said the companies — Business Wire, PR Newswire and Marketwired — often detected the overseas hackers and kicked them out, but the hackers returned time and time again.This, according to court filings, is how they did it with one company almost two years ago.At 9:04 a.m. Eastern Time on Oct. 22, 2013, representatives from Panera Bread, the chain of fast-casual restaurants, uploaded a news release about the company’s latest quarterly earnings to Marketwired’s service.In the release, Panera Bread announced that it was revising its earning guidance downward for the fourth quarter of 2013. It had turned a profit that was in line with what analysts on Wall Street had been expecting, but fewer people were coming to its restaurants and labor and food costs were rising. It was not an altogether rosy picture the company was going to paint when its release became public that day after stock market trading closed at 4 p.m.Weeks earlier, Arkadiy Dubovoy, the owner of a APD Developers, a company based in Alpharetta, Ga., began to prepare.APD designed and built residential communities and condominiums, but Mr. Dubovoy also controlled brokerage accounts at Charles Schwab, E-Trade, Fidelity, Merrill Lynch and TD Ameritrade.On Oct. 8, Mr. Dubovoy received an empty email from a relative who split his time between Georgia and Ukraine. Attached to the email was a so-called wish list — a picture of a spreadsheet that contained the information about 18 publicly traded companies and the schedule for their earnings releases. Panera was on the list.A group of men, who were recently indicted, would sometimes submit “shopping lists” to hackers with the names of the companies whose press releases they wanted to obtain illegally from news services like BusinessWire and PR Newswire. This is one of those lists.For years, Mr. Dubovoy and his colleagues and relatives, including Igor Dubovoy, his son, had established wish lists with men in Ukraine who knew how to gain access to the servers of companies like Marketwired. Ivan Turchynov was one of those men. He sometimes went by Vladimir Gopienko, or DSU.For years, hackers had gained access to Marketwired by using a series of SQL, or Structured Query Language, injections — instructions written in a specific programming language that is used to retrieve and manage information in computer databases. Over two months in 2012, Mr. Turchynov used SQL injections on Marketwired on at least 390 occasions.Once inside the system, Mr. Turchynov and other hackers would retrieve uploaded releases and share them with traders before they were made public. On the day of Panera’s earnings announcement, this is what happened for Mr. Dubovoy.By 2 p.m., Mr. Dubovoy began shorting the company’s shares. That is, he sold borrowed stock in hopes of buying it back at a lower price. A little over an hour later, another man who lived in Georgia, Leonid Momotok, started trading Panera shares. Shortly after that, Vitaly Korchevsky, a former hedge fund manager who lived in Pennsylvania, also began shorting the stock. Among the three men, more than 100,000 shares of Panera stock were put in play between 2 and 4 p.m.At 4:05 p.m., Panera’s earnings news release hit the wire. The stock price dived.That afternoon, Mr. Dubovoy, Mr. Momotok and Mr. Korchevsky made just shy of $1 million.Advertisement