AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedGeneral Electric continued its campaign to shrink its huge finance arm, announcing on Tuesday that it will sell its health care lending business to Capital One for about $9 billion.The transaction is the latest part of a sweeping move by the conglomerate to reshape its business, focusing more on its core industrial operations. That has meant selling off the bulk of GE Capital, once the backbone of G.E.’s profits but which proved a dangerous burden during the financial crisis and then merely a drag on growth afterward. Since announcing its initiative in April, G.E. has sold $26.5 billion worth of real estate assets and a huge lender for private equity takeovers.Now it is selling its Healthcare Financial Services business, which lends to a wide variety of companies in the industry, including hospitals, drug makers and medical device specialists. The unit contains about $8.5 billion worth of assets. Not all of the division will go to Capital One, however: G.E. will hold onto some parts with ties to its core business, including a portion that lends to customers of the conglomerate’s medical equipment operations.As part of the transaction, which is expected to close by year end, the chief executive of the heath care division, Darren Alcus, will join Capital One.“We’re pleased to sell HFS to a company that is committed to expanding the business,” Keith Sherin, GE Capital’s chairman and chief executive, said in a statement. “Our customers, sponsors and HFS employees will benefit from the synergies of combining Capital One’s existing health care lending businesses with the expertise, relationships and experience of our highly regarded HFS team.”Michael Slocum, the president of Capital One’s commercial bank, added in a separate statement: “This is a strategic investment in a specialty industry segment that we have been building out for the past several years. This addition will catapult us to a leading market position in providing financial services to the health care sector.”With the sale, Mr. Sherin said that G.E. was on track to sell about $100 billion worth of GE Capital assets by the end of the year.Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and the law firm Hogan Lovells advised G.E. on Tuesday’s deal. Credit Suisse, Wells Fargo and the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz advised Capital One.Advertisement