By JULIE CRESWELLAUG. 11, 2015
A law passed by New York City three years ago that required banks to make public their efforts to be socially responsible, particularly in low-income neighborhoods, is unconstitutional, according to a federal court ruling.In a decision released on Monday, Judge Katherine Polk Failla of Federal District Court in Manhattan said the law, called the Responsible Banking Act, conflicted with existing federal and state statutes that regulated banks.“A review of the extensive record in this case confirms that while the animating concerns of the City Council are valid, the means by which it sought to harness banks to redress those concerns intrudes on the province of the federal and state governments,” Judge Failla said.A spokesman for the New York City law department said officials there were “considering our options.”Advertisement“We’re disappointed in the decision,” said the spokesman, Nick Paolucci. “The city has a vital role in understanding the effect banks are having on the economic health of our neighborhoods.”AdvertisementThe controversial 2012 law created an advisory committee that would assess whether banks that held more than $6 billion in city deposits were providing robust credit to small businesses and modifying mortgages in low and middle-income neighborhoods.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the financial crisis, other large cities passed or weighed similar measures.Immediately after the New York City law was passed, Michael R. Bloomberg, then the mayor, vetoed it, calling it a “misguided attempt” to influence banks by overlaying extensive state and federal regulation. While the City Council overrode his veto and enacted the law, Mayor Bloomberg delayed its start by refusing to appoint anyone to the bank advisory board.After Bill de Blasio was elected mayor in late 2013, the city took steps to enforce the law, including making appointments to the oversight committee.This spring, the committee sent letters seeking information to the banks. Among the topics it sought information about were the number of foreclosure actions, loan modifications and the number of loans held by the banks that were at least 60 days delinquent. The banks resisted the request, saying that some of the information requested was confidential, involved trade secrets and would be expensive for the banks to produce. At least one bank chose to cease being a deposit bank because of the economic costs needed to gather the required information for the Responsible Banking Act.The New York Bankers Association, which has more than 150 members, including JPMorgan Chase, Citibank and Bank of America, challenged the city law.“The New York Bankers Association is gratified that the court affirmed our position on the pre-eminence of federal and state law in the area of bank regulation,” Michael P. Smith, president and chief executive of the organization, said in an emailed statement. “This is an important decision for the banking industry with nationwide ramifications. The banks in New York will continue to be supervised by state and federal regulators, and will continue to reinvest in the communities in which they operate.”A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: New York City Banking Law Is Unconstitutional, a Judge Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.