AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — American workers’ productivity rebounded in the second quarter, but a weak underlying trend suggested that inflation could pick up more quickly than economists have anticipated.Nonfarm productivity increased at a 1.3 percent annual rate in the April-to-June period, the Labor Department said on Tuesday. But productivity, which measures hourly output per worker, rose only 0.3 percent from a year ago.In line with annual revisions to gross domestic product, first-quarter productivity was revised to show a 1.1 percent rate of decline instead of the previously reported 3.1 percent pace of decline.“What it means is that inflation could be more problematic down the road, but we haven’t seen it yet. It’s something to think about long term,” said Gennadiy Goldberg, an economist at TD Securities in New York.A separate report from the Commerce Department showed that wholesale inventories increased 0.9 percent in June, higher than the 0.7 percent rise the government had forecast.Productivity is one of the things the Federal Reserve is watching as it contemplates raising interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade. Economists had forecast productivity rising at a 1.6 percent rate in the second quarter. The economy grew at a 2.3 percent annual pace in the period.Annual revisions showed that productivity was unchanged in 2013, the weakest annual reading since 1982. Productivity in 2013 was previously reported to have increased at a 1.2 percent rate.The average annual rate of productivity growth from 2007 to 2014 was revised down to 1.3 percent a year, from 1.4 percent, well below the long-term rate of 2.2 percent a year from 1947 to 2014.Growth in productivity is an important determinant of the economy’s noninflationary speed limit. The downward revisions suggested that the economy’s growth potential could be lower than the 1.5 percent to 2 percent pace that economists have been estimating.That would imply that the spare capacity in the economy is being squeezed out more quickly than thought and that inflation pressures may take hold a bit faster than had been anticipated.“We are growing much faster versus potential than we had previously thought,” said Jacob Oubina, senior United States economist at RBC Capital Markets in New York. “So the output gap over the more recent time frame looks like it is closing at a faster rate than we had thought prior to G.D.P. benchmark revisions. The faster you close the output gap, the faster you get to that threshold where you start to see inflationary pressures.”But inflation remains benign for now. Unit labor costs, the price of labor per single unit of output, rose at only a 0.5 percent rate in the second quarter after advancing at a downwardly revised 2.3 percent pace in the first quarter.They were previously reported to have increased at a 6.7 percent rate in the January-to-March period. Unit labor costs rose 2.1 percent compared with the second quarter of 2014.Compensation per hour increased at a 1.8 percent rate in the second quarter after rising at a downwardly revised 1.1 percent pace in the first quarter.Compensation was previously reported to have increased at a 3.3 percent rate in the first quarter. It was up 2.4 percent compared to the second quarter of 2014.Advertisement