AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressStocks fell sharply on Tuesday, led by declines in energy and materials shares as commodity prices sank. Prices for oil and copper fell sharply after China’s government lowered the value of its currency, suggesting weakness in the country’s economy, the world’s second-largest after the United States. Google gained after the company announced a revamping.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average fell 1.21 percent, and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index lost 0.96 percent. The Nasdaq declined 1.27 percent.CHINA’S DEVALUATION Beijing’s devaluation of the renminbi allowed it to fall by its biggest one-day margin in a decade. The central bank cut the currency 1.9 percent against the dollar. In recent months, the yuan has strengthened along with the dollar as currencies of other developing countries have weakened, hurting Chinese exporters. Exports fell by an unexpectedly large 8.3 percent in July. The People’s Bank of China said market forces would be given a bigger role in setting the exchange rate, leaving open the possibility of more declines. China’s yuan was valued at 6.32 per dollar on Tuesday, compared with 6.21 per dollar a day earlier.THE QUOTE “The Chinese government will do whatever is necessary to keep the Chinese economy on course,” said John Manley, chief equity strategist at Wells Fargo Fund Management. “People are reading this as a signal that their economy needs more help.”NEW STRUCTURE Google was the biggest gainer in the S.&P. 500 after the tech giant announced a new structure for the company that included separating its lucrative Internet business from some of its more speculative research projects. Investors welcomed the change, which would give them a better idea of how the technology giant spends its cash. A new holding company will be named Alphabet. Google’s stock gained 4.27 percent.FLYING HIGH Airlines were among the biggest gainers as the prices of oil fell again. Fuel is one of the biggest expenses for airlines, and lower fuel costs typically mean higher profits for airlines. American Airlines rose 2.45 percent, and Southwest Airlines gained 1.51 percent.ASIA’S DAY Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 lost 0.4 percent, and Seoul’s Kospi was off 0.8 percent. The Shanghai Composite Index ended little changed, and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng declined 0.1 percent. Sydney’s S&P/ASX 200 lost 0.7 percent, and India’s Sensex shed 0.7 percent. Singapore, Bangkok and Jakarta also retreated.GREECE DEAL Greece said it had reached an agreement with its international creditors on the broad terms of a new bailout deal. The news pushed up Greek markets, with the stock index up 2 percent and the 2-year bond yield sliding more than 4 percentage points — an indication that investors are less worried about a default. Officials expect the deal to be completed on Tuesday.EUROPEAN MARKETS Other European markets were mostly lower. France’s CAC-40 fell 1.5 percent, and Germany’s DAX lost 2.4 percent. Britain’s FTSE 100 shed 0.7 percent.ENERGY Benchmark United States crude oil fell $1.88, or 4 percent, to settle at $43.08 a barrel in New York on Tuesday, its lowest close since March of 2009. The contract rose $1.09 to $44.96 on Monday.CURRENCIES AND BONDS The dollar rose to 125.18 yen from 124.82 yen Monday. The euro rose to $1.1047 from $1.1021. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.14 percent from 2.23 percent on Monday..Advertisement