AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayThe Sumitomo Life Insurance Company of Japan said on Tuesday that it had agreed to acquire Symetra Financial Corporation, an American provider of insurance and financial products, for about $3.8 billion.The deal is the latest by a Japanese insurer seeking to expand its operations into the United States, the world’s largest insurance market, as an aging Japanese population is expected to cut into results.Symetra would give Sumitomo Life its first real foothold in the United States.Under the terms of the deal, Symetra shareholders will receive $32 a share in cash, and a special dividend of 50 cents a share. The deal represents a 32 percent premium to the company’s average share price over the 30 days that ended Aug. 5.“We are enthusiastic about the opportunity to acquire Symetra’s dynamic business and believe that a transaction will be mutually beneficial and will create significant value for both Symetra and Sumitomo Life,” Masahiro Hashimoto, the president and chief executive of Sumitomo Life, said in a news release.Mr. Hashimoto added that the acquisition would lift and diversify the company’s operations overseas, and would “enhance our financial and earnings foundation.”Founded in 1957, Symetra, based in Bellevue, Wash., provides annuities, life insurance and employee benefits. It posted revenue of $2.18 billion in 2014 and has about 1,400 employees.“This transaction will bring compelling strategic and financial benefits for Symetra, including providing a substantial cash premium to our shareholders,” Thomas M. Marra, president and chief executive of Symetra, said in a news release.Symetra’s largest shareholders, White Mountains Insurance Group and Berkshire Hathaway, have agreed to vote in favor of the transaction. They collectively own about 35 percent of the company’s shares.“Tom and his management team have done a good job running the company and have executed a great deal for shareholders,” Warren E. Buffett, the Berkshire Hathaway chairman and chief executive, said in a news release, referring to Mr. Marra.The transaction is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval. It is expected to close in the second quarter of 2016.Japanese life insurers have been seeking to acquire companies overseas, in recent years, particularly in other parts of Asia and in the United States, as they look to diversify their revenue streams outside their home country.In July, the Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company agreed to acquire the StanCorp Financial Group for $5 billion in cash. In June, Tokio Marine Holdings announced that it would acquire HCC Insurance Holdings for $7.5 billion in cash, one of a series of deals it has undertaken in the United States since 2008.Other Japanese companies seeking growth overseas include Dai-ichi Life Insurance, which announced an agreement to buy the American company Protective Life Corporation in 2014 for about $5.7 billion.If the deal announced on Tuesday is completed, Symetra would serve as Sumitomo Life’s platform in the United States and would continue to operate under its current brand.The company would be led by Mr. Marra, the Symetra chief executive, and the current management team would continue to be based in Bellevue.Founded in 1907, Sumitomo Life is one of Japan’s largest insurers, selling life insurance, annuities and group products. It had total premiums of 2.18 trillion yen, or about $17.5 billion, in 2014 and has more than 42,000 employees.Morgan Stanley and the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore advised Symetra.Advertisement