By CHAD BRAYAUG. 11, 2015
A consortium of investors led by the private equity firm the Carlyle Group has agreed to acquire the data storage company Veritas Technologies from Symantec for $8 billion in cash.Carlyle said on Tuesday that it would acquire the company with the Singapore sovereign wealth fund G.I.C. and other investors.“Veritas is a market innovator with global scale, an iconic brand and significant growth potential,” Patrick R. McCarter, a managing director at the Carlyle Group, said in a news release.The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close near the end of the year.Veritas, which was founded in 1983 and is based in Mountain View, Calif., provides data storage and server management software. It generated $2.6 billion in revenue in the 2015 fiscal year, which ended in March.AdvertisementThe deal came after Symantec, which specializes in security software, announced plans in October to divide its operations into two businesses: one focused on computer security software for businesses and consumers, and the other on information management, the Veritas line of business.AdvertisementSymantec said the deal would allow it to focus on its computer security software business.“Taking this decisive step forward will enable each business to maximize its potential,” Michael A. Brown, the president and chief executive of Symantec, said in a news release. “Both businesses will have substantial operational and financial scale to thrive.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Symantec agreed to acquire Veritas in 2004 for $13.5 billion in stock.If the deal is completed, William T. Coleman III, the founder of the software companies BEA Systems and Cassatt, would serve as chief executive of Veritas. For the past five years, he has been a partner with Alsop Louie Partners, a venture capital firm in San Francisco.L. William Krause, a Carlyle executive and the former chief executive of 3Com, would serve as the chairman of Veritas.“Bill Coleman is a proven leader whose strategic vision and strong execution skills will leverage Veritas’s newfound position as a private, stand-alone company to grow the firm and provide customers an integrated information management solution,” Mr. McCarter said.Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and UBS Investment Bank are advising Carlyle and G.I.C. The law firms Alston & Bird, Latham & Watkins, Allen & Overy and Covington & Burling are also advising Carlyle, while the law firms Ropes & Gray and Sidley Austin are advising G.I.C.A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Data Acquistion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.