By CHAD BRAYAUG. 11, 2015
LONDON — The American crane and heavy equipment maker Terex Corporation and Konecranes of Finland said on Tuesday that they planned to merge in an all-share deal.The combined company, to be called Konecranes Terex, would become a big supplier of cranes and equipment to the construction, mining, manufacturing and shipping sectors, with estimated revenue of about $10 billion a year and 32,000 employees.The combination would give the companies greater scale to compete globally and a broader presence in several of their central business lines, the firms said.Terex investors would receive 0.80 share in Konecranes for each of their Terex shares. That values their shares in the combined company at €2.3 billion, or about $2.5 billion, and represented a 7.7 percent premium to Terex’s closing price on Friday.AdvertisementAfter the transaction, which the companies called a merger of equals, Terex shareholders would own about 60 percent of the combined company, while Konecranes shareholders would own the rest.Advertisement“The combination of Konecranes and Terex is a defining step in the history of both companies,” Stig Gustavson, the Konecranes chairman, said in a news release.Shares of Konecranes jumped 23.4 percent to €34.58 in early trading in Helsinki, Finland, on Tuesday.The transaction is subject to approval by shareholders from both companies and by regulators. It is expected to close in the first half of 2016.The combined company expects to list its shares on the Nasdaq in Helsinki and on the New York Stock Exchange. It would be based in Finland, with headquarters in the Finnish town of Hyvinkaa and in Westport, Conn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As a result of the merger, the companies expect to achieve €110 million in annual cost savings.The deal “provides another lever that is within our control to deliver value-creation to both the shareholders of Terex and Konecranes,” Ron DeFeo, the Terex chief executive, said in a news release.Terex, based in Westport, manufactures cranes and other heavy equipment for a range of industries, including construction, manufacturing, shipping, energy and mining. It posted revenue of $7.3 billion in 2014 and had about 20,400 employees.Konecranes, based in Hyvinkaa, provides cranes and other lifting equipment to customers in sectors like shipping, automobiles and energy. The company posted sales of €2.01 billion in 2014 and employed 12,000 people in 48 countries.The combined company expects to buy back up to €1.4 billion in shares within two years after closing.AdvertisementIts nine-member board of directors would include five directors from Terex and four directors from Konecranes.Mr. Gustavson would serve as chairman of the combined company, while Mr. DeFeo would be the chief executive.Perella Weinberg and the law firms Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, and Roschier advised Konecranes, while Credit Suisse and the law firms Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson, Bryan Cave, and Avance Attorneys advised Terex.A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Crane Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.