AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinFederal prosecutors have asked the courts to refuse bail to all five men arrested in connection with a scheme that enabled securities traders to benefit from confidential corporate information in news releases stolen by hackers in Ukraine before the documents were made public.The government’s lawyers contended in court papers that the men, all of whom were arrested in the United States but have strong ties to Ukraine, were likely to flee the country, especially since the five-year scheme generated at least $30 million in trading profits for them and the overseas hackers.The request by the federal prosecutors to deny bail is somewhat unusual for a white-collar crime case. None of the defendants have been accused of engaging in violent behavior, and three of them are United States citizens.But in one court filing, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn said the men “represent substantial flight risks” because they “have strong overseas ties, and the means to escape to non-extradition countries.”The United States does not have an extradition treaty with Ukraine. International arrest warrants have been issued for four other men in the case, who are believed to be in Ukraine, according to court filings.The authorities said the men in custody traded stock through their own brokerage accounts in various investment banks in the United States. They would sometimes submit “shopping lists” to the hackers with the names of the companies whose news releases they wanted to obtain illegally from news services like BusinessWire and PR Newswire. The lists named some of the biggest companies around the world.One of the men Brooklyn prosecutors want to keep in custody is Vitaly Korchevsky, 50, who is being held at a federal prison in Philadelphia. According to an indictment unsealed on Tuesday, Mr. Korchevsky was the single biggest earner in the novel scheme that married insider trading to computer hacking, making just over $17 million.A group of men, who were recently indicted, would sometimes submit “shopping lists” to hackers with the names of the companies whose press releases they wanted to obtain illegally from news services like BusinessWire and PR Newswire. This is one of those lists.Mr. Korchevsky, who lives in Glen Mills, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia, is a former Morgan Stanley mutual fund manager and a hedge fund manager. Born in Ukraine, Mr. Korchevsky is a United States citizen and pastor of a church.On Tuesday, a federal magistrate judge in Philadelphia, Linda K. Caracappa, ordered Mr. Korchevsky released on $100,000 bond. Soon after that ruling, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn, who had brought the indictment against Mr. Korchevsky, filed an appeal to block his release. And late Tuesday, Judge Brian M. Cogan, of federal court in Brooklyn, signed an order that stayed Judge Caracappa’s ruling and ordered a hearing to be held on the matter in Brooklyn.Steven Brill, the lawyer who is representing Mr. Korchevsky, said, “The government position is unreasonable and unfair,” adding that he was working on putting together a bail proposal for his client.The Brooklyn prosecutors also are asking that Leonid Momotok, 47, and Aleksandr Garkusha, 47, two men living near Atlanta, be held without bail. Both are also United States citizens, but were born in Ukraine. The men are being held in a jail in Atlanta.On Wednesday, Judge Raymond J. Dearie of federal court in Brooklyn issued an order keeping the three men charged by prosecutors there in custody pending a hearing before him.Suzanne K. Hashimi, a lawyer for Mr. Momotok, said, “I don’t believe the government’s claim that my client is a risk of flight is borne out by the evidence.” A lawyer for Mr. Garkusha did not return a request for comment.Two men charged by federal prosecutors in New Jersey are also being held in a jail near Atlanta. Those men, Arkadiy Dubovoy, 51, and Igor Dubovoy, 28, are father and son and are citizens of Ukraine, even though both have permanent resident status in the United States. The Dubovoys made more than $11 million from the scheme, according to an indictment. Lawyers for the men did not return requests for comment.Over the next several days, detention hearings will be held to determine whether the men should be released on bail or remain in custody pending trials. Hearings will also be held to have the men’s cases formally transferred to either federal court in Brooklyn or in Newark.Advertisement