By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 12, 2015
Medications made at a major GlaxoSmithKline plant are safe, the company said on Wednesday, after its decision to close the factory when bacteria that causes the potentially fatal Legionnaires’ disease was discovered.Glaxo said it expected to reopen the closed plant, in Zebulon, N.C., about 25 miles east of Raleigh, in a few days. The plant, which makes inhaled medications, was closed on Tuesday after routine testing found legionella bacteria in two external cooling towers.“No employees are sick, and no products have been compromised,” Jenni Brewer Ligday, a spokeswoman, wrote in an email. “Medicines were not exposed to the bacteria.”North Carolina health officials said on Wednesday that no cases of Legionnaires’ disease linked to the Glaxo plant had been reported.AdvertisementPeople can contract Legionnaires’ disease by inhaling water vapor or mist containing the bacteria, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. It cannot be spread from person to person, the agency added.AdvertisementThe company said it had stopped production and closed the building because the cooling towers where the bacteria was found maintain the temperature and humidity needed for manufacturing and working conditions. None of the air or water released by the cooling towers comes “directly into the building or in contact with any of the products,” Ms. Ligday said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Food and Drug Administration spokesman said on Wednesday that the agency was still looking into the details and referred questions to GlaxoSmithKline.About 600 of the 850 people Glaxo employs in Zebulon were affected by the building closure, Ms. Ligday said.The plant produces inhaled drugs like Advair, a treatment for asthma, and has contracts with other pharmaceutical companies to make their medications.Legionella bacteria found in cooling tanks in the Bronx has caused 12 deaths this summer and sickened over 100 others.A version of this article appears in print on August 13, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Glaxo Calls Its Drugs Safe Though Plant Had Bacteria .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.