AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerIn a move that starts a new chapter in the battle over the bailout of the American International Group during the financial crisis, the Justice Department formally appealed a court ruling on Wednesday that said the government’s terms for saving the company had been too harsh.The ruling in June involved a lawsuit by the former chief executive of A.I.G., Maurice R. Greenberg, who charged that the government overstepped its bounds during the bailout in 2008, imposing unduly harsh terms on the insurance giant compared with lifelines extended to some Wall Street banks during the crisis. The federal lawsuit, brought on behalf of A.I.G. shareholders, sought damages in excess of $40 billion.In June, Judge Thomas C. Wheeler of the United States Court of Federal Claims delivered a split decision: The Federal Reserve had indeed crossed the line by demanding a 79.9 percent equity stake in A.I.G., he ruled, and the central bank “did not have the legal right to become the owner of A.I.G.”Judge Wheeler awarded no damages, however, saying A.I.G. shareholders had not suffered financially. “The inescapable conclusion is that A.I.G. would have filed for bankruptcy” without the bailout, he wrote, and “the value of the shareholders’ common stock would have been zero.”Starr International, the company through which Mr. Greenberg sued, almost immediately indicated that it planned to appeal on the issue of damages. The company, which had been A.I.G.’s largest shareholder and where Mr. Greenberg is now chief executive, issued a statement in June that it “will appeal the ruling that there is no remedy for the government’s illegal conduct, and ask the court of appeals to confirm that the government is not entitled to keep billions of dollars of citizens’ money in its pocket.”The federal government, for its own part, was also dissatisfied with the ruling, which it worried could set a dangerous precedent by declaring the Fed’s actions illegal.“We disagree with the court’s conclusion regarding the Federal Reserve’s legal authority and continue to believe that the government acted well within legal bounds,” the administration said on Wednesday in a statement.The case now moves to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit — which happens to meet in the same Washington courtroom where closing arguments were delivered this year before Judge Wheeler. The case could drag on for several more years.Lawyers for Mr. Greenberg are expected to file their own formal challenge on damages this month.During the trial, which began last fall, architects of the government’s response to the financial crisis — including Timothy F. Geithner, Ben S. Bernanke and Henry M. Paulson Jr. — took the witness stand and sparred with Mr. Greenberg’s lead lawyer, David Boies, over whether A.I.G.’s treatment was appropriate.A.I.G. has repaid the bailout, which ultimately grew to $185 billion, and the government even came out ahead — earning about $20 billion from the deal.Advertisement