AdvertisementSupported byBy Robyn MakThe golden-child status of the Chinese e-commerce group Alibaba hangs by a thread.The company announced disappointing quarterly revenue growth on Wednesday, pushing its shares as close as they have ever been to last year’s initial public stock offering price. Investors haven’t much challenged its founder’s free rein so far. A weakening business and over $100 billion of lost market capitalization since the shares hit a high in November may change that.Revenue in the three months to June grew 28 percent year-on-year — the slowest in three years — to $3.27 billion, missing the expectations of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters. Gross merchandise value, the sticker price of goods transacted on Alibaba’s shopping platforms, increased 34 percent — just over half the rate of two years ago. In comparison, transactions on the much smaller rival JD.com soared 82 percent in the same quarter. Fears of a sputtering Chinese economy, driven by a surprise slide in the renminbi, helped send Alibaba’s shares down to $71 intraday on Wednesday.Since the company went public in New York last year in a $25 billion blockbuster share offering, investors have been tolerant as its founder, Jack Ma, unveiled his sweeping but confusing vision. Alibaba once simply matched buyers and sellers; now it is part of an “online-to-offline” empire that extends to movies, health care, cloud computing and even a bank. Just two days ago, a $4.6 billion investment in the retailer Suning took Alibaba into the struggling electronics superstore sector. It’s not clear Suning’s low-margin business will do anything but harm Alibaba’s bottom line. Still, the shares ticked up.It’s conceivable, though, that as Alibaba shares edge toward last year’s $68 initial public offering price, and roaring growth is no longer a given, investors’ good will may become strained. There will be many more unexpected tests, if recent months’ controversies over counterfeit products, pricing violations and intensifying competition are a guide. Investors can’t change the control Mr. Ma wields over Alibaba’s strategy, or his reluctance to explain it properly. But that doesn’t mean they will always like it.Advertisement