AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Liz MoyerWhen Jon Winkelried retired as a co-president of Goldman Sachs in 2009, many on Wall Street asked if the longtime investment banker would resurface at another financial firm.More than six years later, the answer is finally yes.TPG, the investment firm, said on Wednesday that it had hired Mr. Winkelried as co-chief executive. He will hold that title alongside James Coulter, one of the founders of the firm.The appointment effectively restores the longstanding two-leader structure of TPG, which changed when David Bonderman, a fellow founder, became chairman last year.“As our business becomes more complicated, we have to make sure that we have set up the firm with the right leadership talent,” Mr. Coulter said in a telephone interview. “We’ve had dual roles for a long time.”And it solidifies the upper management of the $74 billion firm as speculation continues to swirl around whether it will join competitors like the Blackstone Group and the Carlyle Group in the public markets.The hiring also means the return of a prominent Wall Street executive, who rose through the ranks of Goldman to become one of the top lieutenants to Lloyd C. Blankfein. But he stepped down unexpectedly in 2009, citing fatigue.Since then, he has worked as an adviser to a credit investing fund at TPG run by a former Goldman colleague, Alan Waxman. And in 2013, he became a strategic adviser to Thrive Capital, a venture capital firm. (He also managed his personal ranching operations.)Those roles provided valuable experience in investing, Mr. Winkelried, 56, said in a telephone interview. But he never ruled out a return to a management role. So when Mr. Coulter, 55, asked him to consider joining TPG full time as co-chief executive, the former Goldman banker was intrigued.“People have constantly been asking me, ‘Are you going to get back to it?’ ” Mr. Winkelried said. “But it had to be the right type of opportunity. In some ways, you know it when you see it or feel it.”He flew to TPG’s headquarters in San Francisco and spent time meeting the firm’s various groups, which include classic leveraged buyouts like those of J. Crew and Neiman Marcus as well as debt investing and growth-equity investments in Uber and Airbnb. The firm was founded in 1992 as the Texas Pacific Group by Mr. Coulter, a former banker from Lehman Brothers; Mr. Bonderman; and William Price.“I’m enthusiastic about the potential here because of my knowledge of the firm and what I think is an incredibly strong platform,” Mr. Winkelried said.Joining TPG means Mr. Winkelried will move to San Francisco, where his office will be next to Mr. Coulter’s. But Mr. Coulter added that there would be no formal split of duties, with the two men jointly running the firm.TPG executives say the move has no bearing on whether — or when — the firm might pursue an initial public offering of stock. Various members of management have been coy over the last year about when an offering could happen.Still, Mr. Coulter said the hiring of Mr. Winkelried was unrelated.“This has no implication on the I.P.O. path — if there is any,” Mr. Coulter said.Advertisement