By MARK SCOTTAUG. 12, 2015
The British education company Pearson agreed on Wednesday to sell its 50 percent stake in the Economist Group, the publisher of The Economist, to other shareholders of the group for $730 million.Pearson, which sold The Financial Times last month, is trying to streamline its operations to focus primarily on its core education and assessment businesses.The biggest participant in the Economist Group transaction will be Exor, the Italian holding company of the Agnelli family, which is a major shareholder in Fiat Chrysler.Exor, which already holds a stake of almost 5 percent in the Economist Group, will pay 286.5 million pounds, or about $446 million, for a combination of 27.8 percent of the Economist Group’s so-called ordinary shares and all of the company’s Class B shares.AdvertisementThe Economist Group will buy the remainder of Pearson’s ordinary shares for £182 million. The ordinary shares can be owned by employees, past employees and founding members of the company.AdvertisementThe Economist Group said it would sell its London headquarters to help pay for the share buyback.An increased stake in the London-based publisher will not increase Exor’s influence. That is because of a complicated trust structure that essentially ensures that the Economist Group cannot be taken over by owners eager to impose their own interests.Analysts said that Pearson’s sale of the stake was inevitable after the company sold The Financial Times to the Japanese media company Nikkei for $1.3 billion in its bid to leave the newspaper publishing business.“With the complicated ownership structure, it was always going to be more difficult than the F.T. sale,” said Ian Whittaker, a media analyst at Liberum Capital in London.He added that Pearson would most likely use the money to pay down debt and to buy other education assets. “They can’t just sit on the cash.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the sale does not give Exor, whose other holdings include the Italian newspaper La Stampa, editorial control of the Economist Group, analysts said the magazine’s stance was unlikely to change.“Pearson is proud to have been a part of The Economist’s success over the past 58 years,” John Fallon, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement on Wednesday. “We have enjoyed supporting the company as it has built a global business.”Unlike other magazine and newspaper outlets, the Economist Group, which includes CQ Roll Call, has been consistently profitable for decades. Its main asset, The Economist, was founded in 1843.The weekly magazine has garnered a global readership of primarily affluent, educated people, and its many admirers include a former mayor of New York City, the billionaire Michael R. Bloomberg.AdvertisementThe company earned about $93 million for the year that ended March 31, on revenue of more than $500 million, according to its annual report. Though it is privately held, the company releases its financial records each spring. The Economist’s circulation increased to about 1.6 million in 2015, from around a million in 2006, defying a trend of declining circulation that overshadows the industry.Investors in the Economist Group will vote on the share sale next month, and the meeting will include a separate vote to prohibit any individual or company from owning more than 50 percent of the group’s shares.“The board’s priority was to secure the independence of the ownership of the group and the continued editorial independence of The Economist,” Rupert Pennant-Rea, the Economist Group’s chairman, said in a statement on Wednesday.A version of this article appears in print on August 13, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Pearson Sells Economist Group Stake to Existing Shareholders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.