AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperGoldman Sachs is broadening its effort to offer banking services to people with a wider array of incomes than it has traditionally served.The firm announced Thursday afternoon that it was acquiring $16 billion in customer deposits from GE Capital Bank. The sale of the deposits is the latest step in General Electric’s effort to focus more tightly on its industrial businesses.The purchase will give Goldman a new role as a savings bank for retail customers. The acquisition will give the firm a source of deposits that it can lend to consumers online, a growth area that Goldman recently announced it would pursue.Goldman has traditionally been an investment bank catering almost entirely to corporate clients, with a small business offering private banking services to the wealthy elite.During the financial crisis, though, Goldman was forced to convert to a bank holding company. That status gave it access to emergency funds from the Federal Reserve but also set stiffer capital requirements and allowed for greater scrutiny from regulators. Since then, Goldman has slowly been trying to take advantage of its new classification, which also allows it to take deposits and lend money.This year, Goldman began hiring employees to build an online lending business, aimed at consumers interested in taking out small loans. The bank has said it will look for new sources of deposits to fund these loans, and the deposits from GE Capital could help fill that need.The $16 billion that Goldman is acquiring is a tiny sum compared with the overall holdings of Goldman, which has assets worth around $860 billion. But the deposits represent an interesting new direction for the bank, which has generally avoided smaller consumer businesses.In recent years, Goldman and other investment banks have been encouraged to diversify their business models by new regulations. Goldman already offers certificates of deposit, but they have generally been brokered by other institutions.Goldman said that it intended to keep most of the staff currently employed by GE Capital.GE Capital Bank takes deposits and sells certificates of deposit directly to consumers online. It has competed for deposits by offering slightly higher interest rates than traditional consumer banks give. Half of the money being taken over by Goldman is in certificates of deposit and half is in online savings accounts.Because it is an online bank, GE Capital Bank does not have any physical locations. Goldman has said the lack of retail branches will be a comparative advantage for it as bank services increasingly move online.General Electric has been aggressively selling off its financial arm over the last few months, in part because of the new rules.Advertisement