AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinLOS ANGELES — A few weeks before NBC faces a new challenge in late night, the network is doubling down on Jimmy Fallon as the host of the “Tonight” show.NBC has extended Mr. Fallon’s contract for three and a half years beyond his previous deal, which will keep him as the show’s host through fall 2021.The “Tonight” show has consistently been No. 1 in the ratings for its time slot, and its segments have been popular online, in the 18 months since Mr. Fallon took over for Jay Leno. But starting next month, he will have strong competition from Stephen Colbert, who is taking over “The Late Show” on CBS.“It’s nice to say Jimmy’s the guy four weeks before Colbert enters the fray,” Robert Greenblatt, chairman of NBC Entertainment, said in an interview on Thursday.“We said, ‘Why don’t we just tie him up for a chunk of years?’ ” he continued. “He got the job last year, and you give him a three-year deal and see how it goes, and then it’s like, O.K., home run. Let’s lock up the home run.”Mr. Greenblatt said that the extension was completed two days ago, and that NBCUniversal’s chief executive, Stephen B. Burke, “loves long-term deals.” He cited NBC’s deal for the Olympic Games last year, which extended its broadcast rights through 2032. Other terms of the deal with Mr. Fallon were not disclosed.On Monday, Mr. Colbert praised Mr. Fallon’s “Tonight” as an “honest show” and said that he had no interest in participating in the feuds between hosts that had been part of the late-night comedy world for years.“Unlike the strange Leno-Letterman stuff that transpired over the years or Kimmel-Leno, they are great friends,” Mr. Greenblatt said of Mr. Fallon and Mr. Colbert.Mr. Leno, who appeared at a Television Critics Association event to promote his new show, “Jay Leno’s Garage,” on CNBC, also praised Mr. Colbert, saying he was “terrific.” When it comes to being a guest, however, he said he was likely to remain loyal to his successor.Mr. Greenblatt demurred when asked how Mr. Fallon’s ratings would be affected by Mr. Colbert, but he said, “The good news is Colbert does something very different from what Jimmy Fallon does. Jimmy’s the variety show as opposed to Colbert, which will be the more talky, maybe more political, more satire.”In May, in an awkward moment at NBC’s upfront presentation, Mr. Fallon joined Mr. Greenblatt on stage, and joked that the NBC chief’s tenure was up: “We’re all going to miss you, buddy. You had a good run.”Mr. Greenblatt said, “He’s funny that way, too,” adding, “By the way, he will be here longer than I will be.”Advertisement