AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Business inventories in the United States in June posted their largest gain in two and a half years, a sign that second-quarter economic growth could be revised higher. Import prices in July posted the biggest decline in six months as the cost of petroleum products fell.The Commerce Department said on Thursday that business inventories increased 0.8 percent, the biggest gain since January 2013, after an unrevised 0.3 percent rise in May. Inventories are a major component of gross domestic product.Retail inventories excluding autos, which go into the calculation of G.D.P., jumped 0.7 percent in June, the largest rise since November 2013. May's retail inventories excluding autos were revised up to show a 0.3 percent increase instead of a 0.1 percent gain.In June, business sales rose 0.2 percent after increasing 0.4 percent in May. At June's sales pace, it would take 1.37 months for businesses to clear shelves — a relatively high ratio that suggests limited scope for businesses to aggressively accumulate stocks. The ratio was up from 1.36 months in May.The Labor Department also said on Thursday that import prices dropped 0.9 percent last month, the largest fall since January. Import prices have now declined in 11 of the last 13 months, and the latest data suggest inflation could remain tame for a while. In the 12 months through July, prices dropped 10.4 percent.Prices were unchanged in June, and July’s decline partly reflected a drop in the prices of oil and other goods. Last month, imported petroleum prices fell 5.9 percent after rising 1.6 percent in June.Import prices excluding petroleum fell 0.3 percent, also reflecting the impact of a strong dollar. The dollar has gained 15.7 percent against the currencies of the United States’ main trading partners since June 2014, mainly on expectations the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates this year.In July, imported food prices were unchanged after dropping 0.7 percent in June. Prices for imported capital goods fell 0.2 percent and were unchanged for automobiles.The report also showed that export prices slipped 0.2 percent last month after falling 0.3 percent in June. Export prices dropped 6.1 percent in the 12 months through July.In a separate report, the Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment benefits increased 5,000 to a seasonally adjusted 274,000 for the week that ended Aug. 8.Though claims have risen for three straight weeks, they have for 23 consecutive weeks remained below the 300,000 threshold, which is associated with a firming jobs market.The four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends as it irons out week-to-week volatility, fell 1,750 last week, to 266,250, the lowest level since April 2000. The tightening labor market is steadily lifting household income, which is supporting consumer spending.Advertisement