By STEPHANIE STROMAUG. 13, 2015
Sir Kensington’s, a small but growing company in the condiments business, has received a $8.5 million from some individual investors and Verlinvest, the family-owned private equity group that is snapping up stakes in some of America’s most popular new food companies.Verlinvest’s money will provide the company with working capital to build a sales team and enhance its marketing.“We knew we needed a certain amount of money from an investor, but we also wanted someone that had more than capital,” said Mark Ramadan, co-founder and chief executive of Sir Kensington’s. “Verlinvest has deep experience not just in the food and beverage space but also in natural and organic brands and smaller businesses.”For example, Verlinvest has stakes in All Market Inc., the company behind the best-selling coconut water Vita Coco; Sambazon Inc., a producer of juices and smoothies; and Popchips, a snack business that in 2011 was named one of America’s 20 most promising companies by Forbes.Advertisement“My cousins and I, we pride ourselves on being daring investors in the food and beverage world, among other things,” said Frédéric de Mevius, chairman of the Verlinvest board and scion of a Belgian family that began brewing beer in Belgium in the 1300s.AdvertisementMr. de Mevius said that while Verlinvest’s initial investment in Sir Kensington’s was small, its international connections would be useful to the condiments maker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The investment fund recently helped arrange the sale of a 25 percent stake in Vita Coco to the owner of Red Bull China for $166 million.The family also has a stake in Anheuser-Busch InBev, the beer company behind brands like Budweiser and Stella Artois. AB InBev’s other big owners include the Brazilian investors behind 3G, the private equity group and owner of Heinz, famous for its “slow good” tomato ketchup. Some high-end hotels, restaurants and food service operations have replaced Heinz products with Sir Kensington’s condiments, which have less sugar and sodium. All are made without genetically modified ingredients.Mr. de Mevius, however, said he had no expectations that Sir Kensington’s would ever unseat Heinz — although it could certainly dent its market share.“I don’t really see this as a competitive issue,” he said. “As you’ve seen in the spirits business, craft beers have developed great niches in the market that are popular with consumers, but they haven’t displaced mainstream beers.”A version of this article appears in print on August 14, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: An $8.5 Million Investment for a Condiments Maker .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.