AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSeven years after the American International Group was bailed out by the federal government for being too big to fail, one of Wall Street’s most prominent activist investors says that the insurer is now too large to succeed.The billionaire Carl C. Icahn wrote an open letter to A.I.G. on Wednesday, calling on the company to break itself up into several smaller insurers and to cut costs to keep itself competitive with other rivals.The move by Mr. Icahn, who said on Twitter that he had “a large stake” in the company, signals the latest challenge for A.I.G., which has already embarked on several moves to slim down after receiving billions of dollars from the government in the fall of 2008.Under a previous leader, the late Robert H. Benmosche, the insurer held off from breaking itself apart to pay back its bailout money. But it sold a number of businesses, including two huge Asian life insurance operations and its aircraft leasing business.In his letter to A.I.G.’s current chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, Mr. Icahn contended that the company had dawdled in pursuing more drastic action.According to the activist investor, keeping different kinds of insurance — property and casualty insurance and life insurance — weighs down A.I.G.’s returns. Mr. Icahn argued that other competitors, as with companies in other industries, have chosen to sell or spin off some divisions to bolster their stock price.Moreover, Mr. Icahn added, spinning off A.I.G.’s life insurance and mortgage insurance subsidiaries into separate publicly traded companies would help the firm avoid the government’s “systemically important financial institution” or SIFI label, a designation that brings stricter oversight and regulatory requirements.Other companies have been eager to avoid that status. MetLife has sued the government, arguing that regulators erred in designating it as a SIFI (pronounced SIH-fee). And General Electric is in the process of selling most of its huge lending arm, in part to shed that label.A.I.G. has also faced questions about how it plans to deal with the tighter regulation. But Mr. Icahn, citing comments from other shareholders, called for more urgency.“We believe there is no more need for procrastination, the time to act is now,” he wrote. “I cannot fathom how you could ignore repeated requests from shareholders to execute a plan that would release billions of dollars of capital, free the company from onerous excess regulation and leave shareholders owning stock in three separate, market-leading insurance franchises.”Mr. Hancock responded in a statement: “A.I.G. maintains an open dialogue with all our shareholders and welcomes their feedback and ideas. We have taken important and significant steps to reposition A.I.G. by both simplifying and de-risking the company, and realizing attractive valuations from noncore asset sales.”Splitting up A.I.G. may not be so easy. Mr. Hancock has indicated that being designated a SIFI would not meaningfully add more restrictions on the company, especially since it has about 200 other regulators across the country and the world.At the same time, a person close to the company argued that breaking up A.I.G. could weaken its individual divisions. The insurer’s own analysis has concluded that having different lines of business provides a measure of stability throughout the firm that has been praised by credit rating agencies.Leaving individual units to stand independently would mean that they would need to shore up their own capital bases, adding to costs, this person argued.Moreover, the company relies on a single sales force to sell its entire suite of products. Separating the businesses would essentially mean doubling the sales staff.While A.I.G. has acknowledged that it needs to do more to cut costs and assuage shareholders, the company could point to two of its own directors as evidence that it is ready to listen to investors. One is Robert S. Miller, whom the activist hedge fund manager Daniel S. Loeb nominated to the board of Dow Chemical. The other is Henry Miller, whom Elliott Management named to the board of the Interpublic Group.In some ways, the entrance of Mr. Icahn highlights how far A.I.G. has come since the fall of 2008, when it nearly sank amid the collapse of mortgages that it had insured. So intertwined into the global financial system had the company become that the government eventually made $182 billion available to help prop up the company.In the last 12 months, A.I.G. shares have risen about 15 percent. They were up 4.9 percent on Wednesday, at $63.90.Advertisement