AdvertisementSupported byBy Aaron M. KesslerTesla Motors has seemingly defied the law of financial gravity on Wall Street ever since the company began proving that electric cars could be sporty, powerful and trendy — not just green.The company did it again this week. When most companies disclose they are selling new shares to raise capital, their stock generally declines. But when Tesla announced on Thursday a $500 million stock sale, investors cheered.It went over so well that the company raised the sale on Friday to $642 million worth of shares. And if the banks underwriting the deal exercise their options, the total could approach $750 million.Tesla’s stock price opened on Thursday morning at $239.86 a share. By Friday, it had closed at $243.15.Even though investors had anticipated a stock sale after Tesla’s founder, Elon Musk, hinted at one in a conference call on Aug. 5, and the value had corrected by roughly 10 percent to compensate since then, Wall Street’s positive reaction this week still surprised some analysts.“Investors are really pouring money into it,” said Akshay Anand, an analyst at Kelley Blue Book. “Tesla seems to have an allure all its own.”But the company’s sky-high valuation is also based on everything going as planned in the coming years, Mr. Anand said. Tesla has estimated it will sell 500,000 vehicles a year by the end of the decade — a sharp increase from around 50,000 expected deliveries this year — and more than a million by 2025, depending on the success of new models like the Model X sport utility vehicle going on sale next month, and the coming mass-market-oriented Model 3.“A lot of their valuation seems to be depending on all things working out,” he said. “If this was another company, I’d say those expectations are unrealistic. But that’s kind of the allure of Tesla. They shoot for the moon.”When the first Model S sedans began hitting the streets in June 2012, Tesla’s stock hovered around $30 a share. But the car, subsequently showered with awards and high-end consumer cachet, made Tesla’s stock a darling of Wall Street beginning in the spring of 2013.The company’s charismatic founder promised more to come: a sport utility vehicle, a mass-market sedan and a sprawling battery factory near Reno, Nev. Recently, Tesla even branched out beyond cars, into energy-storage devices.The result has been a company that seems to embody many of a typical Wall Street investor’s desires: disruptive technology, larger-than-life founders and dazzling growth projections. General Motors or Ford could only dream of inspiring such devotion.But like other public companies, Tesla has a stock price that is based on the predicted value of future cash flows — and that means Tesla’s grand promises have set high expectations among investors who view the company’s short-term struggles as only a prelude to a big payday down the road. As long as those expectations hold, analysts say, the company could remain a Wall Street darling. But if confidence gets shaken, Tesla’s lofty valuation could be shaken with it.Some Wall Street banks have already begun raising concerns. Last month, the investment bank UBS downgraded Tesla to a “sell” recommendation, citing concerns about its overvaluation, excessively aggressive sales targets, pricing and the role the company has taken in the energy storage business.In a research note, UBS warned that “any significant problems with the current or future products would likely cripple the company in the early stages of its growth.”Deutsche Bank also downgraded Tesla this summer from a “buy” to a “hold,” indicating investors should not sell the stock, but should not buy any more.But the majority of Wall Street financial analysts still rate the company a good bet, fueling more investment. Ten analysts rate it as a “buy” or higher, and six others recommend to hold the stock, with a median price prediction topping $300 a share. Only four advise selling or reducing Tesla shares. Catherine D. Wood, chief executive of ARK Investment Management, which is bullish on Tesla, says part of Tesla’s appeal is that some investors think of it as a technology company more than an auto manufacturer. As a result, Ms. Wood said, the huge growth in sales that Tesla predicts is perceived to be more achievable.“The growth numbers are numbers you would expect from a tech company,” she said. “We’re thinking about this as a platform, and believe Tesla is building a platform that others will have trouble keeping up with.”Jessica Caldwell, an auto industry analyst with Edmunds.com, cautions that selling vehicles can be more complex than selling phones or software.“Launching a car is an expensive thing to do,” she said, adding that consumers can also be fickle. Tesla has proven it has a hit with the Model S, but that does not mean other new vehicles are guaranteed the same success.“It’s easy to come out with one good album,” Ms. Caldwell said. “It’s harder to write a second one that resonates.”Advertisement