AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioSFX Entertainment, a company devoted to electronic music festivals, is back on the block after a brutal week on the stock market and a failed takeover bid by the company’s founder, the media executive Robert F. X. Sillerman.SFX announced on Friday that it would pursue “strategic alternatives,” including another takeover bid or a breakup of its assets. The deadline for new offers is Oct. 2. On Thursday, a deadline passed for Mr. Sillerman to submit financing details for his offer of $5.25 a share, which valued the company at $774 million, including debt.But since that offer was made, in May, the company’s stock has plunged and it has reported growing losses. On Thursday, shares of SFX closed at $1.94. In early trading Friday, shares fell more than 20 percent, and they closed down 28 percent.In its announcement on Friday, the company said that it had received “an indication of interest” from an unidentified party, but at a price that was less than Mr. Sillerman’s offer. It added that Mr. Sillerman remained interested in taking SFX private, either alone or with partners, “although also at a lower price” given the drop in its stock value.Last month, the company completed a “go shop” period to seek alternatives to Mr. Sillerman’s bid. The company said then that it received no alternative offers for the whole company, but there had been interest in some of its assets.SFX was founded in 2012 and went public in late 2013, raising $260 million through an initial public offering that helped it acquire dozens of music festivals around the world, among them Electric Zoo, Tomorrowland and Life in Color.Over his career, Mr. Sillerman, 67, has built and sold networks of radio stations and concert promoters, often with well-timed exits that generated profits for himself and his investors. In the first incarnation of SFX Entertainment, during the late 1990s, the company spent $1.2 billion to buy dozens of regional concert promoters across the country; the radio company Clear Channel bought it in 2000 for $4.4 billion.Advertisement