By ANTONY CURRIEAUG. 14, 2015
Goldman Sachs is swapping one too-big-to-fail problem for another. The Wall Street company is buying an online banking platform and $16 billion of deposits from GE Capital. The deal has a number of advantages for Goldman, but it carries plenty of risk.From the perspective of Lloyd Blankfein, the chief executive, it’s a smart move. Granted, the value of the deposits being acquired is tiny compared with the company’s $860 billion in assets. But with $89 billion in deposits already on Goldman’s books, the acquisition means deposits will account for 14 percent of liabilities.That is still less than the 18 percent at its rival Morgan Stanley, which has a large wealth management unit. But every little bit helps: Retail deposits are a cheaper form of financing than bonds. And Goldman clearly intends to attract more customers, either organically or with additional acquisitions.The purchase should keep financial watchdogs happy. They have been pushing for Goldman to expand its deposit base in recent years. That is because in a crisis, bond investors often won’t lend to any companies for a time, whereas only retail banks that are in serious trouble tend to be vulnerable to a run by customers. Financial institutions that are less exposed to capital markets should, therefore, be safer.AdvertisementGoldman and Morgan Stanley both plan to use deposits to finance more loans to wealth management and investment banking clients. Goldman is even preparing to let retail customers and small businesses borrow small amounts. Neither bank has a costly branch network, so the increase in interest income from lending will offer better returns than traditional commercial banks earn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are two problems, though. First, both institutions are essentially investment banks, and as they increase deposits and loans, they begin to resemble more complex mega-banks like Bank of America, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase.Second, they can use federally insured deposits to finance some of their trading, especially in foreign exchange and certain swaps and government bonds, increasing the exposure of retail customers to capital markets.AdvertisementNone of this will happen overnight, of course. Goldman had just $32 billion of loans outstanding at the end of June, compared with JPMorgan’s $791 billion. But it is simplistic to think that shifting an investment bank’s financing to deposits will end up reducing systemic risk.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.