By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 14, 2015
The activist investor Nelson Peltz has emerged as the biggest shareholder in the food service company Sysco after buying a $1.6 billion stake in it.Mr. Peltz’s $10 billion hedge fund, Trian Fund Management, took a 7.1 percent stake in the company, which supplies food to school canteens, hotels and restaurants, according to a filing made on Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.The news sent shares in Sysco up by nearly 7 percent in afternoon trading.Trian has held discussions with senior executives at Sysco about the company’s operations, capital structure, its corporate governance and the structure of the board, the hedge fund said in its filing. In discussions with the company, Trian said Sysco had a competitive advantage but that its financial performance had “underperformed relative to its potential.”The hedge fund said Sysco should “adopt strategic and operating initiatives to improve operating margins, enhance working capital efficiency, consider the use of prudent amounts of incremental leverage to increase the amount of capital returned to shareholders, and take steps to better align management compensation with corporate performance,” according to the filing.AdvertisementMr. Peltz acquires stakes in publicly listed companies that he thinks are undervalued, building up large enough positions to agitate for change. The firm has rattled the boards of other food companies like PepsiCo and Mondelez International.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Charlie Wilson, a spokesman for Sysco, said Friday that the company “welcomes collaborative discussions with investors,” adding that it “recently engaged with Trian and expect to continue a constructive dialogue.”“We believe Sysco is extremely well positioned to execute our strategy in a manner that will support the success of our customers, profitably grow our business and improve our return on invested capital,” Sysco said in an emailed statement.AdvertisementThis year, Sysco halted a planned $3.5 billion takeover of US Foods after a ruling by a United States federal judge halted the merger on grounds that it would lead to higher prices and worse service for its customers. Instead, it announced plans to buy back $3 billion worth of shares.A version of this article appears in print on August 15, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Peltz Fund Buys Stake in Sysco.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.