AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromAnother stalwart of the fast-food scene is opening a store in Manhattan, not too far away from Chick-fil-A’s first full-service outpost in the city.A sign for Arby’s, famous for its sandwiches made from paper-thin roast beef, is going up Wednesday in Midtown, on 40th Street and Eighth Avenue, the same day the company announced that sales in its stores open at least one year jumped 9.6 percent in the quarter that ended Sept. 30.That’s more than 7 percentage points higher than the average comparable-store sales of some 40 fast-food restaurants tracked by the NPD Group, a consumer research firm.“Over half our sales growth came through traffic growth, which I’m particularly pleased with because traffic is the elusive element in our industry right now,” said Paul Brown, chief executive of Arby’s Restaurant Group. The New York store is expected to open in a few weeks.The company, based in Atlanta, is majority-owned by the Roark Capital Group together with Wendy’s, which retained an 18.5 percent stake when it sold Arby’s to the private equity firm. Roark also owns restaurant chains like Hardee’s, Cinnabon and Carvel.As a privately-held business, Arby’s isn’t required to report earnings, but investment analysts say it is profitable. Mr. Brown said the company was on track to generate $4 billion in sales across some 3,400 stores by 2018.It has had a good year in 2015, posting strong same-store sales each quarter. The company has been working to become more of a deli, offering a wider variety of proteins in a wider variety of sandwiches, and this year, it started renovating its stores. About 160 stores will be refurbished by the end of the year, Mr. Brown said.While Chick-fil-A, the fast-food juggernaut known for its chicken sandwiches and conservative values, is opening in New York for the first time, Arby’s had a store in the Manhattan Mall food court, which closed in 2008. The chain started in Georgia and spread to other Southern states and nationally, particularly in the Midwest and Texas.In the third quarter, Arby’s special promotions — like a $4.99 “loaded” Italian sub and brown sugar bacon, which could be added to some sandwiches — helped pump up sales, Mr. Brown said. Last month, Arby’s came out with sliders, small versions of its sandwiches that it sold for $1 apiece initially. It sold 29 million of the little sandwiches, which are now a menu staple at a higher price.This month, Arby’s is offering sliders, small drinks, small fries or a small shake for a dollar apiece from 2-5 p.m. in most of its shops. “That’s a time of day that’s slow for us and most other fast-food restaurants,” Mr. Brown said. “It’s increasing business then for us, and also bringing a younger customer.”Advertisement