AdvertisementSupported byBy Ashley SouthallA technical glitch at an air traffic control center in Northern Virginia disrupted flights along the East Coast for hours on Saturday, causing far-reaching delays and cancellations, federal regulators and airlines said.The disruption was caused by an automation problem at the Federal Aviation Administration’s air traffic control center in Leesburg, Va., a suburb of Washington, the air safety regulator said in a statement. The glitch affected flights into and out of New York and Washington, leading to delays, cancellations and reroutings.Around noon, airlines and airport authorities began warning passengers of a technical problem at the center, which handles high-altitude military and civilian air traffic for a region that includes Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, Reagan National Airport in Washington and Dulles International Airport in Northern Virginia.Shortly after 4 p.m., the F.A.A. announced that the issue had been resolved and said that it was working with airlines to resume normal operations. Officials were still trying to diagnose the cause of the glitch, the agency said in a follow-up statement.Officials said they did not think the glitch was the result of an accident or a hacking. They did not say how many flights or passengers were affected by the disruption.American Airlines said on Twitter that an issue with air traffic control was affecting all airlines’ East Coast flights and advised passengers to plan accordingly. Southwest Airlines advised passengers on Twitter to rebook their flights.Passengers at airports in New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Miami and Tampa experienced delays ranging from 15 minutes to more than an hour on Saturday afternoon, according to Flight Aware. But the pain was sharpest at Dulles, where delays lasted for more than three hours.Online, passengers reported feelings of helplessness and frustration as they waited in long lines at the airport and in telephone queues for customer service. Cody Damon, of Boston, posted an image of a failed attempt to reroute a Southwest flight for his mother, who was returning home through Baltimore.“My mom is still waiting in line at BWI. Reading these tweets doesn’t make me feel confident she will arrive in BOS,” he said, using the airport codes for Baltimore and Boston. “I’m going to book Amtrak before everyone else figures out there is a 10:40 p.m. train headed north tonight.”Advertisement