
Applied Science By                     
PHYLLIS KORKKI

AUG. 15, 2015
Innovation isn’t all about eureka moments. In fact, the road to creative breakthroughs is paved with mundane, workaday tasks. That’s the message of a recent study that might as well be titled “In Praise of Tedium.”In the study, researchers sought to examine how extended periods of free time affect innovation. To do this, they analyzed activity on Kickstarter, the crowdfunding website, in nearly 6,000 American cities. Kickstarter has proved to be a kind of petri dish for researchers who study innovation, said Ajay Agrawal, a management professor at the University of Toronto and one of the paper’s authors. (Its other authors are Christian Catalini of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Avi Goldfarb of the University of Toronto.)Over a period of about nine months, the researchers found a sharp increase in the number of new projects posted during the first few days of school break periods. The spike, they suggest, is tied to people having more time to perform the administrative aspects of Kickstarter projects — working on a manufacturing plan, say, or setting up a rewards schedule. While people may be using some stretches of free time to nurture those much lauded light bulb moments, the process of innovation also appears to require time to carry out execution-oriented tasks that are not particularly creative but still necessary to transform an idea into a product, the study indicates.The lesson is that innovation is not just about invention, Professor Agrawal said. It’s about the gritty parts in between, too.AdvertisementResearchers did not go so far as to say that time spent doing noncreative tasks benefits creativity during other periods, but Professor Agrawal said this could be true and is an idea worthy of further study.Although the study focused on activity during college breaks, the findings may have relevance for companies that have enacted — or are thinking of enacting — “slack time” policies that allow employees to take time away from their daily tasks to work on their own projects.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Most companies these days claim to be very pro-innovation,” Professor Agrawal said. But they may need to adopt a more nuanced view of what that actually means. Moving innovation forward requires effort and time not directly related to the idea itself, he said, and “there is clearly some balance needed between structured time and unstructured time.”Regardless, precious few innovations become successful — a reality that employers need to accept if they embrace “slack time.”“The big ideas come from a very small fraction of people, but it’s very hard to predict in advance who those people will be,” Professor Agrawal said.Advertisement“The bet that organizations need to make is that the value from those few people who have the very big ideas will be so worthwhile that they’re willing to give everybody a certain amount of ‘slack time,’ ” he said.A version of this article appears in print on August 16, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Good Ideas Need Time for Tedious Legwork  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »