By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 16, 2015
Some of the nation’s biggest retailers report earnings this week, including Walmart and Home Depot, which announce second-quarter results on Tuesday, and Target, whose announcement is on Wednesday. Walmart has invested heavily in its stores, as well as in its online business and work force, as part of a bid to overcome a prolonged decline in sales and market share. Still, analysts do not expect big results soon. On the other hand, Home Depot, the home improvement retailer, has been riding a recovery in the housing market to sales gains, and analysts expect it to book a solid quarter. Also reporting this week are TJX on Tuesday; Staples, Lowe’s and American Eagle Outfitters on Wednesday; and Foot Locker on Friday. —Hiroko TabuchiOn Tuesday, the Commerce Department will report data on new home construction in July. Most analysts are expecting the number to rise again. A spurt of new apartment complexes helped housing starts rise 9.8 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.17 million homes in June. Summer weather is generally always preferred to winter’s freeze for breaking ground, and economists say the steady decline in the unemployment rate and historically low mortgage rates are encouraging builders. —Patricia CohenThe Federal Reserve is poised to raise its benchmark interest rate as soon as its next meeting in mid-September. Some officials, however, still harbor misgivings. An account of the Fed’s most recent meeting in late July, which the central bank plans to publish on Wednesday, is likely to describe the extent of those concerns. Investors will look for signs that the Fed, headed by Janet L. Yellen, may once again hesitate before raising its benchmark rate. —Binyamin AppelbaumOn Wednesday, the Labor Department will release the latest figures for consumer prices. Analysts expect a slight uptick for July as housing costs, hotel room rates and possibly health care costs have shifted upward. Overall consumer prices have risen just 0.1 percent during the past year. Inflation has been running well below the Federal Reserve’s target of 2 percent, but any rise in consumer prices contributes to the case for the bank to begin raising interest rates in September from their near-zero levels. Retail sales rebounded in July, although, as the Labor Department reported on Friday, producer prices rose by just 0.2 percent last month, a slowdown from June’s 0.4 percent bump. —Patricia CohenGreece must make a critical repayment of 3.2 billion euros, or $3.6 billion, to the European Central Bank by Thursday or face a default. The government in Athens is planning to pay for the reimbursement from a new €86 billion, or $95 billion, loan deal that eurozone finance ministers approved on Friday. —Liz AldermanHewlett-Packard will report earnings for the next-to-last quarter before it breaks up into two companies on Nov. 1. Much of Thursday’s report will focus on that division, which will create one company largely built on personal computers and printing, and another focused on software and systems for business computing, whose chief executive will be Meg Whitman. Chiefly, investors will want to know about job functions, personnel reductions and cost controls. Effects are being felt ahead of the earnings: On Friday, Moody’s downgraded HP’s credit rating on debt that will be held by the PC business, citing a tough market. —Quentin HardyA version of this article appears in print on August 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.