By JOHN KOBLINAUG. 16, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  The two-plus weeks of the Television Critics Association’s media tour, which wrapped up late last week, gives networks, cable channels and streaming services an opportunity to preview coming shows and to tackle questions about the uncertain future of television.TV is better than ever, so everyone says, and there are more shows than ever. But how do the networks and services (and the talent) actually make money and find a way to get their shows in front of viewers who have limited time and more choice than ever?Here are some of the highlights from the final week of the tour:HULUAs the streaming service begins to expand its original programming, its biggest offering is nothing new: “The Mindy Project.” Fox canceled the show after its third season because of low ratings, but Hulu swooped in and gave it new life and a fourth season. Ike Barinholtz, a writer and actor on the show, said streaming services provided a certain freedom that the networks do not, particularly for comedy. “If Tina sold ‘30 Rock’ this year, I don’t think it would be on a network,” he said. “I think it would be on streaming. I think the same thing goes for ‘Parks & Rec.’ ”And though the language can be bluer on a streaming service, Mr. Barinholtz said, the writers are being careful with how much they take advantage of that freedom. “If we really changed the show too much and made it, you know, more risqué and put it more on a tilt towards stuff you might find on HBO or Showtime, I think we would maybe turn off some of our core viewers,” he said.AdvertisementThat core viewer? “Our demo is Stephen Colbert’s daughter,” he said. “You know what I mean? Like young women that are going to run the country one day.”AdvertisementEpisodes on Hulu are also going to come out weekly, instead of Netflix’s model of offering a full season at once. Nearly everyone associated with Hulu applauded the decision, including the show’s star, Mindy Kaling. “Maybe it’s getting old fashioned, but I love a Christmas episode airing in December,” she said. Her show begins Sept. 15.CBSThe biggest event of the week was Stephen Colbert speaking about his new late-night show for the first time, but CBS News quietly made news on its own. At next year’s Republican and Democratic conventions, it will dispense with the decades-old tradition of the networks renting skyboxes high above the stadium or arena floor. The CBS News president, David Rhodes, said he didn’t want to bother “spending a lot of money to air-condition a skybox” and instead will apply those resources toward additional reporters on the ground. He later said his budget had not been cut.“If on the Republican side there is some kind of brokered convention, you want to have your researchers and your energies on the ground, because that’s the only way you’re going to be able to cover that fight,” added John Dickerson, the host of “Face the Nation.”SHOWTIME“Twin Peaks” begins shooting again next month, and Patti Smith’s “Just Kids” will turn into a limited series. But Showtime’s president, David Nevins, also discussed “Homeland,” entering its fifth season after a critical rebound year. (It received an Emmy nomination for best drama.) The show will take place in Berlin this year, and apparently its ambition has not diminished, as the season after this one will follow these themes: Russia and Putin, Charlie Hebdo, Edward Snowden and ISIS. “There’s a lot of life left in ‘Homeland,’ ” Mr. Nevins said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Showtime also picked up a comedy series produced by Jim Carrey, “I’m Dying Up Here,” about the 1970s comedy club scene in Los Angeles. The network will continue to expand documentaries (“The interesting thing about documentaries is they also can make news,” Mr. Nevins said, without mentioning HBO’s “The Jinx,” about the real estate scion Robert Durst) and is offering a college football version of “Hard Knocks” on Notre Dame college football.NBCNBC is officially in the hunt for a new “Celebrity Apprentice” host who’s not Donald Trump, and Jimmy Fallon is staying with the network through 2021. After the success of “The Sound of Music” and the mixed results of “Peter Pan Live!” NBC will offer another live musical this December: “The Wiz.” The cast will include Queen Latifah, Mary J. Blige, Ne-Yo and Common. The chairman of NBC Entertainment, Robert Greenblatt, described himself as a “live junkie,” which is one of the reasons he is making Neil Patrick Harris’s new variety show, “Best Time Ever.”Mr. Harris said the show would be even more expansive than a typical singing-and-dancing variety show, but he was mum on details. “We’re holding a lot of cards close to our vest because that’s what’s going to make it fun to watch live,” he said. He did say that Reese Witherspoon would be the show’s first guest announcer.And after more than two weeks at the Television Critics Association’s media tour, as producers and stars tried to sell their shows in the most dignified fashion possible, Siobhan Greene, an executive producer of “Best Time Ever,” didn’t bother.AdvertisementShe repeatedly said, “This is the show,” and the laughter of a lot of exhausted reporters and critics did not diminish her zeal.“It’s eight one-hours of, I hope, absolute entertainment perfection where they’re going to be gagging for more at the end,” she said. “I’m telling you now.”That’s one way to do it.A version of this article appears in print on August 17, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘The Mindy Project’ Is Revived on Hulu; CBS News Makes News.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.