AUG. 16, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.09 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.24 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:TUESDAYChesterfield County, Va., $55.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Portland, Ore., $403.9 million of sewer system revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Topeka, Kan., $56.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKArkansas Development Finance Authority, $63 million of Baptist Health health care revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementContra Costa, Calif., Water District, $53.5 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementDistrict of Columbia, $143.4 million of Southwest Waterfront project revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Hillsborough County, Fla., Aviation Authority, $386 million of airport revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $400 million of University of Chicago revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Indiana Bond Bank, $110.9 million of taxable school severance refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Iowa Finance Authority, $81.1 million of single-family mortgage bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kansas Department of Transportation, $185.8 million of highway refinancing revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Lancaster, Tex., Independent School District, $58.2 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Lawrenceville, Ga., Building Authority, $55.3 million of revenue bonds. Raymond James.Louisiana, $73.7 million of unclaimed property special revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $290 million of CareGroup revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Michigan Finance Authority, $245 million of City of Detroit financial recovery income tax revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.AdvertisementMississippi Development Bank, $62.3 million of special obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Port of Morrow, Ore., $100 million of Bonneville Cooperation Project No. 3 transmission facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $109 million of College of New Jersey revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Convention Center Development Corporation, $650 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Northwest Independent School District, Tex., $70.1 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Bosc.Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $135.6 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, $750 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.Riviera Beach, Fla., $57.2 million of taxable public improvement revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.South Carolina, $52.2 million of Piedmont Municipal Power Agency electric revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Sumter, S.C., $51.9 million of waterworks and sewer refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Nueces River Authority, Tex., $62 million of water supply facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Chicago, $150 million of taxable fixed-rate bonds. Barclays Capital.Yonkers, $140 million of debt securities. Roosevelt & Cross.A version of this article appears in print on August 17, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.