
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

AUG. 16, 2015
Jean-Marc Mansvelt is chief executive of the luxury jeweler and watchmaker Chaumet, a division of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton.Q. It is said that leaders are born, not made. Do you think you were a leader even as a child?A. Not really. But from early on I liked to debate, spend time in discussion, exchanging views, which is probably why I did well at my first company, L’Oréal. The former chief executive, François Dalle, had invented this concept — “confrontation,” as they called it — which was really about debating ideas, how to express your point of view and your recommendations, being strong but at the same time listening to the others, hearing different arguments in order to find the best solutions for the brand. That’s where I really got my first opportunity to lead a small team.Q. You were educated in France and have a degree from HEC, a leading French business school. What role did your education play in your evolution as a leader?A. The high school system in France encourages you to work alone; there is a real competition against each other to get into those top schools. So when you’ve spent so many years training in that direction, working to push yourself forward and sometimes also protecting yourself to keep that competitive advantage to get in, and then suddenly you arrive and discover it’s not about yourself, alone in the middle of the forest, but bringing the people around you together. And then it’s a shock [laughs].AdvertisementQ. What did you do then?A. I guess there was this bell ringing inside, making me realize I have to change and adapt, or it won’t work. When you do marketing and you develop concepts and products, as I did at L’Oréal, you also have to deal with laboratories, retailers, and suddenly you discover you have to manage the little group around you, but even more difficult, you have to manage people in an environment outside your control. At the end of the day, the question of leadership is not just about the people working under or around you. Even more difficult is how to manage people that have no hierarchical connection to you.AdvertisementQ. What, in your view, is the key to success as a leader?A. First it takes a little bit of time, and you have to accept it won’t happen immediately. It’s a question of building confidence and respect over the months. Second, you have to be humble and respectful, particularly when you are young, yet at the same time stand by your convictions and vision of the world. So you have to balance the two to get what you want. And then finally, I think you need to demonstrate that you can be successful. At the end of the day people are pragmatic: Maybe they like you, maybe they respect you, maybe they are seduced by your ideas, but at the end of the day, either you bring in the goods or you will get the boot.Q. What makes a great leader as opposed to just a good leader?A. I’ve had the great privilege over the years to work with several great leaders, and all of them demonstrated their interest in being knowledgeable about every single aspect of the business. It was not just for show, but a genuine interest in their company and in their people. And they also always demonstrated a high level of exigence on themselves — you can’t follow someone who does not demonstrate by doing.This was particularly the case when I worked at Louis Vuitton [as director of leather goods and accessories] and I had the opportunity to see Bernard Arnault [chairman of LVMH] one afternoon every week and Yves Carcelle [former chairman and chief executive of Louis Vuitton, who died in 2014] almost every day. They put themselves high up there in terms of standards of excellence, in terms of energy, and they were always on the case, questioning and being results-oriented. I admire these people a lot, and for me they are what great leadership is about.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Looking back now, what was the most important lesson you learned from them?A. How to balance the long-term, strategic vision and the operational, day-to-day business. How you need to step back from the daily activity and at the same time keep the contact with the market, clients and stores. It is important to think long-term, particularly in the luxury industry, but at the same time stay in the reality; very much a sort of helicopter.Q. You became chief executive of Chaumet less than a year ago. How are you approaching the new challenges of that role?A. Mr. Arnault is extremely ambitious for Chaumet, and for good reason. He really wants to see it at the right place, at the top, and he would like us to wake up the “Sleeping Beauty” and accelerate. How you implement this? How you make this change when people are used to a certain pace, particularly in an industry where it’s all about long timing? That is the challenge.So I’m trying to be very pragmatic and being very realistic at the same time. I think it’s important to take time first to understand what is working, why certain things are done a certain way before making any decisions. I think it’s very important when you join a company to be humble; you are not God! Of course you don’t want to take too much time either, because people are waiting for your vision and what you want to do, so again, it’s a question of balance.Q. How have your views on leadership changed over time?A. I think there is a lot they don’t teach you in business schools. Yes, you need some technical expertise, but at the end of the day, the most crucial things are the people. So when I hire, I’m looking for people who are full of energy, full of passion, and also people who will be able to work in a team and will be willing to play the collective game. For me it’s very important to build a team where individually everybody is strong but also links well with the others.Q. What advice would you give your 25-year-old self?A. Be yourself. Don’t try to be someone different.A version of this article appears in print on August 17, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »