AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonWhen Payam Tabibian, who is known as Peter, sketched his idea for a hamburger restaurant name and logo on a napkin a decade ago, he never thought that his distinctive Z-Burger trademark would be at the center of a legal fight.He registered the 1950s-style red, white and yellow logo in 2007, before he even opened his first fast-food restaurant the next year in a reviving Washington neighborhood. Mr. Tabibian, 42, who immigrated to the United States from Iran as a fifth grader in 1982, had operated a vending-machine business and sold neckties from the trunk of his car, but he was always passionate about marketing hamburgers.Beginning as a teenager in Bloomington, Minn., Mr. Tabibian mopped floors at a local Burger King outlet, then, after his family moved to the Washington area, worked at several more Burger Kings and other fast-food outlets, rising to manager along the way.After studying hamburger marketing, he came up with the concept for a lively, accessible store that tied itself to the local community with contests, food giveaways, fund-raisers and happy hours. His marketing pitch: Z-Burger’s hamburger patties are made of a unique meat blend, the buns are specially baked, the fries are doubly cooked and the milkshakes are extra-rich.His first restaurant was an immediate hit, attracting students from nearby American University. Two years ago, the place drew public praise when it gave free food to federal workers who were furloughed from their jobs during government budget cutbacks.Mr. Tabibian, of Great Falls, Va., began expanding, adding stores in Maryland and at other locations in Washington. He worked 80 to 100 hours a week managing the quality of the food and service at the restaurants.A couple of years after its 2008 start, the burger chain — which Mr. Tabibian operated with two partners, the brothers Mohammad and Ebrahim Esfahani — had grown to six locations. He had met Mohammad Esfahani while installing a gumball machine at one of the restaurants he had worked at earlier.But when Mr. Tabibian fell out with his partners last year, they wound up in court, wrangling over control of the Z-Burger name and trademarks.That type of legal clash is far from uncommon when measured by the number of trademark filings every year. Businesses are becoming more active in protecting their intellectual property.Nearly 3,200 trademark cases were filed in federal district courts in the 2013 fiscal year, the latest year for which statistics are available, according to FTI Consulting, which tracks such information.Even though trademarks like the Nike swoosh logo and McDonald’s golden arches are widely recognized and help define major industries, the importance of locking in a word, name or symbol that identifies the goods or services is often overlooked.Typically, it is large corporations seeking to protect their market share that try to block smaller ventures from using similar brand names or trademarks. For example, the snack food giant Frito-Lay, a subsidiary of PepsiCo, several years ago challenged Princeton Vanguard, the maker of Pretzel Crisps. Frito-Lay argued that the name “Pretzel Crisps,” which Princeton Vanguard used for its flat crackers, was a generic term that could not be trademarked.Initially, Princeton Vanguard lost the case, after spending an estimated $1 million in legal fees. The trademark appeals body, called the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board, found that Pretzel Crisps was the generic name for a pretzel cracker, not a brand name, as its makers had asserted when they sought to register the name a decade ago.Then, last May, a federal appeals court upset the conventional wisdom that descriptive names like Pretzel Crisps face an uphill battle gaining trademark registration. The court overturned the trademark board’s decision and sent the case back for further review. The outcome will turn on the facts of the case, but often smaller companies are at a disadvantage because their bigger rivals have deeper pockets to fight anything they perceive as infringing on their share of the consumer market.Still, the biggest problem for most businesses is not legal tangles with industry giants, but just finding the time to register and protect their brand while they are starting up and running a growing business. Taking those steps — including hiring an intellectual property specialist, paying for the research to make sure the name is not already in use and filing for a federal trademark — can save money in the long run.“It is very important early on to pick a trademark that’s going to work, and make sure ownership is sewn on,” said James Gibson, law professor at the University of Richmond School of Law.“That’s particularly true if nobody knows who you are and you’re operating in a limited area,” said Professor Gibson, who teaches intellectual property law. “The federal trademark gives you a lot of nationwide rights.”To make sure that business owners have valid trademarks, the United States Patent and Trademark Office provides detailed information on its website, including a video that explains the differences between a trademark — which is a brand name — and patents, copyrights and domain and business names.“A lot of people don’t realize how important this paperwork is,” said Mr. Tabibian. He noted that his five registered trademarks, including Z-Burger, were crucial in establishing that the restaurant was his idea.In their dispute with him, the Esfahani brothers tried to stop Mr. Tabibian from using the Z-Burger brand in advertising or using it in association with any new restaurants he started. They also asked the judge to require Mr. Tabibian to transfer his trademarks to a company they controlled.Mr. Tabibian challenged their claim, and in late August won a federal judge’s preliminary ruling that he was the owner of the trademarks. Mr. Tabibian can continue to use the Z-Burger brand, including to open new restaurants.“I was happy,” Mr. Tabibian said in an interview. “The trademarks belong to me.”The case now returns to court for the judge to determine whether he was an owner of the original restaurants, or just an employee. The judge named a forensic accountant to examine the finances of the six original hamburger locations.Once the forensic accountant’s report is filed, United States District Court Judge Peter J. Messitte will rule on the Esfahanis’ contention that Mr. Tabibian was not a partner entitled to a share of the profits, but simply an employee who never invested his money in the business. Mohammad Esfahani’s lawyer did not return a phone call requesting comment on the case.While the dispute was continuing, Mr. Tabibian opened two more hamburger outlets and started a food truck, and he is planning more restaurants — with different partners.The outcome of the case will make a major difference in his life. When he left his last fast-food industry job, he was making $65,000 a year, but in the years since he began the Z-Burger venture, his annual compensation has been about half that. Until he was locked out of the restaurants last year, he believed his share of the profits was going to pay off the building and other costs that restaurants routinely incur, he said.One Z-Burger store can gross $3 million a year, with $1 million in profits, according to court records. Even divided by three — multiplied by the seven years the chain has existed — a favorable ruling could make a lot of money for Mr. Tabibian.While he has yet to issue his final decision, Judge Messitte, after examining the evidence, concluded: “The idea that Peter Tabibian was not the heart and soul of Z-Burger; absurd.“Of course, he was.”Advertisement