By BROOKS BARNESAUG. 15, 2015
ANAHEIM, Calif. —  The empire is striking back.While insisting they pay little attention to each other, America’s two largest theme park operators, Disney and Universal, have lately been locked in what certainly seems like an arms race. Universal kicked it off in 2010 with a “Harry Potter” mega-expansion. Disney then introduced or announced new “Cars,” “Avatar” and Fantasyland attractions. Universal, which is owned by Comcast, has since upped the ante, spending billions on new rides and resort hotels.Now, Disney is rolling out the heavy artillery: After a few years of aggressive investment in overseas theme parks, principally the $5.5 billion Shanghai Disneyland — leaving an opening in the United States for Universal — Disney on Saturday announced expensive “Star Wars”-themed expansions at its California and Florida resorts.The pair of “Star Wars” lands, each 14 acres in size, will be built at Disneyland here and at Disney’s Hollywood Studios, a down-on-its-luck park that is part of Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla. Hollywood Studios will also get a new “Star Wars”-themed weekend fireworks show and 11 acres of new “Toy Story” rides.Estimated by analysts to cost more than $2 billion, including parking and other infrastructure upgrades, the vast bicoastal expansion — Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, described the “Star Wars” plans as “jaw-dropping” — marks a long-expected effort by Disney to use its parks to capitalize on its 2012 purchase of Lucasfilm.Disney has long dismissed Universal as a challenger. But the bold building plans were, in part, read by analysts as a competitive response to Comcast, which is pouring billions of dollars into its own California and Florida properties, in particular focusing on wildly popular “Harry Potter”-themed attractions.AdvertisementThe movie-focused Hollywood Studios, which in some ways started the Disney-Universal rivalry when it opened in 1989, has been especially at risk from Universal’s surge. Hollywood Studios attracted 10.3 million visitors in 2014, just a 2 percent increase from the previous year, making it the least visited of Disney’s four major parks in Orlando. Nearby Universal Studios handled 8.3 million guests, but that was a 17 percent increase from the year before.Advertisement“It’s hard for us to recommend spending $80-$100 on a park that has so little to offer,” the new edition of “The Unofficial Guide to Walt Disney World” says of Hollywood Studios, calling a trip to the movie-themed Universal “the superior choice.”Disney had no comment on competition with Universal.Robert Niles, editor of the news site Theme Park Insider, said by phone on Sunday that Disney’s announcement should be interpreted as a response to competition in a broad sense. “Sure, they are looking at Potter, but they are also looking at anything that can compete with a Disney vacation,” he said. “They have to create not just a desire to go see, but a passion to go see.”Disney’s theme parks unit, a $15.1 billion annual business that is scrutinized as a consumer confidence bellwether, tends to open new attractions four to six years after announcing them. Disney declined to comment on the timing or anticipated construction costs related to its “Star Wars” announcements.Disney has recently tried to tap the brakes on expectations for the coming film “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” which will restart the movie series after a 10-year dormancy. Analysts expect the film to take in more than $2 billion. “We just want to be careful that the world doesn’t get ahead of us too much in terms of the estimates,” Mr. Iger told analysts on an Aug. 4 call. “We have to take a wait-and-see approach.”But the decision to move forward with “Star Wars” outposts signals both Disney’s long-term belief in its theme park business as a growth engine and its confidence that “The Force Awakens” will be a juggernaut both at the box office and in the retail aisle.Mr. Iger said the new “Star Wars” areas — designed to look like “a remote trading port and one of the last stops before wild space” — would each have two major rides, a battle experience based on elements of “The Force Awakens” and an attraction that will put patrons behind the controls of the Millennium Falcon. There will also be a version of the franchise’s famed Mos Eisley Cantina in each location.Disney hinted that guests would be able to smell “bantha fodder,” a food eaten by tusked creatures in the “Star Wars” films, and taste “blue milk,” an intergalactic drink.AdvertisementMr. Iger made the announcement before a crowd of 7,800 at a biennial gathering of Disney fans here called D23 Expo, which attracted 70,000 people over three days. It was at the last D23 Expo that Disney first signaled “Star Wars” theme park plans; the D23 exhibit hall in 2013 had R2-D2 positioned with boxes of blueprints labeled “Project Orange Harvest.” (“Blue Harvest” was the code name for “The Return of the Jedi” during production in the early 1980s.)Disney has been quietly preparing Disneyland and Hollywood Studios for expansion. Last month, for instance, Disney won a 30-year exemption on ticket taxes from Anaheim in return for a pledge to spend at least $1 billion on new rides and a 5,000-car parking structure. The investment must begin by the end of 2017.In Florida, the 135-acre Hollywood Studios in February tore down a 122-foot sorcerer’s hat (like the one Mickey wore in “Fantasia”) that served as the park’s centerpiece. The park — rushed into construction by Michael D. Eisner, Disney’s former chief executive, to beat the 1990 arrival of Universal — has also closed an array of attractions, including a faux studio back lot tour, the Magic of Disney Animation pavilion and the Legend of Captain Jack Sparrow exhibit.On a recent Monday in July, with the temperature reaching 93 degrees and humidity of nearly 80 percent, visitors roamed the vast, treeless southern end of Hollywood Studios in search of activities, finding few. “We are gearing up for an all-new production,” read the sun-faded marquee on the empty Premiere Theater. “Watch for an exciting new experience coming soon,” said a placard outside another closed venue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Bob Chapek, Disney’s theme park chairman, told D23 Expo attendees that Hollywood Studios would be taken “to a whole new level,” adding that “our ambition is up to the challenge.” The park, which is expected to be renamed, will remain open during “Star Wars” and “Toy Story” construction. (The planned “Toy Story” rides include a Slinky Dog roller coaster and Little Green Men spinning flying saucers.)The Disney-owned Marvel movie brand was conspicuously absent from plans to rehabilitate Hollywood Studios. Although Disney bought Marvel in 2009 for $4 billion, the Florida theme park rights to Marvel characters like Spider-Man, the Hulk and Captain America continue to be held by Universal under a long-term contract.Asked in an interview in July if Universal would ever sell those rights, Thomas L. Williams, Universal’s theme park chairman, answered with one word: “No.”A version of this article appears in print on August 17, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Disney Bulking Up Theme Parks, as Universal Rises .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.