By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAUG. 18, 2015
SAN FRANCISCO — One of the top providers of gene-sequencing technology, Illumina, is teaming up with investors in hopes of buttressing the growing universe of genetic analysis businesses.Illumina and the investment firms Warburg Pincus and Sutter Hill Ventures plan to announce on Tuesday that they have created a new venture named Helix that is meant to serve as a hub for a constellation of analytic businesses.The three are investing about $100 million in Helix, and Illumina’s chief executive, Jay T. Flatley, will serve as the venture’s chairman. Other financial details could not be learned.The creation of the new company, which has been in the works for more than a year, is an unusual move that its backers say is meant to help support the genetic analysis ecosystem. What Helix is not meant to do is favor any particular partner.AdvertisementInstead, Illumina — whose technology underpins companies like 23andMe and Color Genomics — and its fellow investors are hoping to make it easier for third parties to sequence customers’ genes and then provide a host of analytical offerings.AdvertisementThe venture will use Illumina’s technology to sequence customers’ genetic information, and then place that data in the cloud and make it available to partners.“Helix and its founding investors are committed to creating a neutral platform at the highest quality standard that will work with partners to accelerate consumer adoption of genomics,” Mr. Flatley said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Creating a digital hub for customers’ genetic information could also give Illumina a leg up in the business of actually sequencing customers’ DNA. The company competes with rivals like Thermo Fisher Scientific, which bought Life Technologies two years ago for $13.6 billion, and has battled to bring lower-cost sequencing technology to a broadening range of customers.Yet a person with direct knowledge of Helix’s operations, who was not authorized to discuss confidential business plans, said that Illumina was more focused on increasing the market for consumer genetic analyses. Existing customers of Illumina technology will not pay more than they currently do, this person added. Instead, they could potentially get access to more genetic information.In a nod to privacy concerns, Helix will allow customers to choose how their data will be used, this person said. That will include opt-in choices and notifications.Helix’s first partners are the Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine, which will create apps aimed at consumer education (the Mayo Clinic has also invested in the venture), and the Laboratory Corporation of America, which will start by developing analyses for treatable genetic diseases.“We are thrilled to partner with Illumina to transform how consumers interact with their own DNA,” Noah Knauf, a managing director at Warburg Pincus, said in a statement. “We believe that the digitization of the genome will unleash entrepreneurs and developers to create new applications for consumers in a way never before possible.”A version of this article appears in print on August 19, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Genetic Venture.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.