AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas on Monday chose for its new president Robert Steven Kaplan, a former Goldman Sachs executive.Mr. Kaplan, 58, was head of investment banking at Goldman Sachs until leaving in 2006 for a job as a management professor at Harvard Business School. He will succeed Richard Fisher, an outspoken president who left the Fed in March.Mr. Kaplan will take office Sept. 8, in time to participate in a potentially important meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee the following week, when policy makers may decide to raise interest rates for the first time since the financial crisis.He will not vote, however. The presidents of the Fed’s 12 regional reserve banks vote on a rotating basis, and the Dallas Fed does not hold a vote until 2017.The selection of Mr. Kaplan will help to preserve a modicum of academic diversity among senior Fed officials, most of whom hold doctorates in economics. Mr. Kaplan, like Mr. Fisher before him, will become one of the rare exceptions.Mr. Kaplan worked for more than two decades at Goldman Sachs, rising to lead both its investment banking and investment management operations. Such deep Wall Street experience is unusual among Fed officials, and potentially valuable as the Fed aims to orchestrate a smooth return to more normal conditions.At Harvard, Mr. Kaplan wrote two books on leadership. Wall Street analysts described his views on monetary policy and financial regulation as unknown.Renu Khator, chairman of the Dallas Fed board, said in a statement that Mr. Kaplan was chosen as someone who “has a deep understanding of the economy, financial system and monetary policy — yet who also sincerely appreciates the impact decisions made by the Federal Reserve have on people from all walks of life.”But a coalition of community activists criticized what it described as a secretive selection process. The group described the result as one Wall Street insider replacing another, noting that Mr. Kaplan came from Goldman Sachs while Mr. Fisher has taken a job at Barclays.Mr. Kaplan, the group also said, serves on the board of Heidrick & Struggles, a search firm that was hired to find the replacement for Mr. Fisher.“Neither the process nor the result serves the public interest,” Ady Barkan, director of the Center for Popular Democracy’s Fed Up campaign, said in a statement. “The Fed should do much better.”Mr. Kaplan remains a senior director of Goldman Sachs, which the firm describes as an honorary title.In addition to serving on the Fed’s policy-making committee, Mr. Kaplan will oversee about 1,200 employees, including a staff of research economists in Dallas and satellite offices in Houston, El Paso and San Antonio. Reserve banks also help to operate the plumbing of the financial system, including currency distribution, and to regulate local banks, although that work is largely directed by officials in Washington.Mr. Kaplan is an unusual choice for the Dallas job because he has no ties to Texas, something the bank has prized in its choice of past presidents. Mr. Kaplan grew up in Kansas and has spent his adult life mostly in New York and Boston.Advertisement