
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

AUG. 17, 2015
John C. Malone is taking home shopping over the top.Buying Zulily, a flash-sale site for mothers, would increase online revenue at the cable mogul’s QVC broadcast arm to half from about 40 percent. The target’s growth is already slowing quickly, however. And at $2.4 billion, or 38 times estimated 2015 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, the deal reveals the high cost of chasing Amazon.Zulily’s ascent is impressive. It went from a start-up in 2010 to $1.2 billion in revenue last year by selling clothing for mothers and their children at big discounts. It undercuts rivals by offering limited items for a short time. Zulily also hasn’t needed much capital to grow, as it doesn’t carry inventory.The company’s limitations are becoming more visible, however. Top-line growth is projected by analysts to slow to less than 15 percent in 2015 from more than 70 percent last year. The downside of its ordering-on-demand business model means merchandise can take longer to get to customers. Meanwhile, the cost of acquiring new ones is rising and may explain why Zulily is tinkering with a more Amazonian approach that includes easier returns and stocking some items.Plugging Zulily into QVC, part of Mr. Malone’s Liberty Interactive arm, will offer “tens of millions” of dollars of savings on procurement, shipping and the like. That’s not enough to make the acquisition entirely appealing. Even after factoring in these benefits, QVC, which began in 1986 as a television home-shopping network, would be paying about 25 times Ebitda. If QVC can propel Zulily’s overseas expansion and Zulily helps QVC convert more of its graying viewers to online buyers, the deal might hold more promise.At $18.75 a share, Liberty Interactive is paying a 15 percent discount to Zulily’s 2013 initial public offering price of $22. The stock also once surpassed $70. Flash-sale sites, though, have a habit of flaming out. A rival, Fab, went out of business, while Groupon and Gilt Groupe have faded. It’s too easy a business to replicate and too hard to attract new customers and keep old ones coming back. QVC may have got a bargain of sorts, but one that probably wasn’t big enough.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »