AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la Merced and Chad BrayWhen Zulily, the flash-sales site for mothers, began life as a publicly traded company in fall 2013, it found plenty of favor among investors, who pushed its stock up 70 percent on its first trading day.Now, as the online retailer prepares to sell itself to the parent company of QVC, it is in a much humbler state.Zulily’s agreement to sell itself to Liberty Interactive, announced Monday, values the five-year-old company at $2.4 billion, or $18.75 a share in cash and stock. That is 15 percent below where it priced its initial public offering in fall 2013, and less than half of the $37.70 the company’s shares closed at in their first day of trading.Moreover, the deal is only the latest instance of a company going public, then selling itself relatively shortly afterward. Last week, Yodlee, a financial information company, agreed to sell itself to Envestnet less than a year after its initial public offering.And in late July, Vivint Solar announced a deal to merge with a fellow solar power provider, SunEdison, less than 10 months into its life as a public company.The three companies are linked by a common thread: poor performance as new publicly traded concerns. Zulily’s stock had tumbled nearly 67 percent from its debut until Friday, before the deal with Liberty became public.Shares of Vivint had slid 32 percent before the company’s deal with SunEdison was announced. And those in Yodlee had fallen more than 6 percent.Such performance bucks the generally good showings that market debutantes have displayed in recent years. The average return from I.P.O. prices this year has been 10.5 percent, according to data from Renaissance Capital. Not all quick flips have been as troubled. Shares of Kayak, the travel booking site that sold itself for $1.8 billion to Priceline a mere four months after going public, had fluctuated but stayed consistently above their I.P.O. price.For Zulily, the road from exuberant market debut to more muted sale has been paved by sales growth that did not keep pace with the retailer’s past. By the time of its initial offering, the flash-sales site had more than doubled revenue in the first nine months of that year.Such turbocharged growth was particularly unusual for the company, whose products ship in two to three weeks, a long lead time for a retailer.Yet that surge had evaporated by this year, with second-quarter revenue inching up just 4 percent, the company disclosed early this month.Zulily has acknowledged that it had made a mistake, telling The Wall Street Journal that the company had focused too much on attracting new customers who ended up buying only once.Now Zulily is finding a new home in Liberty Interactive, whose QVC — long known as the biggest name in TV-based sales — has been focused on bolstering its e-commerce. Executives at both companies told analysts in a conference call Monday that they viewed the two as taking aim at a similar customer: higher-income women who like to shop, and shop often.Acquiring Zulily would give QVC a chance to bring the flash-sales site’s vendors onto its own platforms, particularly on television.“QVC and Zulily are tremendous businesses with strong management teams,” Michael A. George, QVC’s chief executive, said during the call. “And we want each to remain focused on building their brands and realizing their full potential while we collaborate on those high-value opportunities that will make our combined companies under Liberty much stronger than either could be on its own.”Liberty’s chief executive, Gregory B. Maffei, said in the call that he and his team had watched Zulily and its management for some time. He added euphemistically that, as Zulilly’s valuation “became more realistic for who we were,” he approached the company’s leaders.Under the terms of the deal, which is expected to close by year end, Zulily investors would receive $9.375 in cash and a 0.3098 share of the QVC tracking stock for each Zulily share they own.After the deal, Zulily will continue to be based in Seattle and run by its current management team, including Darrell Cavens, its chief executive. The company’s chairman, Mark Vadon, will join Liberty Interactive’s board. Hiroko Tabuchi contributed reporting.Advertisement