AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — A remarkable period of growth ended at Volkswagen on Wednesday when the carmaker reported its first quarterly loss in at least 15 years and began the costly process of absorbing the expense of fixing millions of cars designed to cheat on emissions tests.The day also was the end of a defining era of Volkswagen ambition. Matthias Müller, the new chief executive, signaled that the company would no longer be focused on becoming the world’s largest carmaker.He said on Wednesday that sales would cease to be an overriding measure of success. In another shift, he also said that top executives at company headquarters in Wolfsburg, Germany, who had been criticized for micromanaging, would no longer get involved in details of product design.Mr. Müller’s statement represents a clear break from his predecessor, Martin Winterkorn, who resigned in late September after the Environmental Protection Agency in the United States disclosed that Volkswagen diesel cars were equipped with software that could detect when a car was being tested and crank up pollution controls.After he became chief executive in 2007, Mr. Winterkorn declared his determination to make Volkswagen the world’s largest carmaker, overtaking Toyota. He was known for his intense attention to the technical fine points of the vehicles the company produced.“A lot of things were subordinated to the desire to be faster, higher, larger,” Mr. Müller said in a conference call with analysts and reporters on Wednesday. He also said, “I have no intention of intervening in the details of product design.”Mr. Winterkorn’s management style, coupled with a relentless drive for growth, is cited by some critics of the company as a contributing factor to the scandal by impeding open communication and perhaps causing subordinates to cheat rather than admit failure.The earnings report on Wednesday provided a first taste of the financial cost to Volkswagen of its past behavior. The company said it had a net loss of $1.84 billion in the third quarter as it set aside a huge sum to help cover the expected damage from the company’s emissions-cheating scandal.It was the first quarterly loss in as long as anyone could remember. A company spokesman said that internal records went back only to 2001. Previously, Volkswagen did not report quarterly earnings. The loss, totaling 1.67 billion euros, was in contrast to a profit of €2.97 billion in the third quarter of 2014.Volkswagen subtracted €6.7 billion from profit to cover the expense of recalling and repairing about nine million cars in Europe and the United States equipped with the illegal software.That sum does not cover the cost of fines Volkswagen is likely to have to pay to the E.P.A. and to other authorities around the world. Volkswagen also faces hundreds of lawsuits from customers who say the company sold them cars based on a false promise.“It is still far too early to calculate the cost of legal measures,” Frank Witter, the chief financial officer, said in the conference call on Wednesday.The company said it expected profit for full-year 2015 “to be down significantly” from 2014. Volkswagen shares rose on Wednesday, but the stock is down more than 20 percent since the emissions cheating became known on Sept. 18.During tests, the Volkswagen diesel engines with illegal software make full use of pollution controls and can pass emissions tests. But during regular operation, the engines emit many times the allowed amount of nitrogen oxide.Because the deception became known less than two weeks before the end of the most recent reporting period, the third-quarter results provide only a glimpse of the fallout. Volkswagen executives said on Wednesday that they had not seen any signs that the damage to the company’s reputation from the scandal had kept buyers away from showrooms. But they added they were closely watching for possible negative effects in the months to come.Volkswagen said it had an operating loss of €3.5 billion in the quarter, compared with an operating profit of €3.2 billion a year earlier. The loss was partly offset by €1.5 billion in profit the company received for selling its nearly 20 percent stake in the Japanese vehicle maker Suzuki in September.Sales in the quarter rose 5.3 percent to €51.5 billion, Volkswagen said, largely because of gains by its Audi, Bentley and Porsche divisions and favorable currency movements. However, the number of vehicles sold slipped to 2.35 million in the quarter from 2.44 million a year earlier.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.The recent sales data showed that Volkswagen was vulnerable even before the scandal. Sales have been slumping in China, the company’s largest market, and other important markets like Brazil, which is in a severe recession.Shortly after the conference call Wednesday, Mr. Müller joined Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany on a trip to China. He was expected to brief her on Volkswagen’s response to the scandal.Volkswagen this year briefly surpassed Toyota in the number of cars produced, but has since slipped back to No. 2. Mr. Müller said that while size was important — it allowed car companies to spread costs of development over more vehicles — Volkswagen would put more emphasis on factors like customer satisfaction and profitability.“The point is not whether we sell 100,000 more or less than a major competitor,” he said.Mr. Müller said that Volkswagen was conducting its own investigation of how the emissions cheating occurred, but provided no new details on the progress of the inquiry. “We need to find out the truth and learn from it,” he said.Volkswagen had advertised that its “clean diesel” motors were environmentally responsible while delivering excellent fuel economy and performance. But the deceptive software made that economy and performance possible only by allowing the engines to emit up to 40 times the allowable limit of nitrogen oxide, an air pollutant that can be harmful to lungs.The German government has ordered Volkswagen to recall 8.5 million vehicles in Europe with the software, and the company has said it will repair an additional 500,000 in the United States at no cost to customers. But it remains unclear how the company can make the cars compliant with air quality regulations without also hurting performance and fuel economy.Any fix that hurts the cars’ resale value will provide ammunition to disgruntled customers and their lawyers.Mr. Müller has raised the possibility of job cuts because of the cost of the scandal and has said Volkswagen will cut spending on new projects. The company employs 614,000 people worldwide.Analysts say that Volkswagen, which said on Wednesday it had €28 billion in cash on hand, can probably absorb the financial blow of the scandal. But spending on crucial new technologies like self-driving cars could suffer at a time when the industry faces potential new competition from Google and Apple. Both companies have been working on car-related projects.“The financial burden from the diesel crisis is enormous but manageable,” Mr. Witter, the chief financial officer, said.Advertisement