AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Daniel IndiviglioAmerica’s new bank merger and acquisition powerhouse is leaving its rivals for dead. The regional lender BB&T’s $1.8 billion swoop for National Penn Bancshares is its fourth deal in a year.The acquisition makes financial sense and is more proof the Federal Reserve supports industry mergers. Yet few peers are following the lead of BB&T, which is based in North Carolina.A hiatus in industry deal-making was understandable in the years after the financial crisis. The Fed took a lot more time approving deals and started demanding improvements to risk-management and anti-money-laundering systems. That’s why M&T Bank’s 2012 purchase of Hudson City Bancorp has yet to win approval.BB&T has shown that consolidation is back on the agenda. Assuming that its chief executive, Kelly King, secures regulatory approval for this latest deal, he will have added $30 billion in assets and $24 billion in deposits since this time last year. That will leave BB&T with $220 billion in assets.Mr. King is not losing his discipline, either. Expected cost cuts of $65 million a year are now worth $400 million to shareholders, once taxed, capitalized and discounted for the two years it will take to realize them. That certainly eclipses the $270 million premium Mr. King’s bank is paying, even after folding in $100 million in merger costs.The deal also looks savvy strategically. It moves BB&T up to fourth place by market share in Pennsylvania, the nation’s sixth-largest state by population.This all ought to be catnip to peers, whether large regional banks such as PNC Bank and SunTrust Bank or the likes of KeyCorp and Comerica, with less than $100 billion in assets. So far, though, only the CIT Group has joined BB&T in hunting prey.It may well be that several of them are on the prowl already and just a bit slower to pounce. BB&T, after all, has more experience – at least, judging by its executives’ bragging that the bank has closed 80 deals in the last 30 years. The longer its rivals stay on the sidelines, though, the more it may look as if they fear their that targets, or the Fed, may reject them.Daniel Indiviglio is Washington columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement