By BEN PROTESS and JESSICA SILVER-GREENBERGAUG. 18, 2015
When New York State’s financial regulator challenged the independence of a top Wall Street consultant, the Promontory Financial Group, the firm threatened to sue, vowing to “litigate the matter and defend our firm against this regulatory overreach.”On Tuesday, Promontory tried a different approach: compromise.Promontory — whose founder and chief executive, Eugene A. Ludwig, is a former top banking regulator and a law school friend of Bill Clinton — agreed to admit that its actions on behalf of a big British bank did not meet current consulting requirements, the New York State regulator announced.The statement, while a sharp contrast from Promontory’s threat of litigation, was not as sweeping an acknowledgment as the New York regulator originally sought.And in another indication of compromise, Promontory agreed voluntarily to abstain from certain consulting arrangements in New York for six months, a shorter period than once expected. The firm also agreed to pay a $15 million penalty.AdvertisementThe deal, which caps a two-year investigation that cast a pall over the firm, coalesced over the last two days after Mr. Ludwig agreed to revisit a narrow admission of what went wrong in the firm’s work for the British bank Standard Chartered, people briefed on the matter said. Mr. Ludwig, these people said, traveled from Washington to New York on Monday to negotiate the deal in person.AdvertisementIn a statement, Mr. Ludwig said, “We are glad to have resolved this matter,” adding, “We remain committed to quality and integrity in carrying out our work.”Anthony J. Albanese, the acting head of the regulatory agency, the Department of Financial Services, said in a statement, “We are pleased that Promontory has agreed to resolve this matter and to work constructively with the department moving forward to help strengthen integrity within the consulting industry.”The case carried broad significance for the consulting industry and the regulator. A lawsuit from Promontory would have been the first significant challenge to the New York regulator’s authority, and a possible threat to its power.The Department of Financial Services, an agency created just four years ago, has quickly gained a reputation as a thorn in the side of Wall Street. It often extracts hundreds of millions of dollars from banks that pay far less to settle with federal authorities.A Promontory lawsuit carried risks for the firm as well. It could have alienated regulators with no guarantee that the firm would prevail in court. A settlement, while a blow to its reputation, offers closure for the firm.But for the broader industry, the settlement is the latest in a series of black marks. The Department of Financial Services has already taken aim at Promontory’s main competitors, PricewaterhouseCoopers and Deloitte, accusing them of failing to exhibit independence when reviewing certain bank misdeeds.The cases strike at the heart of the consulting industry’s business model. The New York regulator has questioned how the consultants can review bank misconduct — and report their findings to regulators and prosecutors — when they are paid by the banks themselves.Advertisement“The department will continue to aggressively investigate and address conflicts of interest at consulting firms,” Mr. Albanese said in his statement.PwC and Deloitte, unlike Promontory, settled their cases without the public threat of litigation. PwC paid $25 million and agreed to a two-year voluntary suspension from certain consulting arrangements. Deloitte paid $10 million and accepted a one-year abstention. Both admitted that their conduct did not meet certain regulatory standards.Promontory resisted such an acknowledgment.It offered to pay the regulator a larger fine — $20 million instead of $15 million — in lieu of making an admission. When that didn’t work, Promontory appealed to Gov. Andrew Cuomo and asked that the agency recuse itself from its own investigation.Finally, the agency recently released a scathing report that accused the firm of lacking independence in its work for Standard Chartered, which was under investigation on suspicion of processing transactions on behalf of Iran and other countries under sanctions. In turn, Promontory promised to sue the agency.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Promontory will seek a stay of the N.Y.D.F.S. action in New York State Supreme Court,” the firm announced on the day that the New York regulator released its report.That report effectively suspended Promontory from consulting for misbehaving banks. Using an obscure state law that provides regulators the authority to withhold confidential documents that consultants need to advise a bank, the agency said in its report that it “intends to deny all such requests until further notice.”But for weeks, Promontory’s threat of a lawsuit lingered without any action. It is unclear whether Promontory ever actually intended to sue, or if the threat was meant more as a negotiating tactic.Paul Shechtman, a lawyer for Promontory, called Mr. Albanese on Friday to inform him that the threat was real but that the firm was still open to negotiations, the people briefed on the matter said. When Mr. Albanese declined to negotiate unless Promontory admitted to wrongdoing in regard to Standard Chartered, the conversation broke down.But Sunday afternoon, Mr. Albanese spoke with another adviser to Promontory. This time, the adviser signaled a willingness to revisit the issue of admissions.AdvertisementOn Monday morning, Mr. Ludwig and several advisers traveled to New York to meet with Mr. Albanese, according to the people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.The meeting, held in the agency’s boardroom, which looks out on the Statue of Liberty, lasted only two hours. By early afternoon, the participants had a tentative deal that formed the basis of the settlement announced on Tuesday.While Promontory agreed to acknowledge that it fell short of the agency’s current standards for consultants, it persuaded the agency to drop a demand for harsher admissions.“Throughout the negotiations Promontory insisted that it would not admit it lacked independence, integrity and autonomy,” Mr. Shechtman said, referring to the words in previous settlements with PwC and Deloitte. “The matter did not settle until it was agreed those words weren’t required.”Matt Anderson, a spokesman for the agency, noted that “the current standards referenced in the agreement require that the firm exercise independent judgment.”For two years, Promontory has defended the quality of its work for Standard Chartered. The regulator did not accuse Promontory of a legal violation and found only two transactions worth about $300,000 — out of roughly 133,000 worth some $590 billion — that Promontory failed to flag for the authorities.But the investigation centered not so much on mistakes as on whether Promontory’s work for Standard Chartered was truly independent. Although Standard Chartered hired Promontory to conduct an “independent” assessment of the misconduct, and then detail its findings to government authorities, the regulator pointed to internal emails that called that independence into question.For example, in one email cited in the New York report, a lawyer for Standard Chartered pushed Promontory to make part of a presentation “more bland,” a request that the firm granted.On another occasion, the bank’s lawyers asked Promontory to remove a portion of an interim report because it referred to conduct that regulators were not yet aware of and might “draw questions which we’re not yet prepared to answer.” A Promontory employee concurred, saying: “Let’s do it. We’ve come this far, we might as well go for the three-pointer.”A version of this article appears in print on August 19, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Promontory Settlement Caps Inquiry by Regulator.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.