By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAUG. 18, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Home builders started on single-family houses in July at the fastest pace since the recession began in late 2007.Housing starts rose 0.2 percent in July to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.21 million homes, the Commerce Department said on Tuesday. Construction of single-family houses accounted for all of the gains, shooting up 12.8 percent last month to the highest rate since December 2007.The increase pointed to a housing market that has strengthened for much of the year, reflecting an increased sense of financial security for many Americans because of steady job growth, modest layoffs and relatively low mortgage rates. Continued gains in housing would help extend the current economic expansion.“More housing starts means more construction jobs as well as confidence from real estate developers that people will be buying,” said Tara Sinclair, a George Washington University professor and chief economist for job site Indeed. “We’ll know the economy is really hitting stride when we see these starts in the range of 1.5 million.”AdvertisementTotal housing starts have risen 11.3 percent year-to-date. The market is attracting both buyers and renters; starts for apartment buildings have climbed 12.2 percent this year despite last month’s drop.AdvertisementThe improved housing market has already benefited sales at supply stores such as Home Depot, the home improvement retailer. The company reported on Tuesday that sales at United States stores open at least one year had climbed 5.7 percent in the second quarter, pushing its stock to a record high of $123 in morning trading.But Tuesday’s report also showed the potential limits of further gains from new construction as the number of building permits fell, a possible sign that demand will need to continue improving to further the pace of homebuilding.Approved building permits decreased 16.3 percent in July to an annual rate of 1.12 million, after hitting an eight-year high in June. The decrease most likely reflects some pullback after months of gains and was caused primarily by a sharp plunge in permits to construct apartment complexes.Home buyers and renters have crowded into the housing market this year, pushing up prices to levels that have worsened affordability. Builders have relieved some of this financial pressure by ramping up construction, yet the increases in housing starts and building permits still lags the surging demand.
            New private housing starts and permits authorized during the month, at a seasonally adjusted annual pace.        JULYStartsPermits1,206,0001,119,0001.6 million1.20.80.40’14’15AUG. 18, 2015
Purchases of new homes are 21.2 percent higher through the first six months of this year than the same period in 2014. Used homes are selling at an annual rate of 5.49 million, the fastest pace since February 2007, according to the National Association of Realtors.The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo builder sentiment index, which was released on Monday, reached 61 this month, up from 60 in July. Any reading above 50 signals expansion.Still, only 5.4 months’ supply of new homes is available, compared with six months in a healthy market. Construction of single-family houses has risen at roughly half the pace of sales growth for new homes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the rental sector, prices are increasing at double the rate of hourly wage growth, largely because fewer vacant apartments are available. Home rental prices are up 4.3 percent in the last year, according to the real estate firm Zillow. Average hourly earnings have improved a mere 2.1 percent.AdvertisementDevelopers are addressing the recent shift to rentals as more baby boomers start to downsize and millennials rent longer before buying their first homes.The real estate firm Trulia found that permitting activity for apartment complexes had surged well above the historical average in many markets.In the New York metro area, building permits for multifamily complexes is an astounding 423 percent higher than the 24-year average. The increase is 295 percent in Boston, 138 percent in Philadelphia, 161 percent in Los Angeles, 102 percent in San Francisco and 114 percent in Houston.The increased demand primarily reflects an economy operating from a stronger foundation of hiring as the recovery enters its seventh year.Employers added 215,000 jobs in July, while the unemployment rate held at 5.3 percent for the second straight month. The economy has benefited from nearly three million new jobs in the last year, an influx of paychecks that has bolstered the housing and construction sectors.Low mortgage rates have also helped sales. The average 30-year, fixed mortgage rate was 3.94 percent last week, according to the mortgage firm Freddie Mac. That is roughly two percentage points below the historical average.A version of this article appears in print on August 19, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Single-Family Homes Led Housing Starts Last Month.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.