By NEIL GOUGHAUG. 18, 2015
HONG KONG — Mainland Chinese stock markets unexpectedly slumped again on Tuesday, with the Shanghai market plunging by 6.2 percent.Following a yearlong boom, stocks have been volatile of late, prompting aggressive action by the government to help stabilize the market. There was no obvious catalyst for the drop in stocks on Tuesday.The sudden drop on Tuesday came just one week after China sent a jolt through global financial markets with a surprise devaluation of its currency, the renminbi, in an attempt to reinvigorate the country’s exports. The state intervention in mainland stocks and currency markets has raised concerns that China’s economy could be in worse shape than official data suggests.Trading volumes in Shanghai and Shenzhen have been relatively light since early July, when the government introduced several remarkable measures in an attempt to support plunging share prices. Those included ordering government agencies to buy stocks with funding from state banks and preventing shareholders who own more than 5 percent of a company’s stock from selling.AdvertisementDespite the moves, the markets have been shaky. On July 27, stocks in Shanghai dropped 8.5 percent, which was the market’s biggest daily drop in eight years.From market to table, pork can explain a lot about what’s going on with China’s turbulent currency markets.The Shanghai index closed Tuesday at 3,748.16 points — 7 percent above the low it reached on July 8, before the state’s market rescue efforts began to kick in. The market is down more than a quarter from its peak in mid-June.AdvertisementXinhua, the Chinese state-owned news agency, wrote on Twitter that investors were “in stampede again!” The agency noted that shares in about 1,000 companies fell by the 10 percent daily limit, and the post was accompanied by an illustration of a giant hand dangling the grim reaper over a group of people heading for an exit.
#ChinaStocks in stampede again! Key index lost 6%. All seem to get out after it hit 4,000 barrier. 1000 firms off 10% pic.twitter.com/JuFHGeyOQV The stock market sell-off came as new signs showed that volatility was creeping back into China’s currency markets. The central bank, the People’s Bank of China, pushed its official setting for the renminbi’s exchange rate 4.4 percent lower last week — the currency’s biggest drop since 1994.The renminbi stabilized on Friday and Monday, when its value barely budged in flat trading. On Tuesday, the currency seesawed between gains and losses before closing up 0.01 percent, nearly unchanged from Monday, at 6.394 per dollar.There are, however, also signs that several government stimulus efforts — including interest rate cuts and targeted loans for infrastructure and other favored projects — are starting to take effect.Figures released on Tuesday showed more tentative signs of a rebound in the property market. New home prices in 70 major cities fell 5.4 percent in July compared with a year earlier, according to calculations from Bloomberg based on official data. But they increased by 0.2 percent from June, the third month in a row of consecutive improvement.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.