
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

AUG. 19, 2015
If you want to succeed on Wall Street, you have to build relationships. So firms will do almost anything to please clients, catering to their wishes in the hope of winning the next underwriting assignment or new assets to manage.Bank of New York Mellon has now learned that helping a client can get you tangled up in the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act as it settled charges that it gave something of value to keep a large investment with the bank. That law prohibits giving “anything of value” to a foreign official to obtain or retain business with a government entity.The settlement shows Wall Street that its business practices are being put under the uncomfortable glare of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department, which are using the law aggressively to police practices that many might consider standard fare for financial firms trying to win business.The settlement requires BNY Mellon to pay a $14.8 million civil penalty for hiring three interns who were relatives of two officials of a Middle East sovereign wealth fund that had invested $711 million with the bank. According to the administrative order entered in the case, two officials at the unidentified sovereign wealth fund put pressure on BNY Mellon managers to provide the internships, making rather unsubtle hints that the investments might be in jeopardy if the bank did not come through with the positions. In one email, a bank employee said that “by not allowing the internships to take place, we potentially jeopardize our mandate,” while another one wrote that it was “silly things like this that help influence who ends up with more assets/retaining dominant position.”AdvertisementThe interns were not qualified for BNY Mellon’s regular hiring program, and perhaps unsurprisingly they turned out to be less-than-stellar performers. An intern in the London office was described as “O.K.” in a performance review, while the two in the Boston office, who were paid more than other interns, were confronted by a human resources manager for repeated absences.AdvertisementSomeone getting an internship because of connections is certainly nothing new. Look in many Capitol Hill offices and the child of a campaign contributor is likely to be working there for the summer. Keeping the affections of corporate clients is high on any manager’s list of things to do, so it is a small price to pay.The breadth of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, however, does not distinguish between big and little favors so long as there is “anything of value” given. The law reaches any “department, agency or instrumentality” of a foreign government. That last term has been broadly interpreted to include organizations that are controlled by a foreign government, like a sovereign wealth fund, even though it operates much like any other investment firm.Wall Street routinely courts any pool of capital for investments, but when that fund acts on behalf of a foreign government, then the types of gifts and favors that may be showered on clients could come under the prohibition on foreign business bribery.The law applies to any benefit used to obtain or retain business, which is also interpreted to cover almost any action that will benefit a business or help it continue its operations. The emails cited by the S.E.C. make clear that BNY Mellon saw the internships as a way to stay in the good graces of the fund’s officials, which may be enough to establish the requisite connection for a violation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Is the S.E.C. pushing the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act too far, turning it into a vehicle for policing long-accepted practices in the business and political world? The answer depends on whether the law should focus only on more traditional forms of bribery, or should be used to police business ethics.The statute arose from the foreign bribery scandals that came to light in the mid-1970s, with Lockheed being the most notorious example when it admitted paying bribes to foreign officials, including a Dutch prince, to sell military aircraft. The law, adopted in 1977, was largely dormant until about 10 years ago, when the Justice Department and S.E.C. ramped up cases against a wide variety of firms. Among the companies under investigation is Walmart.The focus on Wall Street is not really a surprise because of the large amount of foreign assets targeted by financial firms. Reuters reported in 2014 that a number of firms, including Goldman Sachs and Och-Ziff Capital Management, were being examined for their dealings in 2009 with Libya’s sovereign wealth fund. Doling out gifts and other favors, which might be acceptable when trying to attract the business of a private client, can bring prompt scrutiny for violating the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act because the law does not allow for a “business as usual” defense.The Justice Department has faced difficulties in pursuing cases against individuals for violating the law because it can be difficult to show when conduct crosses the line into bribery. In 2012, the prosecution of 22 defendants caught up in a sting fell apart over claims that the government went too far in enticing them to participate in a fake deal to sell military supplies to an African government. The former co-chief executive of the oil services company PetroTiger was sentenced in June to probation for pleading guilty to a single conspiracy count after an important cooperating witness admitted giving false testimony and the government dropped money laundering and foreign bribery charges.AdvertisementBanks and other large companies, unlike individuals, are much more willing to resolve a case without challenging the government’s theory of bribery by entering a settlement and paying a fine because the publicity from a trial can be much more damaging. So the government’s view of the scope of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act as encompassing three internships as a form of bribery goes unchallenged when BNY Mellon agrees to a settlement.Although this S.E.C. case was small, it sent a message to other financial firms that the Justice Department and S.E.C. consider their hiring practices covered by the foreign bribery law. This may foreshadow a settlement with JPMorgan Chase over its hiring of the children of China’s ruling elite. The New York Times reported in 2013 about the bank’s “Sons and Daughters” program for hiring children with connections, including one email referring to the “existing and potential business opportunities” of a job candidate whose father was chairman of a Chinese financial conglomerate.Currying favor with clients may be nothing new, but when a client is connected to a government official, there is a risk that any benefits violate the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Like it or not, the law has grown into another tool to scrutinize Wall Street.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »