AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Barclays named James E. Staley, a former top executive at JPMorgan Chase, as its new chief executive on Wednesday as the bank tries to accelerate a turnaround.Mr. Staley’s experience as the top executive at JPMorgan ’s investment banking and asset management units could prove crucial as Barclays looks to reshape its investment banking operation — which has a large presence in New York, having acquired the North American operations of the bankrupt Lehman Brothers in 2008.Many European banks are seeking to increase the size of their assets management operations while they shed riskier business lines, particularly in investment banking.In an internal note to employees on Wednesday, Mr. Staley, 58, who is known as Jes, said, “We will complete the necessary transformation and repositioning of the investment bank to a less capital intensive model.”It is a crucial time for Barclays.John McFarlane, the former chairman of the British insurer Aviva who was appointed Barclays chairman last year, has moved quickly to try to regain the confidence of investors. He has pledged to accelerate the bank’s overhaul, to curtail and sell “marginal” business lines and to streamline the lender, which he has described as “far too hierarchical, bureaucratic and group-centric.”One of Mr. McFarlane’s first major moves as chairman was to dismiss Antony Jenkins, the chief executive, after directors lost confidence in Mr. Jenkins’s ability to improve shareholder returns.Mr. Jenkins, a retail banker by trade and a Barclays veteran, was named chief executive in 2012, when the bank was reeling from a scandal involving the manipulation of the London interbank offered interest rate, a global benchmark known as Libor. He was dismissed in July.During his three years as chief executive, Mr. Jenkins moved to aggressively reshape the lender’s culture and to shrink the investment bank, which had grown under his predecessor, Robert E. Diamond Jr. — who, like Mr. Staley, is an American.Mr. Diamond had also moved aggressively to make Barclays a Wall Street powerhouse. (He was running the Barclays investment bank when it bought the American capital markets unit of Lehman.)Mr. Jenkins, who was praised for his efforts to change the corporate culture at Barclays, announced plans last year to cut 19,000 jobs over three years — including more than a quarter of staff members in investment banking — and to drastically reduce that division’s use of capital.Mr. Staley will join the British bank and its board in December. He is to receive annual compensation of up to 8.25 million pounds, or nearly $12.7 million, and £1.93 million in Barclays shares to make up for the loss of an unvested share bonus he received while at JPMorgan.“In Jes Staley, we believe we have an executive with the appropriate leadership talent and wide-ranging experience to deliver shareholder value and to take the group forward strategically,” Mr. McFarlane said on Wednesday. “In particular, he understands corporate and investment banking well, the repositioning of which is one of our major priorities.”In his memo to employees, Mr. Staley also said that he was committed to finishing what he called Barclays’s “cultural transformation.”“My ambition is to restore Barclays to its rightful standing — successful, admired and well regarded by all.”Mr. Staley, 58, spent more than 30 years with JPMorgan, rising from a junior position to eventually lead its investment bank. He also once led JPMorgan’s private bank division and its asset management business.At one point, Mr. Staley was seen as a potential successor to JPMorgan’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, but he left the bank in 2013 to join the hedge fund BlueMountain Capital Management.Several of Barclays’ closest investment banking rivals in Europe have replaced their top executives recently and have pledged to reshape their organizations. They are trying to improve returns even as lenders face stricter regulatory scrutiny, including heftier requirements for the amount of capital they must hold.William T. Winters, another longtime JPMorgan banker, was named chief executive of Standard Chartered, the British lender that generates much of its profit in Asia, in February; Credit Suisse appointed Tidjane Thiam, the former chief executive of the British insurer Prudential, as its top executive in March; and John Cryan, a former finance chief of the Swiss bank UBS, was named co-chief executive at Deutsche Bank in June.Several major European banks have announced plans to shake up their businesses, with Credit Suisse saying last week that it needed to raise as much as $6.2 billion in new capital, as well as to shrink its investment bank and slash costs.Advertisement