AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedLess than a week after emerging as a big investor in Sysco, the activist investor Nelson Peltz has gained seats on the food service company’s board.Sysco said on Thursday that it had added Mr. Peltz and Josh Frank, another executive at Trian Fund Management, as its newest corporate directors, avoiding a potential fight over its board.The move is the latest win for Mr. Peltz in a long career of shareholder activism, an approach to investing in which firms buy stakes in companies and then push for changes in strategy. Activist investors have gained enormous influence over corporate America over the last decade, as mutual funds and other shareholders have increasingly backed efforts to drive up the stock prices of underperforming companies.Mr. Peltz has taken on the likes of PepsiCo and Mondelez International, though he has preferred to settle with companies and gain director seats instead of waging protracted fights for board representation.Mr. Peltz first disclosed owning a 7.1 percent stake in Sysco, one of the biggest suppliers of food to schools, restaurants and hotels, last week. The size of that investment made Trian the company’s largest shareholder.Two months ago, Sysco formally ended a $5.3 billion bid to buy US Foods, another food distributor, after serious opposition from the Federal Trade Commission. The F.T.C. argued that the merger, first announced in December 2013, would lead to higher prices and would reduce service for customers.After the deal’s collapse, Sysco said that it would instead buy back $3 billion worth of its shares.Three months ago, Mr. Peltz failed to win seats on the board of DuPont, a rare defeat for the veteran investor.In a regulatory filing announcing the investment, Trian said that it had had discussions over operations, finances and corporate governance.“We are firmly committed to enhancing value for all Sysco shareholders and always welcome constructive input toward driving long-term shareholder value,” Jackie M. Ward, Sysco’s nonexecutive chairman, said in a statement on Thursday.“Nelson and Josh will bring our board an informed perspective based on their significant experience in the food products industry,” he continued. “We have engaged in constructive dialogue with Nelson and Josh and look forward to benefiting from their insights and contributions.”Mr. Peltz added, “Sysco is a leader in its business, and we believe it is undervalued and has tremendous long-term potential.”Advertisement