By BROOKS BARNESAUG. 20, 2015
LOS ANGELES — Hollywood’s third-largest talent agency has sold a minority stake to the activist hedge fund operator Jeffrey Ubben and will use the money for expansion, including the immediate acquisition of a music agency.United Talent Agency said on Thursday that it had accepted a “personal, long-term” investment of undisclosed size from Mr. Ubben, the chief executive of ValueAct Capital, who is known for his hand in management shake-ups at companies like Microsoft. United Talent also announced the purchase of the Agency Group, a booking company whose 95 agents represent about 2,000 clients, including the Black Keys, Muse, Dolly Parton, Paramore and Nickelback.Jeremy Zimmer, United Talent’s chief executive, said Mr. Ubben’s role would be “passive.” He will join the agency’s board as a nonvoting member.“We’ve been talking over the past year, and he was very interested in media and the power of the content that artists create,” Mr. Zimmer said by phone. “Unlike a more traditional private equity investment, this doesn’t start the clock ticking” for a payout.AdvertisementMr. Zimmer and Mr. Ubben got to know each other while sitting on the board of the Posse Foundation, a nonprofit organization focused on education. In a statement, Mr. Ubben said that United Talent was positioned “for exceptional growth as global demand for great content continues.” He called United Talent a “high-energy organization.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While smaller than William Morris Endeavor and Creative Artists Agency, which are both pursuing growth in the sports business, United Talent has emerged in recent years as a scrappy competitor in movies and television — the traditional heart of the agency trade but one that has in recent years come under pressure, as studios and networks cut back on talent deals to weather financial turbulence.AdvertisementIn April, United Talent stunned Hollywood by luring about a dozen comedy agents away from Creative Artists, which is now suing Mr. Zimmer’s agency for what it called in court documents a “lawless midnight raid.” Last year, United Talent bought N.S. Bienstock, which represents television news personalities like Robin Roberts, Megyn Kelly and Anderson Cooper.To continue growing, however, United Talent, which counts stars like Johnny Depp, Kanye West and Chris Pratt as clients, has long been expected to take on outside investors. Both William Morris and Creative Artists have sold substantial stakes to private equity firms in recent years, providing financing for acquisitions.The Agency Group purchase “immediately gets us to scale” in the music business, Mr. Zimmer said, noting that United Talent had only about five music agents of its own. (An additional couple of agents left recently for ICM Partners, formerly International Creative Management.) Neil Warnock, the Agency Group’s president, will now lead United Talent’s music group.A version of this article appears in print on August 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Talent Agency Sells a Stake and Buys a Music Agency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.