By RAVI SOMAIYAAUG. 20, 2015
After months of exploring a sale, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of The Daily News in New York, has decided to keep the newspaper, he said in a memo to staff members on Thursday.“I have met with several potential interested and well-intentioned suitors during this process,” Mr. Zuckerman said. “For a variety of reasons, I have decided to withdraw The Daily News from the market and have instructed our financial advisers to inform the suitors.”Since informing the staff in February of a possible sale, Mr. Zuckerman has engaged in complex negotiations with several wealthy businessmen, including the supermarket billionaire John A. Catsimatidis; the owner of the politics-focused publication The Hill, Jimmy Finkelstein; and the real estate investor Steven C. Witkoff.The interested parties and their representatives had rounds of talks with Mr. Zuckerman’s lawyers and bankers, said several people familiar with the process, who like others with knowledge of the paper’s operations spoke on the condition of anonymity to disclose confidential information.AdvertisementThe News, according to a person briefed on its finances, loses about $20 million a year. Like most newspapers, it has been severely challenged by sharp declines in advertising and dwindling newsstand sales. In addition, some of its bread-and-butter subjects, like sports and gossip, are now available free online. Its circulation, once in the millions, averaged 307,078 on weekdays and Saturday and 433,077 on Sundays in the second quarter of 2015, according to data from Alliance for Audited Media.But Mr. Zuckerman was bullish on the potential for growth in certain areas, including the rental of its printing presses, said the person, who was also familiar with the negotiations.Mr. Catsimatidis said in an interview that Mr. Zuckerman was concerned about the suitors’ finding a path for the newspaper’s future. Mr. Catsimatidis declined to specify his offer or the nature of the negotiations.Advertisement“There was a lot of money, but the more important part was the plan for long-term viability,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Zuckerman wrote in the staff memo that The News “is a business with enormous potential.” Though the media landscape is challenging, he said the newspaper’s digital presence would “play an ever-increasing part in our future business development plans.”“We have further sharpened our focus on how best to move the business forward in this new digital era,” he continued.Mr. Catsimatidis said he was not disappointed by the announcement, because he believed his plan to buy the paper could still come to fruition. “You never know what happens next year or next month,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on August 21, 2015, on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: Owner of Daily News, After Exploring Sale, Says It Is Off the Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.