
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

AUG. 21, 2015
ABN Amro, the state-owned Dutch bank that was the poster child of the financial crisis, has almost grown up.On Friday, the bank reported a near-doubling of second-quarter earnings from a year ago to 600 million euros ($675 million). The chief executive, Gerrit Zalm, said ABN was on track to sell up to 30 percent of its stock back to private investors in the fourth quarter. Timing is on his and the government’s side.ABN Amro’s improved second-quarter showing is an encouraging start. The provisions the bank took to cover future bad loans fell 90 percent year-on-year to just 34 million euros, helping earnings in the first half rise strongly and its annualized return on equity to hit a solid 15.3 percent.It will take more than that for Dutch taxpayers to get their money back. The state nationalized ABN in 2008, and it has paid a total of 21.7 billion euros for the domestic business of Fortis, as well as ABN’s Dutch, private banking and clearing divisions. The government has said the bank is now worth about 15 billion euros, just under its just-reported book value, suggesting a paper loss of about one-third on the initial share sale. To break even, the bank would need to fetch a valuation of 1.4 times forward book value — higher than that of its rival ING, which trades at 1.2 times.AdvertisementThere is, however, a parallel with Royal Bank of Scotland, the lender put into state ownership in 2007. The British government completed its first selldown in R.B.S. shares this month. The amount raised was similar to the amount the Dutch state is seeking, and it was also about a third lower than the British taxpayer’s average in-price.As with R.B.S., such numbers aren’t totally helpful. Saving ABN from failure may have paid other less-easy-to-measure economic dividends. The International Monetary Fund forecasts steady growth in the Netherlands’ gross domestic product of 1.6 percent for this year and next.AdvertisementThat suggests now is a good time to sell. A buoyant housing market, lower unemployment and improved consumer confidence are also helping ABN’s domestic peers Rabobank and ING. ABN looks healthy, with a common equity Tier 1 ratio of 14 percent, and a pledge to pay 40 percent of earnings in dividends. A return to the market should put ABN’s troubled past comfortably behind it.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »