
Life@Work By                     
TONY SCHWARTZ

AUG. 21, 2015
Dear Jeff Bezos,I spend my days working with the leaders of large companies to help them build cultures of sustainable high performance. My focus is on what it takes to unleash the best in people by better meeting their core needs – physical, emotional, mental and spiritual.The most consistent and pernicious obstacles I run up against at our client companies are the twin toxins of fear and fatigue.You have built an extraordinary company, in large part by obsessively taking care of customers. But as disruptive as you have been in building your business, you have been surprisingly conventional in how you take care of your employees. Based on everything I have read (including  the article on Sunday in The New York Times), you have focused intensely on getting ever more out of them, without seeming to invest very much in them.As you put it yourself in one of your shareholder letters, “When I interview people, I tell them, ‘You can work long, hard or smart, but at Amazon you can’t choose two out of three.’”AdvertisementThat perspective is ripe for disruption in a world in which demand is rising relentlessly, people feel increasingly pushed to the limits of their capacity and researchers know more than ever about the complex ingredients required for people to perform at their best.AdvertisementWhat is increasingly clear is that human beings are not designed to work continuously. Rather, we’re meant to move intermittently between spending and renewing energy. Working long and continuous hours isn’t a prescription for higher productivity, much less higher quality or more innovation.Great athletes have long understood that intermittent rest and renewal are critical to sustainable high performance. Even machines break down if they’re not regularly maintained. Not even the most talented and passionate people can run on empty.In perhaps his most famous study, the renowned performance researcher K. Anders Ericsson found that the best violinists practice in intervals no longer than 90 minutes at a time, and then take a break. They also take a nap most afternoons and sleep an average of 8.5 hours out of every 24, compared with the seven or fewer hours that the average American sleeps. In short, they rest far more and perform far better than most of us do.Eighteen months ago, my company, The Energy Project, partnered with The Harvard Business Review to survey 20,000 employees about their experience of work.As I wrote at the time, employees who take a break to renew every 90 minutes report a 30 percent higher level of focus compared with those who took no breaks during the day, or just one. Those who took more breaks also reported a nearly 50 percent greater capacity to think creatively. Employees who felt encouraged by their supervisors to take renewal breaks reported a nearly 100 percent higher loyalty to their employer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Fear may have an even more insidious impact than fatigue on performance. The experience of fear arouses the sympathetic nervous system and the “fight or flight” response, which progressively shuts down the prefrontal cortex, and in turn our ability to think rationally, reflectively and creatively.In his book “The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon,” Brad Stone, who interviewed 300 past and present employees, describes your occasional outbursts and their unintended consequences.When you become angry or frustrated and lash out in the ways Mr. Stone describes – when you say things such as “Why are you wasting my life?” or “Are you lazy or just incompetent?”– is there any doubt that you stir fear in those you have directed your anger toward? Or that it has a long tail?Advertisement“Sadly, too many leaders continue to believe that fear is a better motivator than love,” wrote John Mackey, the co-chief executive of Whole Foods Market, and his co-author, Raj Sisodia, in their book “Conscious Capitalism.” “A company built on fear and stress is like a house infested with termites. It may look fine from the outside, but it is being eaten away from the inside until one day, it just collapses. A conscious culture facilitates the growth and evolution of the individual as well as the business.”I can easily imagine your dismissing this point of view. “Just look at our growth, our innovation and our results,” you could say. “Clearly, we’re doing something right.”You are doing many things right. Above all else, you have redefined what it means to truly care about your customers. But you can’t do that indefinitely on the backs of your employees. In the long term — and I know you are a long-term thinker — Amazon will be more sustainable and more successful if you bring an equal sense of urgency to taking care of your employees, which will make it possible for them to take even better care of your customers.It is an amazing privilege to be a leader of a large company, but it is also a huge human responsibility. It is possible to challenge and care for people at the same time — to fuel your growth by fueling theirs. It’s also the right thing to do.Sincerely,Tony SchwartzWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »