AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisStock prices around the world continued to plunge on Friday, threatening to end one of the longest bull runs in the history of the United States stock market.A searing six-year rally in United States stocks had advanced into the summer months, shrugging off challenges like the dispute over Greece’s debt that nearly led to the country crashing out of the euro. But in the last two weeks, world markets tumbled as investors grew increasingly concerned about economic conditions in China, which unexpectedly devalued its currency last week, and the outlook for the economies of other large developing countries.As the selling accelerated Friday afternoon, some benchmark indexes were at or near 10 percent below their recent peaks — a “correction” in Wall Street parlance. “This is likely going to go down as the first meaningful correction in four years,” said David Rosenberg, an economist and strategist at Gluskin Sheff.Sell-offs in the financial markets need not cause harm in the real economy. In many cases in the postwar period, the United States stock market has recovered after reacting negatively to problems overseas. Strong employment numbers and other economic indicators suggest that the United States economy remains resilient.Still, fear in financial markets can feed on itself. And the declines in the markets are coming not only as China struggles, but also as the Federal Reserve is winding down its huge stimulus efforts. Trillions of dollars of cheap money from the Fed has fueled economic growth and helped push markets higher around the world. Now, the question is whether the world can stay on the recovery path without the Fed’s largess.Such concerns on Friday helped push stocks far below the peaks they reached just weeks ago when investors were ebullient. The Dow Jones industrial average is more than 10 percent below the high it reached in May. At Friday’s close, the index was down 530.94 points, to 16,459.75, a loss of 3.1 percent on the day.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, a broader benchmark, fell below the psychologically important 2,000 mark. It was down 3.2 percent on the day and more than 7 percent below its recent peak. It fell 64.84 points, to 1,970.89. The index lost $1.14 trillion in value this week, according to S.&P. Dow Jones Indices.The Nasdaq, which contains a lot of technology stocks, fell 3.5 percent on Friday, a slide that takes the index nearly 10 percent below its latest high. It closed down 171.45 points, to 4,706.04.The price of oil, as measured by the benchmark United States crude contract in New York, briefly fell below $40 a barrel. Later on Friday it was trading at $40.11, nearly 25 percent below its price at the start of the year. The decline in the price of oil and other commodities may indicate that there is less demand for such commodities because economies are slowing. The fall in oil reduces energy bills for consumers and companies, but it also hammers the profitability of the many oil and gas companies that have invested heavily during the recent shale boom.The Vix, known as Wall Street’s fear gauge, spiked higher than the level it reached last fall, when global markets last sold off on concerns about global growth.Investors rushed into the relative safety of government bonds. The yield of the 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.05 percent on Friday, from 2.07 percent on Thursday.In the coming days, investors will have to decide whether the selling is part of summer squall that will soon pass — or the start of tougher times for the global economy that could weigh on stock markets for months.“There is a relatively more ominous slowdown going on in emerging markets — and that’s what the trade is all about right now,” said Gina C. Martin Adams, an equity strategist at Wells Fargo Securities.Officials at the Fed will also have to weigh the seriousness of the turbulence in the markets as they decide whether to raise interest rates for the first time in nine years. Raising rates as early as next month, as some investors have expected will happen, could further unnerve investors, damp economic activity and speed the flow of dollars out of developing countries. As a result, the Fed may decide to wait until later in the year, or longer. The central bank may try to estimate the impact of a falling stock market on the wealth and spending habits of United States households. The six-year bull run, which began as the last bear market ended in 2009, has helped drive up households’ holdings of stocks and mutual funds by over $10 trillion.Much, of course, depends on the strength of the Chinese economy — and an economic release on Friday could stoke further pessimism. Output in China’s manufacturing industry contracted in the first three weeks of August at the fastest pace since the depths of the financial crisis, according to a preliminary reading of the Caixin purchasing managers’ index. It came in at 47.1 points for August, compared with 47.8 points in July. The August figure was its lowest reading since March 2009 on a scale in which any figure below 50 indicates contraction.Markets have grown volatile since China made a surprise move last week to devalue its currency, the renminbi, by the biggest amount since 1994. On Thursday, Vietnam devalued its currency, the dong, while Kazakhstan allowed its currency, the tenge, to float freely, prompting a decline of about 25 percent.Since the devaluation, China has moved to keep the renminbi from depreciating further by selling dollars. This effectively takes money out of the financial system, so the central bank has been busy this week trying to add liquidity. On Wednesday, it announced 110 billion renminbi ($17 billion) in new six-month loans to 14 unnamed financial institutions.These measures have not been enough, as China’s overnight money market rates have continued to inch upward. Many analysts now think the central bank must respond more aggressively.The main Shanghai index fell 4.3 percent, while the Shenzhen index closed 5.4 percent lower. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index declined 1.5 percent after having given up all its gains for the year this week. The Nikkei 225 in Tokyo closed down 3 percent.European shares were also trading lower on Friday. Benchmark indexes in London, Frankfurt, Paris and Milan were all down about 3 percent, capping a week of declines.Positive survey data published on Friday was not enough to overcome investor doubts about whether the Continent could break out of its pattern of perennially sluggish growth, analysts said.A monthly survey of business sentiment by Markit, a research firm, signaled a modest pickup in eurozone growth. But the survey also pointed to nearly stagnant growth in France, the eurozone’s second-largest economy after Germany.Another headwind for United States stocks is that their valuations — or the yardsticks that investors use to determine whether a company is cheap or expensive — recently climbed to demandingly high levels. This can make stocks more vulnerable to declines when bad news occurs or fearfulness grows among investors.Companies are struggling to bolster their revenue, for instance. In the second quarter of this year, companies in the S.&P. 500 managed to post revenue growth of only under 1 percent — even after excluding energy companies, which have been hit hard by the decline in the price of oil. “It’s very, very slow,” Ms. Martin Adams said.Neil Gough and Jack Ewing contributed reporting.Advertisement