By BEN SISARIOAUG. 23, 2015
Robert F. X. Sillerman didn’t start the dance-music festival promoter SFX Entertainment out of a love for the music. Instead, he acted with cold logical reasoning backed by demographic marketing.“I don’t consider myself anything more than a sociologist, a student of cohort groups,” Mr. Sillerman said last week. “I was not the first, although we have been the most aggressive to recognize the seismic shift in the consumption of music that the millennial generation is enjoying.”That view appealed to Wall Street when Mr. Sillerman, who pioneered the corporatization of the concert business in the 1990s, started SFX in 2012 and announced plans to build an international network to unite the fragmented world of electronic dance music, or E.D.M. The company raised $260 million through an initial public offering of stock in October 2013. Its portfolio includes festivals like Tomorrowland, Rock in Rio and Stereosonic, and the online music store Beatport.Yet SFX has tested investors’ patience recently with high debt, growing losses and a failed takeover bid by Mr. Sillerman, who controls 38 percent of the company. Its stock has fallen more than 80 percent since May, going below $1 a share last week, leading analysts to wonder whether the company is headed for bankruptcy and the music industry to fret over its implications for the dance genre.AdvertisementIts problems have mounted even as the concert industry has been enjoying a record summer and rivals like Live Nation Entertainment have posted strong returns. By some estimates, the global market for E.D.M. is worth $6.9 billion a year.“They have a lot of debt and a C.E.O. whose core competency is creating investor angst,” said Richard Tullo, an analyst at Albert Fried & Company who has been a critic of Mr. Sillerman’s management.At the center of the controversy is Mr. Sillerman, who, after his success in the concert business in the 1990s, emerged with bold plans to accomplish the same in the fragmented world of dance music. In an interview, he dismissed SFX’s naysayers and insisted that the company was growing apace.Advertisement“There are people who either have misinformation or a vested interest in seeing SFX suffer,” he said. “I’m proud of all our people, and they continue to put on great events. All of the constituent companies are doing better than they’ve ever done.”Despite its stock’s collapse, the company has canceled no events. One of its festivals, Electric Zoo, will return to New York over Labor Day weekend with star performers like the Chemical Brothers and Alesso, along with a lineup of corporate sponsors, including T-Mobile, MasterCard, Coors and Smirnoff.Yet SFX also caused a brief panic in the music industry this month when Beatport told record companies that it could not make royalty payments on time because the necessary finances had been “trapped” during the company’s attempt to going private. After an uproar, the company apologized and said it would make the payments on time.“Bob loves the idea of synergy,” said Josh Baron, one of the authors of the 2012 book “Ticket Masters: The Rise of the Concert Industry and How the Public Got Scalped.” “He has always been interested in finding a demographic to drive advertising and sponsorship dollars. E.D.M. is a very lucrative demographic to offer to Madison Avenue, but it has been harder than people realize to figure out how to do that.”At 67, Mr. Sillerman cuts an unusual figure in the youth-focused dance world. He prefers listening to Bob Dylan and Paul Simon. And while most of the entrepreneurs he deals with are decades younger, he has surrounded himself with seasoned sports and entertainment executives like Sheldon Finkel, a former boxing promoter who is SFX’s chairman of strategy and development.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Sillerman has also established himself as an eccentric, sometimes dressing in bright-color wigs and outfits and liberally employing vulgarities in meetings, according to executives who have met with him. Last year, images of Mr. Sillerman making obscene gestures circulated online, drawing a bemused response from Wall Street; Mr. Sillerman later said they had been meant as private fun within the company and should not have been released.At the same time, he is known to keep a close eye on the financial details of the company, reflecting a career building media networks and selling them at a profit. He began in radio in the 1970s, and sold a collection of stations in 1997 for $2.1 billion. Mr. Sillerman then combined dozens of regional rock promoters into a company he called SFX Entertainment, and in 2000 sold that to Clear Channel for $4.4 billion.In the 2000s, Mr. Sillerman was a producer of Mel Brooks’s Broadway show “The Producers,” and his company CKX bought the image rights to Elvis Presley and the company behind “American Idol.” But he failed in an attempt to build an Elvis-themed casino in Las Vegas, and he also made unsuccessful attempts to take over CKX, drawing criticism for failing to deliver on promised bids. (Mr. Sillerman said that the financing for his bid, in mid-2007, collapsed as a result of the larger economic crisis.)Analysts who follow SFX have been disappointed by its financial results. Although SFX has signed a number of sponsorship deals and its revenue has increased quickly — to $121 million in its most recent quarter — its losses have also grown. SFX had a net loss of $48 million in the second quarter, up from $35 million the year before.AdvertisementThe company’s buying spree has saddled it with $295 million in debt, and in its latest quarterly report, SFX warned that it might need to issue more stock to pay for debt servicing and operations.Mr. Sillerman’s management of SFX, and the company’s actions during his takeover bid, have likewise drawn complaints. In February, when the company’s stock was trading at about $3.50, Mr. Sillerman offered $4.75 a share, then increased his bid in May to $5.25. But extensions of the process, along with lack of information about Mr. Sillerman’s bid and a peculiar series of stock sales, caused the stock to slip.A special committee appointed by SFX’s board to evaluate Mr. Sillerman’s bid gave him until Aug. 13 to supply his financing commitments. That deadline came and went, and — as the stock fell further — the company said it would consider new bids until Oct. 2, or explore whether to sell assets. It also gave Mr. Sillerman until then to pay a $7.8 million breakup fee for failing to complete the deal.“This is not what a public company should look like,” said Steven Azarbad, chief investment officer of Maglan Capital, a hedge fund that sold its position in SFX this year. The longer the buyout process took, Mr. Azarbad added, “the more fishy it became.”While Benjamin Mogil, an analyst with Stifel Nicolaus, lowered his target price for the company last week to $1 a share and warned investors of stock dilution, Mr. Tullo, the Albert Fried analyst, increased his target to $6. Mr. Tullo, who thinks the company’s assets have been undervalued, said that may be attractive to other concert firms like Live Nation, A.E.G. Live or the Madison Square Garden Company. (Representatives of those companies declined to comment.)“We think the bondholders and Mr. Sillerman are not incentivized by allowing SFX to go bankrupt,” Mr. Tullo said.As for Mr. Sillerman, he reiterated that he intended to take SFX private — just at a lower price.“I remain 1,000 percent interested,” he said, “in being the person that prevails.”A version of this article appears in print on August 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Sillerman’s Failed Bid and Losses Test SFX.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.