AUG. 23, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.03 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.2 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida State Department of Environmental Protection, $50 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYGeorgia, $372.6 million of coliseum revenue bonds. Competitive.Iowa Community School District, $65.5 million in revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMissouri Public Buildings Board, $60 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Pulaski County, Ark., School District, $69.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementTHURSDAYNorth Texas Municipal Water District, $120.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $99.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAlaska Municipal Bond Bank, $155.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Beverly Hills, Calif., Unified School District, $76 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Birmingham, Ala., $109.4 million of children’s hospital health care facilities revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.California Department of Water Resources, $109.4 million of water system revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.California, $1.9 billion of various purpose general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Chicago Park District, $87.9 million of general obligation bonds. BMO Capital Markets.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $320 million of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Guam, $404.9 million of privilege tax refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Kentucky Economic Development Finance Authority, $231 million of next generation information highway project revenue bonds. Bank of America.AdvertisementLake Havasu City, Ariz., $164.7 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Martin County, Fla., Health Facilities Authority, $105 million of medical center debt securities. Barclays Capital.Missouri Development Finance Board, $57.1 million of infrastructure facilities refinancing revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Nebraska Investment Finance Authority, $90 million of single family housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Jersey Economic Development Authority, $2.23 billion of school facilities construction bonds. Bank of America.Pennsylvania Economic Development Financing Authority, $230 million of facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Philadelphia, $95.4 million of airport revenue refunding bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Vista, Calif., $99.4 million of refinancing lease revenue bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.A version of this article appears in print on August 24, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.