AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberUnder Armour has not given up on Tom Brady.Even as Brady, the New England Patriots’ quarterback, fights a suspension, the sportswear company is planning to feature him in a new commercial that highlights his training regimen.“I think personally Tom will have his moment to redeem himself,” Adrienne Lofton, senior vice president for brand marketing at Under Armour, said recently. “There was absolutely no moment where we said we should pull him out of the campaign.”The 30-second ad, which is set to run during the early part of the National Football League season, is part of a broader campaign that seeks to capture the outsize success that those who endorse Under Armour have enjoyed this year, Brady’s so-called Deflategate challenges notwithstanding.Since the beginning of the year, those on Under Armour’s roster have racked up victories and accolades, bolstering the company’s profile and validating the chances it took on young stars. In addition to the more established Brady, who led the Patriots to a fourth Super Bowl championship in February, the campaign stars the golfer Jordan Spieth, who won the Masters in April and the United States Open in June; Stephen Curry, who was named the National Basketball Association’s most valuable player this year and then led the Golden State Warriors to the league title; and Misty Copeland, who in June became the first African-American woman to be named a principal dancer in the 75-year history of the American Ballet Theater.Under Armour promoted its athletes’ accomplishments on social media. But until now, it had held off on starting the kind of big ad campaign that often follows such success.The new Under Armour campaign, under the tagline “Rule Yourself,” will be introduced on Wednesday and focuses on the behind-the-scenes training that goes into world-class performances. The four endorsers star in their own 30- or 15-second commercials; one longer, 60-second commercial features Spieth, Curry and Ms. Copeland (Brady is absent).Under Armour’s base layer line, including its leggings and shirts, appears prominently, but Ms. Lofton said the campaign was not intended to promote a specific product. Rather, the idea was to draw attention to Under Armour’s core training business, a category in which it faces stiff competition from rivals like Nike.7 PhotosView Slide Show ›Karsten Moran for The New York TimesThe training category represented more than half of Under Armour’s $2.3 billion apparel business in 2014, and Ms. Lofton said the company was looking to double revenue for the category in the next couple of years.The new campaign is based on the idea that athletes are the products of their training sessions, said Felix Richter, a creative director at Droga5, the agency behind the campaign.“We want people to feel that when they train they don’t do something repetitive over and over to no end,” Mr. Richter said. “Every time you train, you add another soldier to the army. And when it comes to game day, all this force is with you.”Curry’s 30-second spot, for instance, shows many Stephen Currys dribbling two balls at once. At one point, one of them makes a mistake and slams a ball to the ground in frustration.Ms. Copeland, who appears spinning and practicing formations in the campaign, said the ads captured the less glamorous side of training.“Even at the top, you’re going to have those days of doubt where things don’t go the way you planned them to go,” she said in an interview.Under Armour was tight-lipped about Brady’s commercial, and gave little detail beyond that it would probably run the ad in September during the start of the football season. Brady’s four-game suspension, which he is appealing, would make him eligible to return for the Oct. 18 game against the Indianapolis Colts.“Tom is training all the time,” said Adam Peake, executive vice president for global marketing at Under Armour. “What is going on in and around that — we’re focused on the work ethic, the will to be the best, and that doesn’t stop.”Advertisement