AdvertisementSupported byBy Dionne SearceyJohn Correnti, who was a leader in the American steel industry during its heyday and clung to it even as it faded, died on Tuesday in Chicago while on a business trip. He was 68.His son, Nicholas John, confirmed the death. He said that the family did not yet know the cause.Mr. Correnti led several American steel companies and built steel mills from scratch, embracing new technologies and developing methods that sharply reduced construction times.Most recently, he was the founder and chief executive of Big River Steel in Arkansas. Since starting the company a year ago, he had been overseeing the construction of a $1.3 billion steel mill in Osceola, Ark.Earlier, he led Nucor, one of the nation’s biggest steel corporations.Michelle Applebaum, who met Mr. Correnti when she was a steel industry analyst for Salomon Brothers, said he liked to talk about “Nucor-izing” things: going forward on sheer will to make possible things that seemed impossible. She added that he took pride in being likable.“If somebody didn’t like him, it drove him crazy, and he made them like him,” Ms. Applebaum said. “That’s a born manager.”Mr. Correnti was born on April 1, 1947, in the western New York town of Mount Morris. His father sold life insurance.The first in his family to go to college, Mr. Correnti attended what is now known as Clarkson University in Potsdam, N.Y. While there, he worked various jobs, including sweeping the streets, reading water meters and busing tables.When he graduated in 1969 with a degree in civil engineering, he had five job offers. On his father’s advice, he took a job at United States Steel, handling construction of various projects.Mr. Correnti joined Nucor, based in North Carolina, as manager of construction in 1980. He considered Kenneth Iverson, the man credited with revolutionizing Nucor, a mentor. The two often had lunch together, and in 1996, Mr. Iverson made him chief executive.Mr. Correnti was portrayed in news media reports at the time as running the company on gut instinct. But he also sought to decentralize power, putting into place numerous layers of managers who were assigned to facilities across the country.That hands-off approach became unwieldy as the company expanded, and he resigned under pressure in 1999. The company’s stock had dipped, and the American steel industry as a whole was losing ground to China and other cheaper producers overseas.Within months, though, Mr. Correnti was back in the industry. He emerged as the chief executive of Birmingham Steel, based in Alabama, after a proxy battle turned out the company’s previous management.It was James A. Todd Jr., a former Birmingham Steel chief executive, who identified Mr. Correnti as the company’s prospective savior, according to The Wall Street Journal.“What he wanted to do at Nucor made sense, and I think he can turn it around,” Mr. Todd told The Journal in 1999. “John is able to attract almost anybody he wants to come run operations for him.”Mr. Correnti restructured the company and sold it to Nucor in 2003. He then founded Severstal Columbus, a Mississippi steel company, in 2005 and was its president and chief executive until 2008.Mr. Correnti served on the boards of several companies, including Navistar, a truck maker.At Big River Steel, Mr. Correnti faced obstacles in building the new steel mill in Osceola, including an environmental lawsuit filed by Nucor, his former employer, which has mills in the same area. Nucor had accused Big River Steel of not properly assessing the potential environmental impact of the plant, claiming that its fumes would sicken Nucor workers upriver. The suit is pending in a federal appellate court.Mr. Correnti secured millions of dollars in public financing for the mill, with the prospect of creating hundreds of jobs. He called the site “steel mill heaven” because of its proximity to the Mississippi River, direct connection to a railroad and access to interstate highways.Besides his son, Mr. Correnti is survived by his wife, Dawn; his mother, Sara Correnti; his sister, Maryann Correnti; and two grandchildren.Advertisement