AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbSouthern Company’s acquisition of AGL Resources could yet find its true north. The power producer is buying its crosstown Atlanta rival for $12 billion, including $4 billion of debt. Although the premium looks rich for the utility sector, there is at least a chance that the price can be justified.The deal, announced on Monday, represents an important step for Southern as it moves from coal to natural gas. Once combined, the company will be the second-largest United States utility, with aboutnine million customers. The scale should lead to some cost-cutting, but Southern isn’t saying. That’s not uncommon, as there are local regulators to win over, and they like to see some savings passed on to consumers.AGL shareholders are being offered 38 percent more than their stock was worth last week. By comparison, Wisconsin Energy paid a 17 percent premium for Integrys while Exelon handed over a 20 percent premium for Pepco in two deals announced last year. Southern is pitching its acquisition as a “growth play,” but there will have to be more to it than that to support the expense and the $3 billion in stock that Southern plans to issue in the next four or so years.To cover the $2.2 billion premium, Southern will need to slash about $338 million a year in costs, valuing them on a multiple of 10 and assuming a tax rate of 35 percent. That amounts to about 6.4 percent of the $5.3 billion in combined operating and maintenance expenses the two companies reported last year.It may not be an easy target, but it shouldn’t be a stretch either. The Morningstar analyst Mark Barnett said in Southern’s call with investors that based on other deals, he was estimating something around 5 to 7 percent. When Duke Energy first proposed buying Progress Energy in 2011, it was aiming for savings of about 6 percent, but subsequently lifted that to 9 percent.For Southern to make the acquisition of AGL work, it had better start heading in that direction.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement