AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningAn acquittal in an insider trading case is no longer much of a “man bites dog” story, even when the United States attorney hailed the indictment, proclaiming that “sooner or later, you will be brought to justice.” But the jury verdict last week in Atlanta in favor Steven E. Slawson, co-founder of the hedge fund Titan Capital Management, may be much more important for signaling a new way of charging those who receive tips that may avoid requirements thought necessary to prove insider trading.Cases that involve the tipping of confidential information have been the focus of the government’s recent push against insider trading by hedge funds, with prominent defendants like Raj Rajaratnam convicted of exploiting corporate sources to trade profitably. The Supreme Court said in Dirks v. S.E.C.  that “the need for a ban on some tippee trading is clear.”Most insider trading cases are charged as a violation of Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. That provision prohibits use of any “manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance” in connection with the purchase or sale of a security. Although the provision does not expressly prohibit insider trading, the Supreme Court has found that buying or selling securities based on confidential information in breach of a duty of trust and confidence to the source is a type of deception that violates this provision.The Dirks case extended the law to tipping if there is proof that a benefit flowed from the recipient to the tipper. Called a quid pro quo, the benefit can be something with pecuniary value or even “a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”It is the benefit requirement that caused the Justice Department so much trouble in the insider trading prosecution of two hedge fund managers, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson. In United States v. Newman, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned the convictions because the defendants never had any contact with the sources of the information, and the government failed to introduce sufficient evidence that Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson knew about any benefit provided.Along the way, the appeals court also heightened the requirement for what constitutes the benefit to the tipper. It stated that the government must introduce “proof of a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.” That language led Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr. to ask the Supreme Court to review the case, arguing that the decision was an attempt to “rewrite this court’s decision in Dirks.”In Mr. Slawson’s case, he was charged with receiving earnings information about Carter’s, a children’s clothing company, that was passed along by sources inside the company to others. He was a remote recipient of a tip, much like Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson, so the basic conduct fits into the mold of a typical insider trading case.But federal prosecutors in Atlanta charged him with violating a different securities fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1348, which was adopted in 2002 as part of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The Justice Department argued that this law did not require proof of a benefit being passed to the tipper. Is this the government’s own attempt to “rewrite” the requirements for proving a recipient engaged in insider trading?Section 1348 is patterned after the mail and wire fraud statutes, making it a crime “to defraud any person” in connection with a commodity or security, or to obtain “by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises” any money or property from the purchase or sale of a security. A violation carries a prison sentence up to 25 years, which is higher than that for other securities fraud statutes.It is not clear how much this new law differs from Section 10(b) because both require proof of some type of fraud. Mr. Slawson asked the trial court to dismiss the securities fraud charges because prosecutors had not identified in the indictment his knowledge of the benefit provided to the tipper.The government argued in response that the law was intended “to enable prosecutors to reach a greater array of securities-related misconduct, and to enable the government to avoid the technical complexities and nuances of the traditional securities laws that were often exploited by defendants and their lawyers.” In other words, the benefit requirement imposed by the Supreme Court in the Dirks case no longer applies because Congress adopted Section 1348 to “avoid” such cumbersome requirements.The trial court agreed, so the jury instructions made no reference to finding Mr. Slawson’s knowledge that the tipper received a benefit in exchange for the information, or that one was even given to the source. The only requirement was that he knew the person providing the information embezzled it from Carter’s in order to share it with others who would trade. That is a far cry from what the Supreme Court found necessary for tipping liability in the Dirks case.If the Justice Department is right that those “technical complexities and nuances” should not apply, then the problems caused by the decision in the Newman case magically disappear by simply using Section 1348 in future insider trading cases. Indeed, if pushed to its logical conclusion, the government could claim that other elements like showing a breach of fiduciary duty should also be dropped from insider trading prosecutions.Section 1348 does not directly address insider trading, so it will be up to the courts to figure out whether the statute actually changes the requirements for proving a violation. That question will not be resolved in Mr. Slawson’s case because the jury acquitted him after only three hours of deliberations, a sign that the government’s evidence was weak even without having to show his knowledge of a benefit to the tipper.There is another case in Atlanta, involving four defendants accused of trading and tipping inside information about the acquisition of Chattem by Sanofi-Aventis in 2009. In that case, the Justice Department charged only violations of Section 1348. The indictment does not make any reference to a quid pro quo arrangement with the source, although it does discuss the breach of fiduciary duty in passing along the information. If a jury convicts any of the defendants, then the issue of the scope of Section 1348 in insider trading prosecution may be squarely presents on appeal.Unlike the Justice Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission cannot benefit from this new approach because it can only pursue insider trading cases under the federal securities law, not a criminal statute. It would be odd if the Justice Department could bring insider trading cases under Section 1348 while the S.E.C., the primary regulator in this field, might not have evidence of a benefit to the tipper to show a violation of Section 10(b).It will be interesting to see if federal prosecutors follow the lead in the Atlanta cases by using Section 1348 in future insider trading cases, especially the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan that is still subject to the heightened benefit requirement of the Newman decision.If more cases are pursued this way, it will be the next front in the fight over the scope of insider trading law as courts will have to figure out whether — and perhaps how much — Section 1348 alters the requirements for proving insider trading.Advertisement