AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Neil UnmackMonsanto, the world’s largest seed maker, has abandoned its $47 billion pursuit of the Swiss agricultural chemical company Syngenta, and that may turn out to be the best thing for both sides. But Syngenta’s management must now show why its reluctance to entertain the offer was well founded.Monsanto shareholders have reason to be glad of Syngenta’s rejection. The stock-and-cash offer would have been a 50 percent premium to Syngenta’s undisturbed share price — a premium worth about $15.3 billion. A Breakingviews estimate suggested that savings from reducing costs and cutting taxes were worth no more than that.For Monsanto’s chairman and chief executive, Hugh Grant, walking away shows discipline. If Syngenta’s management remained aloof, he risked getting tied up in an expensive hostile battle, no easy feat for a global, tax-based deal in a complex sector. And the merger itself would have been a headache, involving breaking up Syngenta and relocating Monsanto to get the benefits of a lower tax rate.The jump in Monsanto’s share price suggests its own shareholders are relieved to be rid of the affair. Still, having doggedly pursued Syngenta for years, Mr. Grant has left the door open for a later tilt: The company says it won’t pursue the current combination, without ruling out a tweaked one.Syngenta’s chief executive, Michael Mack, also deserves some credit. Getting antitrust approval for a merger could have dragged on for years. Yet his alternative plan for heady margin expansion is uncertain. He may yet be tempted into other tie-ups, like a merger with Dow Chemical’s AgroSciences division.Bankers may mourn the loss of a mega-merger, particularly after Pfizer’s bid for AstraZeneca and AbbVie’s for Shire both failed. If Mr. Mack can’t show his intransigence will deliver value, they may just get another bite of the cherry.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement