AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberSoccer is getting its own “Con,” courtesy of the Men in Blazers.Roger Bennett and Michael Davies, the British soccer duo who became famous for their “Men in Blazers” podcast on the ESPN website Grantland, will host in November the first-ever BlazerCon, a two-day convention for soccer enthusiasts.The cheeky commentators are billing the event as a celebration of soccer in the mold of well-known festivals like Comic-Con (for comics, film and television) and VidCon (for online video). There will be panels and presentations featuring prominent figures from the soccer world, live shows with celebrities and plenty of beer and meat pies.The two men, who now have their own television show on the NBC Sports channel, hope the convention, which will be held in Brooklyn, will help extend soccer’s rising popularity in the United States, not to mention the Men in Blazers brand.“We will do anything to grow the game in this country, so for us this is the logical next step,” Mr. Bennett said in an interview.Soccer has become firmly part of the American sports conversation, and BlazerCon arrives as the sport is now experiencing even greater recognition in the United States.This month, NBC Sports announced a six-year deal worth about $1 billion to retain the rights to the English Premier League through the 2021-22 season, reflecting a growing American appetite for the global sport. The deal came shortly after the United States women’s team won the World Cup in the most-watched soccer game, men’s or women’s, in this country.EA Sports, which makes the popular EA Sports FIFA video games, is presenting the convention alongside the Men in Blazers. Adidas, Mini and DUB Pies, a pie bakery, are among the event’s sponsors.David Pekush, a senior marketing manager at EA Sports, said the decision to support the convention was easy.“I think what this will help do is grow the sport even more,” he said. “We all really get excited about growing the sport of soccer — not necessarily growing our own personal brand — but growing the sport itself.”Richard Scudamore, the chief executive of the English Premier League, is expected to attend the event, Mr. Bennett and Mr. Davies said, as are leaders of several European soccer clubs and members of the United States women’s soccer team.The convention may also help cement the Men in Blazers’ status as a cultural conduit between the global game and American fans. The pair became surprise stars during the 2014 men’s World Cup in Brazil, giving nightly reports on the tournament’s most exciting story lines from a minuscule room on ESPN’s set. Shortly afterward, the commentators jumped to NBC Sports, which gave them their own show on Monday nights.Both Mr. Bennett and Mr. Davies put some of their own money into the convention, and they said that they would be lucky to break even in the first year. But they are optimistic that BlazerCon will thrive in the long term.“It’s a gamble, but we’ve paid witness to the rise of this game — this unstoppable rise, this love affair between Americans and this global game,” Mr. Bennett said. “It’s definitely an investment, but it’s not one we’re concerned about.”Advertisement