AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robyn MakAlibaba’s stock price still looks expensive despite the recent sell-off. Less than a year after the Chinese web giant’s record $25 billion initial public offering of stock, its shares are near their $68 initial price. Though macroeconomic worries have afflicted all Chinese companies, the company, founded by Jack Ma, is still highly valued when compared with rivals.Shares of the company, which is listed in New York, touched $120 as recently as November. On Monday, they closed at $65.80, and with a market bounceback, they closed at $68.59 on Tuesday.Slumping Chinese stocks and worries about an economic slowdown are partly to blame. Bank of New York Mellon’s index of Chinese stocks listed in the United States is down 16 percent since the beginning of the month.Disappointing results have helped to wipe $100 billion from Alibaba’s market capitalization since its peak. Revenue for the quarter ending June grew at its slowest rate in three years. Investors and employees whose share holdings were locked up after the public offering will be free to sell next month, further weighing on the stock.Even so, the company, now valued at $165 billion, hardly looks cheap. Start by stripping out investments such as its potential 33 percent stake in the financial services affiliate Ant Financial. Based on Ant’s latest valuation reported by Reuters, that stake is worth $14.9 billion. Equity investments in companies like the online video group Youku Tudou, the social network Weibo and the electronics retailer Suning add up to a further $12.9 billion. That implies investors value Alibaba’s core e-commerce business at about $138 billion.Transactions on the company’s shopping platforms will reach $502 billion in the year to next March, Barclays estimates. Assume Alibaba’s “take rate” — the proportion of revenue it captures from advertising or commissions – remains stable at 2.5 percent. Applying last year’s operating margins and tax rate, Alibaba’s shopping sites would generate earnings of $4.5 billion, implying a valuation of more than 30 times earnings.That is significantly higher than Alibaba’s Chinese web rivals. Tencent, which leads in gaming and social media, trades at 24 times forward earnings, while the top search engine Baidu is at 20 times. Alibaba’s dominance of Chinese e-commerce means it deserves some kind of premium rating. But a return to its post-public-offering euphoria looks unlikely.Robyn Mak is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement