By REUTERSAUG. 25, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Sales of new single-family homes rebounded in July, and consumer confidence increased to a seven-month high in August, pointing to underlying strength in the economy.Other data on Tuesday showed moderate gains in house prices, which should support consumer spending and keep home purchasing affordable, especially for first-time buyers.“This is evidence of the ‘some further improvement’ in the economy that the Fed is waiting for to raise rates,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank in New York. “They are so close, they need just a little more confirmation.”New-home sales increased 5.4 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 507,000 units, the Commerce Department said on Tuesday. Those sales, which account for 8.3 percent of the market, were up 25.8 percent compared with July 2014.AdvertisementIn a second report, the Conference Board said its consumer index jumped to 101.5 this month, the highest reading since January, because of optimism over the labor market. The index was up from July’s reading of 91.AdvertisementThe survey, however, was conducted before a global equity markets sell-off that began last week, which has diminished the chances of a United States rate hike next month.
            Index measuring attitudes toward the economy, 1985=100.        1101009080’14’15AUG. 25, 2015
Although sentiment could retreat in September, economists said any decline was likely to be modest. A strong labor market, lower gasoline prices and an improving housing market also are seen supporting consumer confidence.“If this upbeat sentiment is sustained, then it could potentially provide a strong platform for a sustained upswing in consumer spending activity, which could provide a strong tailwind for the economic recovery going forward,” said Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York.The reports, which added to a steady stream of data that have painted an upbeat picture of the American economy in the face of global turmoil, will probably be welcomed by Federal Reserve officials, who are weighing when to increase  interest rates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A third report showed the Standard & Poor’s/Case Shiller composite index of 20 metropolitan areas in June gained 5.0 percent year over year compared to a gain of 4.9 percent in May.The biggest year-over-year home appreciation among the 20 cities was in Denver, where prices increased 10.2 percent. That was followed by San Francisco, with 9.5 percent, and Dallas, with 8.2 percent.“If the pace of appreciation stabilizes around current levels, it could provide enough incentive to encourage homeowners to put their homes on the market, while encouraging potential homebuyers back into the market,” said Lewis Alexander, chief economist at Nomura in New York.The sturdy housing market is helping home builders. Toll Brothers, the largest American luxury-home builder, said on Tuesday that orders had risen 16 percent so far in the quarter started in August, outpacing the 12 percent rise in the company’s third quarter.A version of this article appears in print on August 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: New-Home Sales Rebounded in July.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.