
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

AUG. 25, 2015
What is the price of silence on Wall Street? That is the question confronting Peter Sivere, a 46-year-old soon-to-be former compliance officer at Barclays in New York.This kind of moral and ethical quandary crops up all the time on Wall Street, of course. For instance, as we all know by now, the big banks have been paying up – something like $190 billion in fines and counting, according to a recent Keefe, Bruyette & Woods analysis — to settle various cases and investigations, which has also left out of the public record many of the precise details of what employees at the banks did wrong in the years leading up to the 2008 financial crisis.In November 2013, JPMorgan Chase paid $13 billion to various federal and state agencies; in July 2014, Citigroup paid $7 billion, and a month later, Bank of America paid nearly $17 billion. Not one individual was held accountable for their behavior, in large part because these settlements were accompanied by heavily negotiated “statements of facts” — little narratives about what the banks did wrong without naming names. Clearly, Wall Street will pay a high price for silence.Wall Street goes to similar lengths to keep quiet people who leave. In exchange for their silence, departing employees generally receive a cash settlement of some sort, at times running into the seven figures. Most people sign these documents, because they would prefer to move on quietly to another Wall Street job, if they can, and take some financial remuneration for their troubles. A few people do not sign them. (For instance, I did not sign a separation agreement with JPMorgan Chase when it fired me 11 years ago.)AdvertisementAfter some negotiation, Barclays has offered $345,000 to Mr. Sivere, who has been a compliance officer at the bank for more than six years. (The bank’s first offer was $54,212.) In return, according to documents shared with me by Mr. Sivere, Barclays wants him to agree to make no future legal claims against the firm, to agree that the firm has no legal liability to him whatsoever, to agree never to disparage Barclays and to keep confidential the entire settlement and its terms. This is all fairly standard stuff.AdvertisementBefore working at Barclays, Mr. Sivere was a former compliance officer at JPMorgan Chase, which fired him in 2004 for inappropriate use of the firm’s email. The Labor Department determined that JPMorgan had retaliated against Mr. Sivere, essentially for being a whistle-blower, and ordered him reinstated. Instead, Mr. Sivere and the bank settled for $350,000. After an arbitration hearing, JPMorgan was ordered to change the description of Mr. Sivere’s firing on his termination notice from “mutual consent” and “for accessing e-mails without authorization” to “a disagreement regarding the scope of his authority.”But this time, Mr. Sivere isn’t buying what the bank is selling. He says he believes people need to know about certain acts related to Barclays’ role in Hewlett-Packard’s $11.1 billion acquisition of Autonomy, a British software company, in 2011.Barclays was a financial adviser to HP on the deal and the sole provider of a one-year, $8.3 billion loan to be used, in part, by HP to buy Autonomy. Since then, the Autonomy acquisition has generally been viewed as a disaster. In 2012, HP wrote down the value of Autonomy by $8.8 billion, and said that some $5 billion of it stemmed from a willful misrepresentation by Autonomy’s management of the company’s financial performance (Autonomy’s management disagreed, and the two sides headed to court).In June, a federal judge in California approved a $100 million settlement between HP and its shareholders related to the write-down. (HP’s insurance company paid the settlement; Barclays did not contribute to it.) After a two-year investigation, the Serious Fraud Office of Britain in January dismissed HP’s claims of wrongdoing against Autonomy, declaring that it found “insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction.”Mr. Sivere says he believes there is more to the HP story, in particular that Barclays may have breached its internal ethical walls regarding the deal, allowing some confidential information from the banking side of Barclays to be used by Barclays traders. He reached this conclusion in his role as a compliance officer and after he saw internal digital correspondence between the two groups that made him nervous that the wall had been breached.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2013, Mr. Sivere tells me, he filed an internal report at Barclays that questioned the ethics and legality of what he had witnessed. He reported his concern that confidentiality had been breached around certain foreign-exchange trades; around so-called Contracts for Difference trades, known as C.F.D.s; and around certain representations that Barclays had made to HP when it provided the $8.8 billion loan.“Barclays represented to Hewlett-Packard, among other things, that it had ‘ethical wall’ procedures intended to protect against the unlawful use of confidential information,” Mr. Sivere wrote the Barclays board in a June 2015 letter that he shared with me. “That was not true in 2011, as I flagged several breaches during the transaction that can now be verified, in part, by the plea agreement that Barclays has recently entered into with the D.O.J.,” he wrote in reference to a May 2015 settlement with the Justice Department regarding manipulation of the foreign-exchange markets. (This was the same investigation that revealed one Barclays trader writing during a chat session, “If you ain’t cheating, you ain’t trying.”)Furthermore, Mr. Sivere wrote in his letter to the Barclays board, he also believed that Barclays entered into certain suspicious derivative transactions with HP at the time of the Autonomy acquisition.Advertisement“Some of these transactions included FX trades, a dollar/sterling option and C.F.D.s traded prior to the announcement (and also the bridge loan pegged to a possible manipulated Libor rate),” he wrote. “The unwinding of such derivative transactions most likely occurred during 2012 which should have raised suspicions of what exactly the Hewlett-Packard write-down was related to if not for Autonomy’s purported accounting improprieties, misrepresentations and disclosure failures.”In response to Mr. Sivere’s claims, a Barclays spokeswoman, Kerrie Cohen, wrote in an email: “Prior to requesting to be placed on leave in July 2013, Mr. Sivere raised concerns about a transaction. Barclays investigated those concerns and concluded that there was no evidence of wrongdoing or misconduct related to them. While out on leave, Mr. Sivere has raised other potential issues relating to events before and after he went on leave. As part of its whistle-blowing program, Barclays encourages employees to speak out if they believe they have learned of potentially inappropriate behavior, so that the company can investigate and take action as appropriate. If Barclays determines that any of the issues warrant further action, Barclays will take appropriate action.”After the filing of his internal report, Sivere was demoted and taken out of the “control room,” where the compliance officials worked. In January, out of frustration, he sent some 20 emails to Antony P. Jenkins, then the Barclays chief executive, in a three-day period. He then heard back from Margaret Murphy, the chief of staff to the head of human resources, who assured him that “the messages have been received and will be appropriately considered by Barclays.” Ms. Murphy also assured Mr. Sivere that his demotion was not related to his internal whistle-blowing and that the concerns he raised about improper behavior “are being properly received and considered.”On Jan. 31, Barclays stopped paying Mr. Sivere.Mr. Sivere says he is prepared to take his findings to the federal authorities.“If it was the money, I would have just taken it when they offered it to me,” he told me. “I don’t want to go quietly at this point.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »