By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDAUG. 25, 2015
Before Tuesday, Exelon seemed close to sealing its $6.8 billion takeover of a fellow utility operator, Pepco Holdings, having secured support from most of the power regulators it needed to satisfy.But the utilities commission for Washington, D.C., has upended those plans, sending shares in Pepco tumbling as much as 20 percent.The Public Service Commission of the District of Columbia voted unanimously on Tuesday to block the merger of the two companies, arguing that the combination did not offer enough benefits to the region’s customers.That decision casts doubt on a merger that would create the country’s biggest utility operator, with about 10 million customers. It comes just a day after another big power company, the Southern Company, agreed to buy AGL Resources for about $8 billion.AdvertisementUtilities have turned to mergers and acquisitions in part to cut costs, as the industry grapples with sliding electricity sales and low gas prices.AdvertisementUtility regulators in Delaware, New Jersey and Virginia approved the deal. A judge in Maryland overrode a move by that state’s attorney general to block the transaction. And the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission signed off on the combination.But Washington’s commission said that the deal was not in the public interest, having considered the possibility of rate increases, lessened competition in the retail and wholesale power markets and effects on the environment. The regulator said it had received written testimony from more than 3,000 residents, nonprofit organizations and small businesses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The public policy of the district is that the local electric company should focus solely on providing safe, reliable and affordable distribution service to district residences, businesses and institutions,” Betty Ann Kane, the commission’s chairwoman, said in a statement. “The evidence in the record is that sale and change in control proposed in the merger would move us in the opposite direction.”Another commissioner, Willie L. Phillips, added a partial dissent. “I agree with my colleagues that the merger application as filed is a bad deal for the district,” he said in a statement. “However, I am disappointed in the loss of the many opportunities that could have achieved benefits for our local communities and across the region.”By Tuesday afternoon, shares of Pepco were down 14 percent, at $23.17. Under the terms of the deal, Pepco shareholders would receive $27.25 a share in cash.Exelon shares were down about 3 percent, at $31.68.Exelon and Pepco have 30 days to appeal the commission’s decision.In a joint statement, the companies said they were disappointed with the decision and planned to review their options.“We continue to believe our proposal is in the public interest and provides direct immediate and long-term benefits to customers, enhances reliability and preserves our role as a community partner,” they said.A version of this article appears in print on August 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Washington Regulator Blocks Exelon-Pepco Utility Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.