By JOHN SCHWARTZAUG. 25, 2015
The Coca-Cola Company is years ahead of schedule in its efforts to replace the water that it uses around the world to make its beverages, it announced on Tuesday.Coca-Cola said that by the end of the year, it and its bottlers would reach its goal of returning water to the environment and to communities around the world. Coca-Cola uses roughly 300 billion liters each year to produce about 160 billion liters of “finished beverages” — Coke, Sprite, Fanta and hundreds of other brands.The company announced this goal in 2007, promising to replenish the amount of water equivalent to its sales volume — the 160-billion-liter figure — by 2020. Tuesday’s announcement stated that it would reach this goal five years early.Coca-Cola has tackled water issues on several fronts — including making more efficient use of water in its plants and putting into effect wastewater treatment standards for its manufacturing facilities, as well as developing community water projects around the world that focus on, among other things, providing safe water and sanitation, supporting water conservation and protecting watersheds.AdvertisementThe company kicked off 209 community water projects in 61 countries. It has worked with environmental, development and health organizations — including the United Nations Development Programme, the United States Agency for International Development, Water & Sanitation for the Urban Poor, the Nature Conservancy and Water for People.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The water that does not go directly into beverages is used in cooling towers and for cleaning and other manufacturing functions, said Greg Koch, Coca-Cola’s senior director of global water stewardship.AdvertisementCoca-Cola now has wastewater processing facilities in 862 of its 863 plants around the world, he says. While the company had been pursuing its water stewardship strategy before the 2007 announcement, setting this goal helped it “to up the game,” he said. Coca-Cola had spent $2 billion on these water programs, Mr. Koch said, adding that as sales grow, the company’s water commitment will grow to match.In a statement provided by the company, Mark Tercek, the president and chief executive of the Nature Conservancy, said that the beverage company’s initiative was part of a broader effort by companies “factoring nature into their decision-making,” and said that Coca-Cola’s commitment “underscores that investing in nature can produce very positive returns for businesses and local communities.”Water used to grow ingredients that go into the company’s products is not included in the goal, Coca-Cola says.A version of this article appears in print on August 26, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Coca-Cola Says It’s Close to Water Replenishment Goal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.