By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 26, 2015
Not even one of Wall Street’s most successful investors has been spared from the recent rout in stock markets around the world.William A. Ackman’s multibillion-dollar hedge fund has lost all of its gains so far this year, he told investors on Wednesday.In an interim report for shareholders, his hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, said it had returned to investors 10 percent net of fees for the year through the end of July.But “significant volatility” in global markets over the last few weeks, driven by huge declines in the Chinese stock market and “fear that slowing growth in China will have repercussions for business around the world,” had erased Pershing Square’s double-digit returns, the letter said.AdvertisementMarkets have been on a wild ride in recent days as investors reacted to news and data from China that pointed to a slowing economy there, the world’s second biggest. Even as markets in the United States bounced back on Wednesday — with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index closing up 3.9 percent and the Dow Jones industrial average gaining more than 600 points — many were still nursing losses.AdvertisementOther hedge funds have been pulled into the riptide, too, and are poised to report disappointing returns for investors this month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Leon G. Cooperman’s Omega Partners was down 11 percent as of the end of last week, according to two people briefed on the matter. The world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, led by Ray Dalio, notified investors that its Pure Alpha fund was down 4.7 percent for the month. And the August performance of David Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital will be closely watched. The hedge fund went into August down 9 percent for the year.In its letter on Wednesday, Pershing Square said the current depressed share prices of many of its top holdings in companies like Mondelez, Canadian Pacific and Zoetis did not reflect the real value of the businesses and that the companies had limited exposure to macroeconomic events. The firm’s top five holdings were down between 5 and 15 percent for the month of August. Valeant, for example, has shed 11.6 percent, while Canadian Pacific is down 15 percent on the month.Separately, Pershing Square highlighted a potential conflict of interest between the fund and the personal investment of an employee related to the recent acquisition of Sprout Pharmaceuticals by Valeant.The firm did not identify the employee in the letter, but Mr. Ackman had acquired a less than 1.5 percent stake in Sprout before its $1 billion sale on Aug. 18, according to a Pershing Square spokesman. Valeant and Mr. Ackman teamed up last year in a seven-month battle to take over Allergan, the maker of Botox. Eventually Allergan trumped their hostile bid, agreeing to be acquired by Actavis. The personal stake was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.Pershing Square will report on Thursday the latest numbers that will include the moves in markets as of the end of Tuesday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.