By REUTERSAUG. 26, 2015
WASHINGTON —  A gauge of business investment plans in July posted its largest increase in just over a year, underscoring the durability of the economic recovery in the United States despite a slowing global economy.The Commerce Department said on Wednesday that orders for nonmilitary capital goods excluding aircraft, a closely watched proxy for business spending plans also called core capital goods orders, increased 2.2 percent last month, the biggest rise since June 2014.A separate report on Wednesday said that applications for home mortgages in the United States edged up last week as interest rates declined.“The economy had a tailwind heading into the recent market rout. That tailwind will help to carry us through the turbulent waters that lie ahead,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago.AdvertisementJuly’s increase in core capital goods orders was on top of an upwardly revised 1.4 percent increase in June and brought two straight months of hefty gains. Economists had forecast that these core capital goods would rise only 0.4 percent in July, after a previously reported 0.9 percent increase in June.AdvertisementThe report added to employment, industrial production, retail sales, housing and consumer spending data in highlighting the United States economy’s resilience.The string of upbeat reports suggests the Federal Reserve could still raise interest rates this year despite a global market sell-off, caused by worries over China’s slowing economy, and policy makers’ concerns about low inflation.William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said on Wednesday that the prospect of a September rate increase “seems less compelling to me than it was a few weeks ago.” Stocks on Wall Street rallied.And the surge in core capital goods orders in July bodes well for economic growth prospects in the third quarter.“It points to a sharp acceleration in the pace of business capital investment activity in the third quarter and provides some upside risks to our expectation for growth,” said Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York.
            Manufacturers’ total new orders for durable goods, seasonally adjusted.        MAY–2.3%JUNE+4.1%JUY+2.0%$300billion275250225200175’14’15AUG. 26, 2015
Shipments of core capital goods, which are used to calculate equipment spending in the government’s gross domestic product measurement, rose 0.6 percent last month. According to revised numbers, the June increase was 0.9 percent, compared with a previously reported 0.3 percent rise. The revision suggests that second-quarter gross domestic product could be increased when the government publishes its revised estimate on Thursday.June data on business inventories and construction spending have already suggested that second-quarter growth could be revised to as high as a 3.3 percent annualized pace from the 2.3 percent rate reported last month.AdvertisementA 4.7 percent increase in transportation equipment buoyed overall orders for durable goods — items like toasters and aircraft that are meant to last three years or more — which rose 2 percent in July.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Transportation was lifted by a 4 percent rise in orders for automobiles and parts, as automakers kept most assembly lines running during the summer instead of shutting them down for retooling.That increase offset a 6 percent decline in aircraft orders. Boeing reported on its website that it had received 101 orders last month, down from 161 in June.The upbeat durable goods report is good news for manufacturing, which has been hobbled by a strong dollar, weak global demand and deep spending cuts in the energy industry after a plunge in crude oil prices.Unfilled orders for durable goods rose 0.2 percent in July, the largest gain since November, after being flat in June. Durable goods inventories were unchanged after rising 0.4 percent in June.In the mortgage report, the Mortgage Bankers Association said its seasonally adjusted index of application activity, which includes both refinancing and home purchase demand, rose0.2 percent in the week ended Aug. 21.The association’s seasonally adjusted index of refinancing applications fell 1 percent, while the gauge of loan requests for home purchases, a leading indicator of home sales, rose 1.7 percent.The refinance share of total mortgage activity fell to 55.3 percent of applications from 55.5 percent the week before.Fixed 30-year mortgage rates averaged 4.08 percent in the week, compared with 4.11 percent the previous week.The survey covers over 75 percent of American retail residential mortgage applications, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Measure of Business Investment Plans Jumped in July, Its Largest Rise in a Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.