
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

AUG. 26, 2015
While many of us were enjoying some August beach time, Judge Russell F. Nelms of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Fort Worth decided to use a ruling in a local case as a chance to drop a bombshell on the restructuring community.The case in question is rather prosaic, and would normally be of little concern to anyone other than the litigants. Crosby National Golf Club in San Diego, which is controlled by a Texas company that oversees many golf courses, filed for bankruptcy as a result of a dispute with a gated residential community that borders the course.The case was filed in Texas, given that the executives calling the shots have offices in Fort Worth.One of the residents in the dispute presented the judge with a motion to move the case to San Diego, the other place where this case might have reasonably been filed. The judge ultimately agreed, given that the golf course is in San Diego.If the court’s opinion had ended there, we would not be talking about it today. But the final three pages of the opinion provided something of a surprise ending.AdvertisementJudge Nelms used those pages to rail against the practice of large corporations filing bankruptcy cases “in venues that have almost no connection to the debtor.” That, of course, did not apply in this case.AdvertisementIt seems that the judge is miffed that RadioShack and Quicksilver Resources — both with corporate headquarters in the judge’s jurisdiction in Fort Worth — filed for bankruptcy in Delaware. The complaint seems somewhat odd, however, since his golf course ruling rejected the use of corporate headquarters as the basis for venue.Quicksilver Resources has primary assets in West Texas. Using Judge Nelms’s reasoning, that would make Fort Worth an unlikely venue for the case.There are undoubtedly abuses of the superflexible venue rules in bankruptcy — the Los Angeles Dodgers filing in Delaware is my favorite example. It seems single-state operations should file in the state it which they are based.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But for cases that involve national or international businesses, there is a lot to be said for having a specialized bench of judges. From a policy perspective, it might have been better for Congress to formally create such a system for large, multimillion-dollar cases. Instead, we have developed it on an ad hoc basis, exploiting the fact that Delaware is a favorite place of incorporation and New York City is the nation’s financial center. Thus, most big Chapter 11 cases happen in either Delaware or the Southern District of New York.But given that the venue laws allow this, is it really lamentable that corporate managers seek out an experienced judge for a life-or-death moment in the corporation’s existence? After all, corporate management has fiduciary obligations — in insolvency, these extend to both shareholders and creditors.The judge emphasized that Texas-based employees were unable to attend hearings in the RadioShack and Quicksilver cases.“No employee at RadioShack’s corporate headquarters took off from work early and walked the few short blocks to this court to observe any proceedings in that bankruptcy case. And that’s a shame, not necessarily because the result would have been different, but because that employee might have felt a little better about the result and the system after seeing the sausage being made.”Of course, one might ask if there is any reason to favor the employees at the corporate headquarters over the employees at any other location of a multistate business.RadioShack has decided to close dozens of locations in Pennsylvania and Maryland. For the employees of those stores, Wilmington is a lot more convenient than Fort Worth.AdvertisementFor a national or international business, there are trade-offs involved with filing in any location.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »