By CAITLIN KELLYAUG. 26, 2015
Jim Adkinson, an accountant in Orlando, Fla., has a litmus test for when it’s time to part ways with a client: If he sees the caller I.D. and can’t bear to pick up the phone.Another tipping point: If a customer repeatedly refuses to heed his advice or becomes too frustrating to deal with, he fires them.Turning away sales can feel like sacrilege for business owners, especially when their business is new or their cash flow is tight. But longtime entrepreneurs say that being selective about whom you work with, and on what terms, is a crucial step in building a successful business — and a step that is increasingly complex.Max Aulakh, a former Air Force security expert who runs his own digital security company, Mafazo L.L.C., still thinks about the $100,000 that got away. When his company was just three years old, a potential client offered a sizable contract. But as he began investigating this client’s regulatory processes, he found glaring problems.Advertisement“The audits were horrible,” he said. “They weren’t doing any of their due diligence. I cut off the engagement and just walked away.”AdvertisementMafazo, based in Miamisburg, Ohio, is a healthy company with six full-time employees, four subcontractors and revenue that is on track to double this year. Losing a major engagement, though, “had a tremendous impact on our business, and it happened during our growth phase,” Mr. Aulakh said.Still, he has no regrets. “Our entire business is based on integrity,” he said.Jordhy Ledesma, a web consultant in Charlottesville, Va., who is focused on the Latino market, pays $50 a month to use a web-based system, Mention.com, to search potential clients’ social media accounts for 5,000 troublesome terms, like “Hispanic” and “Latino” combined with “lawsuit” or “discrimination.” If a prospect has a record of racial mistreatment, Mr. Ledesma will most likely refuse their business.“We do a lot of work for politicians like the first lady of the Dominican Republic and the Clinton Foundation. If you’re selling to governments, it’s a very, very sensitive area,” he said. “As an agency, you should try to choose positivity for any kind of brand association. We cannot work with people with these issues.”Mr. Ledesma recently turned away a Fortune 1000 client after his searches found more than 3,000 examples of behavior that raised red flags. “You ask yourself what sort of company you want to build,” he said. “Is it just a bank account, or is it more than that?”Companies are generally free to refuse potential customers for most reasons — except when discrimination is involved. Courts in Colorado and Oregon have recently ruled against bakery owners, for example, who refused to sell wedding cakes to same-sex couples.The bakers were found to have violated their states’ public accommodation laws, which prohibit businesses from refusing to serve customers because of their race, gender or religious views, among other factors. In 22 states, including Colorado and Oregon, sexual orientation is included in the statutes.Nearly every state has public accommodation laws, but what these laws cover varies widely. The laws fall most heavily on businesses that provide essential services, like medical care, and those that serve the public. Retail stores, for example, are nearly always bound by the laws.Advertisement“Things that are considered more of a necessity are subject to much greater scrutiny,” said Charles J. Bowen, a business lawyer in Savannah, Ga.The bakery cases drew national attention, but in nearly 30 states, the business owners’ actions would have been legal, Mr. Bowen said. He recommends that business owners become familiar with their own states’ laws.“If someone comes in and they’re rude or unruly or disorderly, any private business can absolutely refuse to serve that person. I’ve thrown people out of my law office before,” he said. “The only protection is that you can’t do it just because of some kind of unlawful discrimination.”The line between being choosy and being discriminatory can be a thin one.In the weeks after Hurricane Sandy in 2012, Jane Parmel, the founder and co-owner of Events by TFL, an event-planning firm in Coney Island, was desperate for sales. The storm hit her three-story building hard, destroying all of her inventory: $12,000 worth of balloons, satin ribbon, chair covers and other accessories.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Around that time, she began looking into the background of a potential client — a religion-based organization she preferred not to name — and made an unequivocal decision to forgo the revenue.“They were very anti-L.G.B.T., and I found that very unnerving,” she said, referring to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community. She is proud of the diversity of her staff and clientele.The client was “very confused” by her refusing the order, until Ms. Parmel tactfully said, “I don’t think we share the same belief system.”New York’s laws prohibit discrimination based on religion or creed, but Mr. Bowen said he doubted Ms. Parmel’s choice would run afoul of those rules.“It’s a very tricky line,” he said. “What if somebody said their religion forbids them to associate with African-Americans? Are you discriminating against their religion by refusing to do business with that person? I don’t think so. If they engage in something that would be unlawful, I think you can refuse to do business with them.”AdvertisementTurning away sales becomes easier as a business builds its customer base, business owners acknowledge. Mr. Adkinson, the accountant, opened his own practice five years ago and has gradually become pickier. He has two young children and a staff of five full-time employees, so refusing business isn’t something he takes lightly.“At the beginning, I’d take anyone with a heartbeat and a checkbook,” he said.Margaret Wilson and her fiancé are new to their industry: distributing specialty meat products nationally through a network of small farm providers. Their company, KutBox, based in Las Vegas, started in September 2014, after family and friends who had eaten at their home began asking for the products themselves. The meat they source must meet strict rules, such as originating from pasture-raised animals on pesticide-free farms that do not use antibiotics or G.M.O. products.“We had a lot of bigger farms wanting to be a part of this, and we did turn away a lot of bigger farms who didn’t meet our standards,” she said. “The larger farms were very persistent.”Even as owners of a young company eager for growth, they are keeping their standards tight. After seeing how poorly one shipment was packaged, the couple stopped doing business with that supplier.A more established food producer, the Yee-Haw Pickle Company in Park City, Utah, faces a different issue as its owners decide how to expand their small business. With 600 retailers nationally already carrying their four-year-old product line of pickles and pickled green beans, made with unusual ingredients like wildflower honey and turmeric, they’ve hit an inflection point.A large retailer with 500 stores wants to carry their pickles, but the chain sells only discounted merchandise.“We’re struggling with this right now,” says Allison Yeary Cesati, who owns the company with her husband, Andrew Cesati. “We could really, really use the revenue, but we’re a premium company.” Being associated with a discount retailer could damage the brand, she fears.The short-term pain of turning down lucrative business can pay off in the long run. Mr. Ledesma, the web consultant, makes no apologies for his selectivity. His employees appreciate it, he said — and so do the clients he chooses to take on.“People want to work with a consultant who holds himself to high standards,” he said.Stacy Cowley contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 27, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: When Turning Away Customers Will Help the Bottom Line.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.