AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisOnce again, the Federal Reserve helped save the day for investors.The United States stock market soared in late trading on Wednesday, shrugging off earlier declines in China and Europe. The powerful rally, which came after several days of severe plunges in the world’s major stock markets, was inspired by soothing words from an influential Fed policy maker. At a news briefing in New York, William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said that the recent turmoil in the financial markets was a risk to the United States economy. Crucially, he added that he found the prospect of raising interest rates next month “less compelling.” Mr. Dudley’s words were manna for investors who had been starved of good news in recent days. On Thursday, stocks in Asia opened broadly higher for the first time since last week, including in Shanghai, where the main index was up more than 2 percent. Jim Vogel, a strategist at FTN Financial, said the remarks were “likely to have influence well beyond today.” On Wednesday in the United States, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, a broad measure of the market, closed 3.9 percent higher, at 1,940.51. The much narrower Dow Jones industrial average gained almost 4 percent, or 619 points, to end at 16,285.51. The technology-heavy Nasdaq gained more than 4.2 percent to end at 4,697.54. It was the first positive day for all three market indicators after six days of losses.The respite from selling may yet prove to be temporary, but the trading on Wednesday showed that the Fed still holds a strong sway over investors’ sentiment.Until the recent sell-off, investors had been betting that the Fed would raise interest rates for the first time in nine years at its September meeting. Now, after Mr. Dudley’s comments, a rate increase next month appeared to be all the more unlikely. “From my perspective, at this moment, the decision to begin the normalization process at the September F.O.M.C. meeting seems less compelling to me than it was a few weeks ago,” he said, referring to the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed panel that steers monetary policy. Mr. Dudley is a member of the committee.Those words raised hopes that a long-running era of cheap money that has buoyed markets would run a bit longer, at least past the next F.O.M.C. meeting on Sept. 16 and 17. “I do not believe that Fed officials thought financial markets were quite as fragile as they proved to be in the last week, and they tend not to want to tighten policy during these periods of market turmoil,” said Tim Duy, an economist at the University of Oregon, who keeps a close watch on the Fed.More clues may emerge this weekend at an annual conference for monetary policy makers in Jackson Hole, Wyo. Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s vice chairman, is scheduled to speak on Saturday. Earlier in the week, Dennis P. Lockhart, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta — and, like Mr. Dudley, one of the 10 Fed officials with votes on monetary policy this year — said he still expected the Fed to raise interest rates later in the year.More broadly, Mr. Dudley’s comments on Wednesday underscore a relationship between the Fed and financial markets that some analysts have come to describe as unhealthy.During the financial crisis about seven years ago, the Fed became the central bank to the world, providing emergency loans to global banks and funneling dollars to countries where there were shortages. The stimulus helped bring the financial system back from the brink of collapse and fueled a recovery in the United States that has created hundreds of thousands of new jobs.Still, in recent years, the Fed’s ultralow interest rates may have also pushed stock and bond prices to what appeared to be unsustainable highs. Many investors even saw the plunges of the last few days as a healthy corrective to the ebullience. And some analysts have asserted that a September rate increase might be a good thing for stock and bond markets, because it would remove a nagging source of uncertainty.If the Fed does hold off on raising rates, it may seem like an indulgent overreaction, especially if stocks climb back to their recent peaks.More than seven years ago the Federal Reserve put its benchmark interest rate close to zero, as a way to bolster the economy. But that policy is about to change, perhaps this week.Stock market slides need not do collateral damage to the real economy — which Mr. Dudley seemed to acknowledge on Wednesday. “The stock market has to move a lot — and stay there — to have implications for the U.S. economy,” he said. He also suggested that a September rate increase could still occur if economic and financial conditions were to steady.Even with Wednesday’s rally, the S.&P. 500 is down nearly 6 percent this year, but it is no longer in a correction, the Wall Street term for a market’s being down 10 percent or more from its most recent high. After the rally, the benchmark is now down 8.9 percent from its high, reached in May. The Dow Jones industrial average is now down 11 percent from its high, also reached in May. The stock market was powered higher on Wednesday by technology stocks, including Google, which rose 8 percent on the day. Trading was less volatile than it has been in some recent sessions, with Wall Street’s so-called fear gauge, the Vix index, down for a second consecutive day. In other markets, oil was weaker, with the benchmark United States crude contract falling 1.91 percent, to $38.56 a barrel.The recent sell-off in stocks has wiped about $1 trillion of value from the S.&P. 500, depleting households’ nest eggs and perhaps delaying some spending. The S.&P. 500 is now lower than its peak in 2000, adjusting for inflation, according to data compiled by Prof. Robert J. Shiller of Yale.Still, stock market corrections have often come and gone, usually with little consequence. And, importantly, they do not always signal tough economic times ahead.“Corrections are generally three times as frequent as recessions,” David Bianco, a strategist at Deutsche Bank in New York, said in an email, referring to the period since 1960. “This time I think the cause isn’t about U.S. recession risk.”The last time the stock market declined more than 10 percent was in 2011. But the United States economy has mostly grown steadily since then. Corrections hit the stock market in 1997, 1998 and 1999, according to data from S.&P. Dow Jones Indices, and in each of those years the United States economy grew by more than 4 percent. This shows that stock market corrections can be relatively isolated events that are driven more by concerns about the strength of corporate profits. Mr. Bianco noted that the profits of companies within the S.&P. 500 had been flat in recent quarters and were likely to remain sluggish for a while. “I believe that is the cause of the correction,” he said.The recent wave of selling was set off in part by China’s surprise devaluation of its currency, the renminbi, on Aug. 11.Since the country’s stock market started plunging in June, after a rally that more than doubled share values in a year, China’s leaders have been scrambling to prop up the markets. But shares in Shanghai and Shenzhen have continued to slide. Officials now appear to be tacitly acknowledging the failure of their efforts to rescue shares.Li Kui-Wai, an associate professor of economics and finance at the City University of Hong Kong, said such measures amounted to “financial socialism.”“Basically they just try to bail out everything,” Mr. Li said on Wednesday. “The market is unsure about what China can do or will do, other than interfering in it,” he added, referring to the state measures.Binyamin Appelbaum, Neil Gough and David Jolly contributed reporting.Advertisement