AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonIf nothing else, the last week has proved it can be very difficult to run a hedge fund. The Carlyle Group, the private equity giant, has known that for much longer.Its Carlyle Capital fund became a harbinger of the financial crisis after it imploded in March 2008. Months later, Blue Wave Partners, Carlyle’s entrance into hedge funds, ended abruptly after it failed to raise enough money from investors.They were among the first in a series of bumps in the road for Carlyle and its hedge fund investments, the most recent of which came to the fore last week, when it announced that its credit-focused hedge fund, Claren Road Asset Management, faced nearly $2 billion in investor redemption requests. Since last September, Claren Road has faced a total of $6 billion in redemption requests.Carlyle’s core buyout business, however, continues to exceed Wall Street’s expectations. It has raised tens of billions of dollars of new money to spend on acquisitions. But its track record with hedge funds has been mixed at best, which has raised questions about its ability to diversify successfully the way its rivals have. In particular, it is unclear whether Carlyle can expand its global market strategies business where its hedge fund investments are housed.“While Carlyle’s dominant private equity business continues to perform particularly well, a number of its other businesses are not,” Kenneth B. Worthington, an analyst with JPMorgan Chase, wrote in a note to investors last month, adding: “Its hedge fund business is top of mind with performance issues in its large credit manager Claren Road — we think redemptions will persist.”And they have persisted. When Carlyle announced a new wave of outflows from Claren Road last week, it was the third time it had to do so this year: The hedge fund had continued to lose money in its investments in natural resources, as well as in wrongheaded bets on Greece and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.Carlyle’s investment in Vermillion Asset Management has also struggled. When Carlyle bought its ownership stake in 2012, Vermillion’s flagship fund was managing $2.2 billion of investor money. Since then it has slumped to $50 million, the result of a volatile few years in commodities.While executives have conceded that Carlyle’s hedge funds have had a difficult time recently, they blame the broader investment environment for the disappointing performances. The hedge fund portfolio is a small part of its global market strategies business, which is performing well, said Christopher W. Ullman, a spokesman for Carlyle.Carlyle created its global market strategies division five years ago, as banks began to pull back from certain lending practices after the financial crisis hit. Carlyle executives saw an opportunity to create and buy portfolios of structured credit products like mezzanine debt and collateralized loan obligations. It was also part of a broader push, ahead of its public offering in 2012, to diversify and branch out from the core buyout business.As Carlyle bolstered its global market division, it began to take majority stakes in hedge funds to benefit from the firms’ bottom line, receiving a part of the fees that investors in hedge funds pay to managers. The unusual model has become increasingly popular with other firms like the Blackstone Group and the family office of the Google chairman Eric E. Schmidt.As Carlyle rapidly expanded its investments, it shifted away from its traditional strategy of developing its own products.In 2010, it bought a majority stake in Claren Road, which managed $4.5 billion at the time and was founded by four senior Citigroup traders — Brian Riano, John Eckerson, Sean Fahey and Albert Marino. Months later it bought a stake in Emerging Sovereign Group, an investment firm focused on macroeconomic strategies and emerging markets, which had seed investment from Julian H. Robertson, the billionaire hedge fund manager. And in 2012, Carlyle took a stake in Vermillion, the commodities investment manager based in New York.“The business of hedge funds is generally sound, so in principle such investments make sense,” said Todd E. Petzel, chief investment officer at the private wealth management firm Offit Capital. But, he added, sometimes there are caveats.“If the portfolio manager receives a large payout for a majority share and doesn’t put that money back into the fund, then questions arise about alignment of interests with the private equity investors and future return potential,” he said.Carlyle has told investors that the managers of each hedge fund that it acquired would put a majority of the cash generated from the deal back into the hedge fund.Carlyle’s investments in hedge funds is presently worth $9 billion. That is small compared with the rest of its $36 billion global market strategy business.But volatility from its hedge funds has helped to drag down the overall performance of the unit. In its most recent quarterly earnings, Carlyle reported that distributable earnings — a measure of cash generated that is eligible to be paid to investors — fell by 81 percent for its global market strategies group. Carlyle will report results for the current quarter in October.Things were different as recently as a year ago for some of the hedge funds. Claren Road had $8 billion in assets under management and turned away $1 billion from investors, William E. Conway Jr., a Carlyle co-founder, told analysts in a conference call last month. Before 2014, when it lost investors 9.7 percent, Claren Road delivered positive returns for eight consecutive years.When asked whether Carlyle faced a bigger problem with oversight, ownership and even the selection of managers, Mr. Conway instead blamed volatility and a difficult investment environment.“You perform, people are happy; they give you more money,” Mr. Conway said. “You don’t perform, the opposite happens.”The latest investor retreat last week will result in a non-cash impairment charge of as much as $175 million for Carlyle in its third quarter. Carlyle has said it is assessing what to do next with Claren Road. A spokesman for Claren Road declined to comment.Carlyle’s investment in Vermillion has also been rocky. Earlier this year Carlyle split with the hedge fund’s co-founders, Chris Nygaard and Andrew Gilbert, choosing to redirect Vermillion’s focus away from managing money and toward commodity financing in the face of losses across commodity-focused funds like Black River Asset Management, a Cargill, unit that said last month it would liquidate four hedge funds. Mr. Gilbert could not be reached for comment.“These are businesses where we felt there were — and continue to be — opportunities we could exploit,” Mr. Ullman said. “We think of it as investing in a commodities business platform versus just investing in hedge funds.”Carlyle executives prefer to highlight another hedge fund investment that has done better: the Emerging Sovereign Group.That hedge fund has had turbulent times, too, but it has outperformed the main index for emerging market stocks, MSCI’s Emerging Markets index, over several years, according to two people briefed on the matter. But it has also suffered redemptions from investors like the Philadelphia Board of Pensions, which redeemed some of its investment in the Emerging Sovereign Group as part of a decision to cut back on hedge fund allocations.So far, Carlyle has not announced any plans to change its strategy of investing in hedge funds. Speaking at a New York Times conference in 2013, David M. Rubenstein, co-founder and a co-chief executive of Carlyle, spoke about how the private equity world has changed and the challenges that Carlyle faced as it experimented with new business models. “I think increasingly firms like ours recognize that the classic buyout model isn’t as easy to do as it used to be.”Advertisement