AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel AbramsThe Food and Drug Administration  issued warnings to the makers of Natural American Spirit, Winston and Nat Sherman cigarettes, saying that the brands could not be marketed as “additive-free” or “natural.”In three separate letters made public on Thursday, the F.D.A. told the manufacturers of the brands that they did not have the agency’s approval to claim that their products were free of certain harmful substances, or that they posed less risk to consumers than other tobacco products. The warnings were sent to ITG Brands, which makes Winston cigarettes; Santa Fe Natural Tobacco, which makes Natural American Spirit; and Sherman’s 1400 Broadway N.Y.C., the maker of Nat Sherman cigarettes.The move is the agency’s first effort to enforce a provision in the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009 that gave the F.D.A. authority to regulate marketing claims like the ones used by these companies promoting healthier tobacco products.“The F.D.A.’s job is to ensure tobacco products are not marketed in a way that leads consumers to believe cigarettes with descriptors like ‘additive-free’ and ‘natural’ pose fewer health risks than other cigarettes, unless the claims have been scientifically supported,” said Mitchell Zeller, director of the Center for Tobacco Products at the F.D.A. Mr. Zeller called the action a “milestone.”Under the 2009 law, companies must submit a “modified risk tobacco product” application, along with scientific evidence, to advertise that their tobacco products are less dangerous than others. The agency has not approved any such products, according to its statement. The F.D.A. is currently reviewing 10 applications for smokeless products from the North American branch of the tobacco company Swedish Match.In a statement, ITG Brands, the United States subsidiary of the British company Imperial Tobacco Group, said that it disagreed with the F.D.A.’s position, and believed its products “comply with all applicable state and federal regulations.” In an email, a spokeswoman for Santa Fe Natural Tobacco, a subsidiary of Reynolds American, said the company was reviewing the letter. Representatives for Sherman’s 1400 Broadway N.Y.C. could not be reached for comment.All three companies have 15 business days to respond to the agency.American Spirit’s label has long depicted a Native American smoking a long pipe, with the word “Natural” prominently displayed on individual packs of cigarettes. The company also advertises that its products are made with “100 percent organic tobacco,” a claim that several health and consumer groups recently disputed.Also this week, more than two dozen groups signed a letter urging the F.D.A. to curb the brand’s claims.“The F.D.A.’s warning sends a strong message to the tobacco industry that its long history of deception about the dangers of tobacco use will no longer be tolerated,” Matthew L. Myers, the president of the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, one of the groups that signed the letter, said in a statement.Cigarette companies’ marketing practices have run afoul of federal regulators before. For example, Santa Fe Natural Tobacco agreed to settle deceptive advertising charges with the Federal Trade Commission in 2000. The company agreed to print a statement: “No additives in our tobacco does NOT mean a safer cigarette” on all of its products that made a no additives claim.Advertisement