By PETER EAVISOCT. 29, 2015
Over the last year, Europe has been unsettled by several significant challenges, including the inflow of migrants, the conflict in Ukraine and the threat of Greece falling out of the euro.Perhaps less appreciated is the role that Europe’s largest banks have played in damping the mood on the Continent. And on Thursday, the burden of the big banks was on display.Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest lender, announced new efforts to turn around its flagging operations. The contents of the plan were more or less as expected. They included measures like cost-cutting, focusing more on profitable businesses and bolstering capital, the financial buffer that banks have to maintain to protect themselves against losses and shocks.But the overhaul is notable for another reason — it is happening seven years after the financial crisis of 2008 and after other large global banks have gone down a similar road.AdvertisementIn detailing the restructuring plan, Deutsche Bank’s new co-chief executive, John Cryan, was in effect bringing a failed experiment to a close. Under its former leaders, Deutsche Bank had made efforts to adapt, while also harboring ambitions of remaining a dominant player on Wall Street. But the bank’s returns had fallen well below those of its peers, particularly its large United States rivals.AdvertisementThe problems of Deutsche Bank reverberate beyond the financial markets.In the United States, companies borrow heavily in the bond markets as well as from banks. As a result, when United States banks faltered after the crisis, companies still had a deep pool of capital they could tap.European companies, however, rely heavily on bank loans. That means the banks in Europe need to be healthy and ready to lend if the Continent is to experience a sustained upswing in economic growth.Banks in Europe were able to avoid a thorough cleanup until last year, when they had to start subjecting themselves to relatively thorough regulatory examinations known as stress tests. Analysts at the Royal Bank of Scotland said in a recent research note that European banks have 1 trillion euros of nonperforming loans on their books, which, they said, is equivalent to roughly 10 percent of the combined gross domestic product of the countries using the euro.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Perhaps because European banks are weighed down with poorly performing credit and other issues, their lending has not grown nearly as fast as that of United States banks in recent years. This may have had macroeconomic consequences. The success of the European Central Bank’s economic stimulus program rests heavily on the banking system being healthy enough to ramp up lending as credit conditions ease.Deutsche Bank’s situation shows why the European financial system may take a while to catch up. Banks with strong capital are often more likely to lend because they can be more confident about taking risks.But Deutsche Bank’s capital is low on certain measures. Its so-called leverage ratio, a regulatory measure that expresses capital as a percentage of a bank’s assets, is at 3.6 percent. If Deutsche Bank today raised its leverage ratio to JPMorgan Chase’s level of 6.4 percent, Deutsche Bank would require an additional 40 billion euros of capital. (In its new plan, Deutsche Bank is aiming for a leverage ratio of at least 4.5 percent by the end of 2018, and much of that increase can come from reducing its assets.)Still, Deutsche Bank’s latest moves may be a reason for optimism. In some ways it was Europe’s most powerful bank, and it pushed back hard against postcrisis regulations in Europe and the United States. Any remaining laggards may now see no alternative but to adopt the sort of streamlining that has made banks more efficient in the United States.Barclays, the large British bank, is an example of how even a bumpy effort to change can yield progress. Like Deutsche Bank, Barclays on Thursday reported third-quarter earnings. They weren’t great, but Barclays’ profitability — expressed as a percentage of its capital — is clearly making progress.More broadly, British banks have been posting solid loan growth, helping to continue an economic recovery that was initially stoked by the Bank of England’s stimulus policies.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Long Shadow of Europe’s Big Banks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.