AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedTaking the Dole Company private in 2013 was nothing new to David H. Murdock, the nonagenarian billionaire who first bought out the fruit seller in 2003.But the second time, according to a Delaware judge, Mr. Murdock went too far.The judge found on Thursday that Mr. Murdock, the company’s chief executive, and a top lieutenant fraudulently drove down the company’s stock price so he could buy the business at a cheaper price in its 2013 leveraged buyout.In his opinion, Vice Chancellor J. Travis Laster of the Court of Chancery in Delaware ordered Mr. Murdock and the company’s former chief operating officer, C. Michael Carter, to reimburse other shareholders $148 million. That is one of the largest amounts awarded in a lawsuit tied to a merger.The decision, after a trial in February initiated by investors in the company, highlights the increase in appraisal lawsuits, in which investors who contend a takeover undervalued their shares demand further payment.It is also a black eye to Mr. Murdock, 92, a high school dropout who was briefly homeless, then rose to become a real estate magnate. His defining career achievement was taking control of Dole, the company that in the 1800s introduced Americans to Hawaiian pineapples, beginning in 1985.That relationship has been lucrative for Mr. Murdock, who sold one company asset, the Hawaiian island Lanai, to the billionaire Lawrence J. Ellison of Oracle for hundreds of millions of dollars in 2012. Such legal deal fights have become increasingly popular. But they rarely go to trial.As part of their defense, Dole and Mr. Murdock campaigned to amend the laws of the company’s corporate home, Delaware, complaining that the current regime allowed too many lawsuits and rendered the state inhospitable to business.But in Vice Chancellor Laster’s eyes, Mr. Murdock simply sought to flout corporate law in trying to buy the 60 percent of the company that he did not already own at an unfair discount.“They have been trying to ram through the Delaware Legislature some amendments to Delaware’s appraisal statute,” said Minor Myers, a professor at the Brooklyn Law School. “Now it’s become clear that these are legitimate fraudsters.”The 2013 buyout valued Dole at $13.50 a share. Yet the opinion effectively determined that the company was actually worth $16.24 a share at that time, and Vice Chancellor Laster said he was taking a conservative view of the valuation.At first glance, the transaction appeared to hew to good corporate practices. Dole set up an independent board committee to weigh the takeover bid by Mr. Murdock. At one point, the chairman of that group went so far as to read aloud the text of an influential Delaware case about management buyouts.But the price that Mr. Murdock paid, according to Vice Chancellor Laster, was derived through unfair manipulation. The billionaire initially offered $12 a share, which the independent committee eventually negotiated up to $13.50 a share.Yet even before Mr. Murdock made his bid, Mr. Carter misstated how much Dole could earn by selling some of its businesses and canceled a stock buyback program. The net effect was to drive down the company’s stock price.After Mr. Murdock disclosed his offer, Mr. Carter provided the committee with one set of artificially low management projections. He then gave potential lenders to the takeover bid different, more accurate numbers.Dole’s independent committee voted unanimously to support the takeover bid. The company’s other shareholders barely approved the deal.“By taking these actions, Murdock and Carter deprived the committee of the ability to negotiate on a fully informed basis and potentially say no to the merger,” Vice Chancellor Laster wrote. “Murdock and Carter likewise deprived the stockholders of their ability to consider the merger on a fully informed basis and potentially vote it down.”Vice Chancellor Laster spared some of the other parties involved, finding that the independent board committee and its advisers at Lazard acted with “integrity.” But they could not overcome all of the deceitful efforts, he said.He reserved more criticism for Deutsche Bank, which had had a long relationship with Mr. Murdock and appeared to openly favor him before the merger. But the vice chancellor concluded that the bank did not participate knowingly in the improper price manipulation.Deutsche Bank declined to comment. Through a spokeswoman, Morgan Evans, Dole and Mr. Murdock declined to comment. Professor Myers said that Vice Chancellor Laster’s decision was so harsh and thorough that it would stand as a clear guidepost in the annals of corporate law.“This is going to be a canonical case of how not to run a management buyout,” he said. “This is a case of a team working to undermine a process that otherwise looked like it worked.”Advertisement