
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
AUG. 27, 2015
James Stewart of The New York Times weighs in on the recent stock swings in an interview with CNBC..The steep market sell-off has spared hardly anyone. Even some of the country’s top-performing portfolio managers have been hit. A fund run by William Miller, the Legg Mason Opportunity Trust, gave back all of this year’s gains of 14 percent. Bill Smead, who manages the Smead Value Fund, lost about 10 percent over the last month. Both funds are now roughly flat over the last year.Yet the severe plunge in the world’s major stock markets — coming as it has four years since the last (brief) correction here in the United States and more than six years since the end of the last bear market — was something of a relief to the two seasoned mutual fund investors.“When you’ve been in this business for 35 years, as I have, you prefer a fast death to a slow death,” Mr. Smead said when I reached him in the midst of this week’s turmoil. “We’re not technical people, but for this bull market to have another leg, you have to have something like this happen.”That’s because sustained market rallies come not during periods of complacency and optimism, but when most investors have given up and thrown in the towel (think of March 2009). “It had been a long while since we’ve seen anything that looks like this sort of capitulation,” Mr. Smead said.AdvertisementMr. Miller said he met with his team on Monday after two days of unabated selling, and told them: “What happened today and Friday is that the froth is being blown off the beer. The beer is better without the froth.”AdvertisementThere’s no way to know where markets are headed next, of course. By some measures, United States stocks are still expensive relative to expected earnings.The AlphaSimplex Group in Cambridge, Mass., which follows a strictly quantitative, computer-driven approach, significantly lowered its exposure to United States stocks on Wednesday. “That’s in response to the above-average risk we’ve seen in the market, not just in the past few days, but building up over recent weeks and months, which includes the risk of contagion from abroad,” said Alexander D. Healy, director of strategic research at AlphaSimplex.But one thing is certain: Stock prices are much lower today than they were a few weeks ago, with every major index, both in the United States and overseas, down more than 10 percent, which is the definition of a correction. (A decline of 20 percent or more is considered to indicate a bear market.)Both Mr. Miller and Mr. Smead told me they saw what looked like significant bargains emerge from the sharp drop, and they were using the opportunity to add to positions in their favorite stocks.While Mr. Miller’s fund gave back all of this year’s gains, it still ranks near the top of its category, which is midcap value funds, and ranks first over three years, with an annualized return of nearly 29 percent, according to Morningstar. He was one of the experts I interviewed last year for my annual outlook column, and his prediction of “a lot more volatility than we’ve become used to” has been borne out this week.Mr. Miller told me he was struck that this week’s selling was across the board, affecting virtually all regions and sectors. “The selling was indiscriminate,” he said. “But everyone’s prospects have not changed identically and for the worse. That means there are opportunities.”So what was Mr. Miller buying this week? He said he was pursuing his themes of home builders (“completely unaffected by China”), airlines (“screamingly cheap, especially with low oil prices”) and money center banks (“generating huge amounts of capital”). He also said he was intrigued by Twitter, which was trading below its initial public offering price this week.AdvertisementMr. Smead’s Smead Value Fund (investor class) ranks first among large cap blended funds over five years, with a five-year annualized return of just under 19 percent, according to Morningstar.“We’re value investors,” Mr. Smead said, “and we have eight strict criteria for picking stocks,” one of which is “a low price in relation to intrinsic value.” (The other criteria are listed on Smead’s website.) “After four days of this correction, our portfolio is trading at 13.8 times forward earnings. That’s way better than 18.”He continued: “We try to take a long-term view. There are 86 million people in this country between the ages of 19 and 37. They don’t own stocks, they do drive cars, and they want to buy a house. This is nirvana for them” — because they haven’t lost any money in the market, gas prices are plunging and mortgage rates are likely to remain low — “and great for the United States economy.”Mr. Smead said he was buying four stocks, which he considered solid value propositions: Amgen, Berkshire Hathaway, American Express and News Corporation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If opportunities are appearing in the United States market, they are even more evident overseas, even in China, whose faltering economy and currency, and plunging markets, have been the trigger for the recent global market turmoil.In part that is because many emerging markets were already in a bear market before the recent plunge.“Emerging markets are generally looking attractive relative to their historic valuations,” said James Syme, a senior fund manager at J O Hambro Capital Management in London, although he added that there was a big difference between manufacturing exporters like China, Taiwan and South Korea, whose stocks “seem incredibly cheap,” and countries that rely heavily on commodity exports, like Brazil and Russia.The JOHCM International Select Fund ranks first over both three- and five-year periods in its category, which is foreign large cap growth funds, according to Morningstar, with annualized returns of 14 percent over three years. The fund is closed to new investors, but Mr. Syme manages the JOHCM Emerging Markets Opportunities Fund, which isn’t. Over the last year, it is down roughly 20 percent, which nonetheless puts it near the top of its category, which is diversified emerging markets.“We’re overweight in China, and we’re using periods of weakness to top up positions,” Mr. Syme said. “There are obviously stresses in the Chinese economy, but Chinese policy makers have plenty of tools to address those challenges. Interest rate cuts and currency weakness are two of those tools, and we expect to see results from their recent actions during the second half of the year.”AdvertisementMoreover, he added, “Chinese stock valuations are pricing in an awful lot of bad news.” He noted that the current forward price-earnings multiple on Hong Kong-listed Chinese stocks is nine, “which is about where it was after the collapse of Lehman.” At the same time, his fund is avoiding “the commodity exporting nations.”“We’re very underweight Latin America, Indonesia and Malaysia, and have only a few select positions in Russia and South Africa,” Mr. Syme said.Besides adding to positions in Hong Kong-listed Chinese shares, Mr. Syme said he was buying leading Asian technology companies, such as Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor.With the markets soaring on Wednesday and grinding higher in Thursday trading, purchases made earlier in the week look smart, for now.If the volatility continues and the indexes drop further, investors should remember what Mr. Miller says is a rather simple math lesson.“Lower prices now mean higher long-term rates of return,” he said, citing the example of John Maynard Keynes, who resisted pressure from the trustees of King’s College at Cambridge, whose investment portfolio Mr. Keynes managed, to sell stocks during the Great Depression.“If you sell when stocks go down, you’ll end up owning nothing when they hit bottom,” Mr. Miller said. “You should be doing the opposite.”The Common Sense column on Friday, about money managers who are looking for bargains after a global market sell-off, rendered incorrectly parts of the names of an asset management firm and two of its funds. It is J O Hambro Capital Management, not J. O. Hambro Asset Management, and the funds are the JOHCM International Select Fund and the JOHCM Emerging Markets Opportunities Fund, not the J.O. Hambro International Select Fund and the J.O. Hambro Global Emerging Markets Opportunities Fund.The Common Sense column on Friday, about money managers who are looking for bargains after a global market sell-off, misspelled the surname of the director of strategic research at the AlphaSimplex Group, who discussed the firm’s investment strategy. He is Alexander D. Healy, not Healey.A version of this article appears in print on August 28, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: With Stocks in Chaos, Some Funds Go Hunting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »