By JOHN KOBLINAUG. 27, 2015
Was it newsworthy or over the line? News outlets had to confront that question after Vester Lee Flanagan II fatally shot two television journalists in Virginia on Wednesday and then posted a video of the shooting to his Facebook account.The Daily News and The New York Post both received withering criticism Thursday for using stills from Mr. Flanagan’s video, with critics charging that the newspapers had sensationalized the killing.The Daily News, particularly, was roundly criticized for its front page. Under the headline “Executed on Live TV,” the paper published three stills from the video, which showed in chilling succession Mr. Flanagan pointing his gun at Alison Parker, a local news reporter, and then opening fire. He also killed Ms. Parker’s cameraman, Adam Ward; both worked for WDBJ in Roanoke.The Daily News defended its decision to use the images, saying they were “a definitive part of the story, however disturbing and horrific.” A spokeswoman said in a statement Thursday that the paper’s editors believed there should be stronger gun control laws and that the front page would give the issue more visibility “at a time when it is so easy for the public to become inured to such senseless violence.”AdvertisementThe Post declined to comment.The Boston Globe took a different approach, posting a still picture on its front page from the footage Mr. Ward was recording when he was gunned down. Taken from a skewed angle, it showed Mr. Flanagan standing over the fallen cameraman, gun in hand.Advertisement“Showing the shooter in that context felt more real and was a better portrayal of the terror of the moment than showing him, say, in a smiling headshot,” said Christine Chinlund, The Globe’s managing editor for news. She said the paper had been careful not to use images from the gunman’s video.The New York Times had a discussion about whether to use stills to accompany a column about the role social media played in the shooting. “We decided against running the pictures because they were deeply disturbing images that showed the act of killing,” Matthew Purdy, a deputy executive editor, said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CNN did not broadcast Mr. Flanagan’s video or any stills, a spokeswoman said. Likewise, ABC’s “World News Tonight” refused to show the video.“Something we wrestled with today: whether to grant the gunman his last wish by playing his video,” George Stephanopoulos, filling in for David Muir, said early in the broadcast Wednesday. “We will not.” NBC’s evening newscast did not play the video but used stills from it, showing the moments before Mr. Flanagan raised his gun.CBS, however, played 23 seconds of Mr. Flanagan’s video in its evening newscast, stopping it right before he began shooting. During the clip, the CBS News correspondent Jeff Pegues explained that Mr. Flanagan had aimed his gun at Ms. Parker, then lowered it out of view while Mr. Ward’s camera was pointed at a background scene, waiting for him to turn back toward Ms. Parker and her interview subject.David Rhodes, the president of CBS News, defended the decision in an interview, arguing that Mr. Flanagan’s movements made the clip newsworthy.“Using the material we did, we helped people understand the degree of premeditation behind the attack,” Mr. Rhodes said. “If you don’t show some of what we showed, you can leave people with the impression that somebody just snapped.”When asked about the other evening newscasts’ decision not to show the video, Mr. Rhodes said: “I think we are harder in our approach, and that’s why we showed what we did. The softer approach is to take additional steps to protect the audience from some of this material. I’m not sure that’s helping their understanding of what happened.”Katie Rogers and Sydney Ember contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 28, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Front Pages on Killings in Virginia Spur Anger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.