AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Consumer spending rose in July as American households stepped up vehicle purchases, but consumer sentiment dipped in August. Though confidence remains at levels consistent with solid spending growth, many households have been fretting over a recent stock market sell-off.The Commerce Department said on Friday that consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic activity in the United States, increased 0.3 percent last month, after a similar gain in June.Spending on long-lasting goods like automobiles increased 1.1 percent, reversing June’s decline. Auto purchases accounted for about half of the increase. When adjusted for inflation, consumer spending rose 0.2 percent; it was flat in June.“We score this report as a solid adjunct to yesterday’s strong G.D.P. report that should encourage members of the Fed’s policy-making committee that income and spending fundamentals remain in good shape,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York.Economists say that underlying strength — also highlighted by a rebound in business spending, and buoyant housing and labor markets — gives the economy muscle to weather the fallout from the market rout.  The economy grew at a 3.7 percent annual rate in the second quarter, according to revised data released on Thursday. The consumer spending data was the latest report indicating momentum in the economy as it confronted global markets turbulence, sparked by concerns over a slowing Chinese economy, which has diminished the chances of an interest rate increase next month.The personal consumption expenditures index, excluding food and energy, rose 1.2 percent in the 12 months through July, the smallest rise since March 2011. In another report, the University of Michigan said its consumer sentiment index fell to 91.9 this month from a reading of 93.1 in July. Still, the index remained at levels consistent with a 2.9 percent growth pace in consumer spending this year.The University of Michigan survey showed a mild decline in buying intentions for durable goods and an increase in home purchase expectations.“We continue to see relatively stable buying intentions as a positive for consumer spending activity in the months to come. And as the global equity markets have rebounded, we expect consumer confidence to pick up over the next few months,” said Cheng Chen, an economist at TD Securities in New York.Consumer spending should be supported by steady income growth and higher savings. Last month, personal income increased 0.4 percent in July. Income has risen by that same percentage for four straight months.Savings increased to a $651.1 billion annual rate, from $627.3 billion in June.“The economy has built up a huge amount of steam to push it forward in the months to come with the substantial cash reserves that consumers are holding,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank in New York.Advertisement