
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
AUG. 29, 2015
This interview with Greg Schott, chief executive of MuleSoft, a software company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles or doing entrepreneurial things when you were younger?A. I played a lot of sports. I wasn’t a great natural athlete, but I learned that the harder I worked, the better the results. That was a good feedback loop for me.I also started working from a young age. I would cut lawns and shovel snow, and in high school I worked in a frame store. I was in the back room making frames, and always trying to figure out a way to do it simpler and faster.When the owners opened another store, they said, “We want you to go over there and set up the whole store and figure out the flow of everything.” It was a cool experience as a 16-year-old to design a little factory. It was a good reminder that if you put your mind to something and work at it, people will recognize it and maybe ask you to do something more important later.AdvertisementAnd were you doing those jobs just for spending money?I had this drive for independence. I liked having my own plan and my own money. I wanted to pay for college myself. I was on a mission to do that. I don’t know where that came from. In our family, there was this push to start something and do something.Tell me more about your parents.My father was a Navy pilot. He was the first person in his family to go to college. After the Navy, he joined Xerox for a while, and then he was an entrepreneur. He’s the most high-integrity person I’ve ever known. There’s no pretense or spin. I learned from him to be incredibly direct. My mom spent years raising us and then worked in office administration roles. She was just behind you the whole time. With my mom, you felt like you could do anything.What was your first management role?I managed an assembly line with 17 employees at Westinghouse. We built radar systems for B-1 bombers. I was 22.How did that go?It can be tough when you’re managing a group of people who’ve been doing something maybe for 20 or 30 years, and you’ve been doing it only for a year or two. But I always walked in with this attitude of, let’s just make it better. We were always trying to figure out ways to improve the process, because in the defense business, accuracy and reliability have to be great.But you also learn that just because you think something is the best thing for the organization, others don’t necessarily share the same motivation.AdvertisementYou worked at a number of tech companies before becoming C.E.O. of MuleSoft. What lessons did you learn about culture along the way?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I learned that it can take years to build a great culture and you can tear it down in very short order. It’s like a building — you can spend years building a beautiful building and then it can just collapse.The problems I’ve seen have been lack of communication, which can lead to a lack of trust. If people don’t feel connected to the leadership and they don’t feel like they understand where the company is headed, people will fill in the blanks, and often not with positive things. It’s just human nature.Another one is when you get leadership that looks like they’re out for themselves. People pick up on that when decisions are made that are not necessarily with everybody’s best interest at heart. It’s hard to put your finger on it, but it’s an attitude.Factions are also a problem, and I’ve seen this in the tech world as companies grow quickly. There tends to be an old-timer group — the ones who have been around forever, which in technology is three to five years — and the new people who were brought on board later.If there’s any kind of different treatment, like the folks who have been there since the beginning are treated as if they’re the only ones that can really figure things out, or if the new ones are considered the saviors of the company, that sends a terrible signal. We’re all here together to make it work.How do you hire? What do you look for?First off, we’re looking for someone who’s a good human. That is defined by high integrity, being a great team player, and they want to win as a company first, team second, individually third. The next thing we look for is people who are whip-smart. The third thing we look for is a clear track record of achievement.And I also work hard to understand the decisions they’ve made along the way, like why they left a certain job to take the next one. You learn all kinds of things from why they made those job transitions. I’ll also ask what they’ve done that changed things for their organization as opposed to just doing the job that they were asked to do. What did they do that nobody asked them to do?What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?The first thing I’d say is that you should be spending as much time making decisions about your job as you did making a decision about the college you chose. And when you make those decisions, you need to really dig in. Candidates should be interviewing us every bit as much as we’re interviewing them. But I’m often surprised by how people haven’t really researched the company before they come in for interviews.I also tell them that starting their career is a bit like being at the top of a mogul ski run. You can try to map out your line for 10 moguls, but after the first two moguls, you’re usually off your line. You’re never going to be able to map it out to the bottom. It’s about making sure that you’re on the right slope and you picked the right mountain. Don’t worry so much about how it’s all going to play out in the end.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on August 30, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Threats to a Positive Workplace.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »