AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew PollackThe nation’s three largest drug benefit managers said on Thursday that they would cease doing business with a mysterious pharmacy that has been bolstering sales of products made by Valeant Pharmaceuticals International.Express Scripts, CVS Health and OptumRx said they would stop paying for drugs dispensed by the pharmacy, Philidor Rx Services.Valeant stock dropped nearly 5 percent on Thursday; it has lost more than half its value since mid-September when it and other companies came under fire for the high cost of their drugs.Philidor is a mail-order pharmacy that almost exclusively dispenses Valeant’s dermatology products, many of which are expensive and compete with much cheaper alternatives.The use of such so-called specialty pharmacies in this context is drawing scrutiny because it appears intended to help make it more difficult for pharmacists and health plans to switch patients to the less expensive alternatives. Valeant has said that Philidor accounted for about 7 percent of its total sales and profits in the third quarter.Express Scripts said it was removing Philidor from its network. It also said that it was evaluating other such “captive pharmacies” that derive the vast majority of their business from one manufacturer or one drug.“We routinely monitor our network and take action when we see pharmacies trying to circumvent solutions, like formulary management, that protect payers and patients from wasteful drug spend,” Express Scripts said in a statement. Formulary management refers to controlling spending, such as by encouraging use of certain drugs over others.CVS said in a statement that it had been reviewing results of audits of Philidor and had terminated the pharmacy “for noncompliance with the terms of its provider agreement.” OptumRx said it conducted an audit in late 2014 “and subsequently began terminating them from all networks in the interest of our customers.”Valeant has encouraged doctors to submit prescriptions for its products to Philidor, rather than send patients to the corner drugstore. That makes it more difficult for pharmacists and insurers to substitute a less expensive alternative. Co-payments are often subsidized, making it easier for the patients to agree to get the higher-priced Valeant drug. And Philidor handles the task of fighting for reimbursement from insurers, taking that off doctors’ hands.What has raised even more suspicion is that Valeant did not disclose its relationship with Philidor until this month, when word started to get around, even though it had paid $100 million in December for an option to acquire the pharmacy, for no additional payment. Valeant said the transaction was too small to be material.Another question is why Valeant did not simply buy Philidor, especially since it consolidates Philidor’s financial results into its own. It seems this arrangement allows Valeant to claim that Philidor is an independent company, perhaps protecting itself from liability.J. Michael Pearson, the chief executive of Valeant, defended the company’s relationship with Philidor in a long conference call with investors on Monday. But at the same time, the company said its board of directors had formed a committee to examine that relationship.In a statement issued Thursday, Laurie Little, a spokeswoman for Valeant, said the company’s drugs “are provided to patients through many channels, including traditional retail pharmacies, specialty pharmacies, and directly from health care providers. We look forward to continuing to work with our full range of partners to ensure patients have access to the important medicines they need.”Companies like Valeant that use these pharmacies — Horizon Pharma is another example — defend the practice. They say that if a doctor prescribes a particular drug that might have some advantage, patients should get that drug, even if it is more expensive. The specialty pharmacies deliver the drugs quickly, even before insurance matters are settled — meaning that if the insurer refuses to pay, the drug company absorbs the cost. Also, they say, out-of-pocket costs can be much less than if patients go through a regular drugstore.Philidor says little about itself on its website. It was denied a license to dispense drugs in California because, the state said, it had not been truthful identifying its owners and financial officers.When Philidor failed to get the license in California, entities affiliated with it bought stakes in at least two California pharmacies. One of those, R&O Pharmacy, has presented evidence in litigation that the entity that bought the stake tried to hide that it was a front for Philidor. It also claims that Philidor used R&O’s pharmacy identification numbers to help fill its own prescriptions.Express Scripts said it was also evaluating whether to terminate relationships with the pharmacies affiliated with Philidor and any others it can find that are affiliated with Valeant.One of the products dispensed by Philidor is Solodyn, a Valeant acne drug that costs more than $1,000 a month and is a formulation of an old generic antibiotic, minocycline.Claims of advantages over the generic form are “a bunch of nonsense,” said Dr. Robert Brody, a dermatologist in Shaker Heights, Ohio.Another product is Jublia, an ointment for toenail fungus that costs more than $500 a bottle and is one of Valeant’s fastest-growing treatments. Philidor handled 44 percent of Valeant’s Jublia business in the third quarter, Valeant said Monday.Both CVS and Express Scripts own specialty pharmacies of their own — CVS Specialty and Accredo — which are the nation’s largest.These pharmacies mainly handle complex drugs that need to be injected or refrigerated, and they often provide support, like call centers staffed with nurses, to assist patients. While such specialty pharmacies, which are a fast-growing part of the business, have their own controversial aspects, they are different from Philidor, which handles conventional retail drugs. Moreover, most specialty pharmacies handle products of multiple manufacturers while Philidor is overwhelmingly devoted to Valeant.Express Scripts said in its statement that it was “important to clarify the difference” between “niche pharmacies that are operated by manufacturers to push a particular product” and specialty pharmacies that serve patients with complex diseases.Advertisement