By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONAUG. 30, 2015
In 2009, the hedge fund manager Daniel B. Zwirn closed his firm, D.B. Zwirn, amid a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation into accounting irregularities.Six years later, Mr. Zwirn is trying his luck again, this time with the backing of a big investor. Mr. Zwirn has teamed up with Westaim Corporation, a Canadian investment company, to create Arena Finance Company and Arena Investors, according to people briefed on the matter.Arena Finance, which will begin with roughly $183 million, will buy and originate commercial and real estate loans, seeking to go where banks are no longer willing to go, like loans to small-scale oil and gas companies and subprime auto lending, according to these people.Arena Investors, which currently has around $15 million of Mr. Zwirn’s family money, will invest money on behalf of institutional investors including insurance companies, looking for opportunities around the world to lend to companies that need cash or investors in distressed situations who want an easy exit, these people said.AdvertisementWestaim is expected to announced the news on Monday.The partnership begins a new chapter for Mr. Zwirn, whose D.B. Zwirn was upended after the firm uncovered a series of accounting irregularities in late 2006, including $3.8 million taken from investors to help finance the purchase of an $18 million Gulfstream IV private jet.AdvertisementIn a letter to investors later, Mr. Zwirn said the conduct was “completely unacceptable to us and deeply embarrassing,” and the firm repaid clients, with interest. But investors took flight, at one point redeeming $1.4 billion between September 2006 and November 2007.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By early 2008, the firm had closed two of its biggest funds. And in 2009, D.B. Zwirn sold its remaining $2 billion in assets to Fortress Investment Group.In 2011, after several years of investigation, the S.E.C. closed the investigation of Mr. Zwirn and of the firm. The agency then sued Perry Gruss, the chief financial officer, contending that he “knowingly misused” $870 million in clients’ funds — including for the Gulfstream IV. The original discovery and subsequent investigation set off lawsuits between Mr. Zwirn and Mr. Gruss, and investors and D.B. Zwirn.This will be the first time since D.B. Zwirn that Mr. Zwirn manages money for outside investors.Like many hedge funds, Arena Investors will charge a 2 percent yearly fee for administration and receive 20 percent of all returns each year. Once the hedge fund’s assets under management reach $1 billion, Mr. Zwirn will be allowed to own 49 percent of the firm. After Arena Investors reaches $5 billion, Mr. Zwirn will own 75 percent of the firm.A spokeswoman for Westaim was not available to comment. A spokesman for Mr. Zwirn declined to comment.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.