By THE NEW YORK TIMESAUG. 30, 2015
Major automakers are expected on Tuesday to report healthy August sales of new vehicles in the United States, despite posting an overall decline from the same month last year, which included the Labor Day weekend. Industry analysts project that year-over-year sales will drop slightly, but will still exceed 1.5 million vehicles for the month. So far this year, consumers have flooded vehicle showrooms to buy pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, while sales of passenger cars have declined. The trend has benefited the Detroit automakers, which are expected to report sales increases in August. Analysts do not expect the recent stock market fluctuations to have had much effect on the auto industry. —Bill VlasicSamsung Electronics, the No. 1 phone maker, introduced a smartwatch two years before Apple released its Apple Watch. But being first to market has not produced fruitful results for the South Korean manufacturer — the company is the No. 5 maker of wearable computers, after Fitbit, Apple, Xiaomi and Garmin, according to the market research firm IDC. Still, Samsung plans to introduce another watch on Thursday: the Gear S2, this time with a round screen. —Brian X. ChenThe European Central Bank is not expected to change monetary policy when it meets in Frankfurt on Thursday. But the central bank’s governing council is likely to have an intense discussion about how economic slowdown in China could affect the 19 countries in the eurozone. Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, could signal that the governing council is becoming more willing to step up purchases of government bonds and other assets to pump more money into the economy and stimulate growth. Some analysts say the central bank could even announce an increase in asset purchases. —Jack EwingIn one of the most brazen promotional efforts in Hollywood history, which is saying something, Disney will introduce merchandise from “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” starting in Australia on Thursday and unfolding over 18 hours in 15 cities and 12 countries. YouTube personalities represented by Disney-owned Maker Studios will, one by one, open “Star Wars” toys live on camera, and Disney-owned ABC News will carry the streams on its website. Then, at midnight on Friday, roughly 1,000 stores worldwide will open to sell the products. (Two Disney-owned stores are charging $50 just to get in the door.) Whether fans turn out for what Disney has billed “Force Friday” remains to be seen, but retailers are on board in a big way. Walmart, which will stock 500 products related to the movie, including themed grocery items, moved up its Christmas layaway program to coincide with the event. —Brooks BarnesOn Friday morning, the Labor Department will report the latest data on hiring and unemployment in August. The monthly report on the state of the job market is always closely watched. But this one is under Wall Street’s microscope because it is the last one before Federal Reserve policy makers meet in late September to decide whether to raise interest rates for the first time since the recession — a move they have signaled they plan to make soon. Wall Street is looking for slightly more than 200,000 jobs to have been added for the month and an unemployment rate that has stayed flat at 5.3 percent. A significantly more robust number might nudge the Fed to move, but global market volatility recently has prompted some analysts to predict a December rate increase. One wild card: In seven of the last 10 years, the August number for payrolls has come in 48,000 below the consensus, only to be revised upward later, according to RBS. In other words, this one is going to be a cliffhanger for nervous traders and investors. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.