AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — As Bombardier, the aerospace manufacturer, struggles with a new commercial jet project, it will receive a $1 billion bailout from the province of Quebec, helping ease concerns about the company’s cash situation.Bombardier’s new single-aisle planes, the CSeries airliners, were supposed to be a game-changer for the company, a direct challenge to its much larger rivals, Boeing and Airbus. But the project, the company’s first attempt to move beyond the regional and business aircraft market, has been marred by delays, cost overruns and a dearth of orders.The infusion of money will go directly into the CSeries effort, making the provincial government a partner in the project. The deal provides much-needed cash just as the company gears up for production on the planes.“What Bombardier has done with the Quebec government is give themselves some time,” said Sash Tusa, an aerospace analyst with Agency Partners in London.The project has weighed heavily on the company. On Thursday, Bombardier reported that it lost $4.9 billion during its third quarter, compared with a profit of $74 million the same period a year earlier.Much of the loss came from a $3.2 billion write-down of the value of the CSeries project, an amount similar to the original capital budget for the airliner. Bombardier also wrote off $1.2 billion because of the cancellation of a new Lear business jet model.The total write-downs are substantially larger than the company’s current market value of $3.16 billion. Shares of the company, which continued to fall on Thursday, are off 63 percent over the last year.In a conference call, Bombardier’s chief executive, Alain Bellemare, who came to the company in February, rejected an analyst’s suggestion that it is on the verge of conceding defeat for the CSeries. He called the government bailout “a big deal” that should give more “confidence” in the project.“With this, our liquidity position is solid,” Mr. Bellemare said.He noted that unlike their rival products from Boeing and Airbus, the two CSeries models were completely new aircraft. Without offering specifics, he said that the airplanes, during tests, were exceeding their promised performance specifications.The CSeries airliners, which can carry from 100 to 150 passengers, were intended to be the first planes to use a new engine technology that is significantly quieter than current engines’ and that burns less fuel. But the delay in the technology’s release allowed Boeing to develop a version of its best-selling 737 aircraft with a similar engine technology. Airbus created variations of the A320 and A319 that also offer the new technology.Despite Bombardier’s inability to attract orders, Mr. Bellemare said interest remains strong in the CSeries planes, which are slightly smaller than their competitors and offer airlines lower overall flight costs. So far, the CSeries has produced only 243 firm orders, none in the last year.During the call, Bombardier said that it did not expect the cash drain from the new airliners to end for five or six more years. Until that time, the project will require another $2 billion on top of the government’s contribution, the company said.As the company looks to stabilize its cash situation, Bombardier is expected to offer a minority stake in its transportation unit, which is the largest maker of trains in the world outside of China. Mr. Bellemare, however, said only that such a step would be taken “soon.”While Bombardier’s aviation and rail equipment operations are spread throughout the world, the company maintains a large presence in Quebec. It has built a massive assembly complex for the CSeries at an abandoned airport north of Montreal.Some investors have been pushing for an end to the special voting share structure that keeps control of the company in the hands of the descendants of its founder, Joseph-Armand Bombardier. But many Quebecers worry that such a step would lead to the company’s breakup and a significant decline in its operations within the province.Quebec’s investment will give the government a 49.5 percent stake in the CSeries program. The company is now bound to continue various operations, including the assembly of the airplanes, in the province for at least 20 years.Government investment did not appear to be Bombardier’s first choice for dealing with the cash drain. Airbus and Bombardier confirmed this month that they had held discussions but offered little in the way of details.Mr. Tusa, the aerospace analyst, said other partners may appear. “I wouldn’t assume for one second that the opportunity is lost for Airbus or Boeing to look at the CSeries again,” he said.Advertisement