AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra AlterA rare books expert who reviewed recently discovered manuscript pages by Harper Lee has concluded that they are from an early version of “To Kill a Mockingbird,” and not a possible third novel by the author.The expert, James S. Jaffe, was brought in to evaluate the pages discovered by Ms. Lee’s lawyer, Tonja B. Carter, who has said she found them in the same safe deposit box where she came upon the recently published “Go Set a Watchman,” Ms. Lee’s long-awaited second novel. In an opinion piece in The Wall Street Journal in July, Ms. Carter speculated that the pages could constitute a bridge novel linking “Mockingbird” and “Watchman,” and said she planned to use an expert to analyze the pages, with Ms. Lee’s consent.Mr. Jaffe’s findings were first reported by The Wall Street Journal, which posted his full report on its website. It includes images of the first page of the early draft, which opens with the lines, “Where did it begin for us? It began with Andrew Jackson.” It continues with a description of the origins of Maycomb County, the setting for “Mockingbird” and “Watchman.” The final version of “Mockingbird” opens with the character of Scout describing how her brother, Jem, broke his arm. Mr. Jaffe also looked at the original typescript for “Watchman,” and a copy-edited typescript for “Mockingbird,” which were also in the safe deposit box.Mr. Jaffe said he read “Mockingbird” and “Watchman” in preparation for reviewing the pages on Aug. 21. He said he was struck by the “substantial differences” between the early draft of “Mockingbird” and the published version. Some passages resembled parts of “Watchman,” showing how Ms. Lee transformed “Watchman” into “Mockingbird.” The pages appear to be assembled from several early drafts. The highest numbered page was 193, for example, but there were only a total of 145 pages. In an interview, Mr. Jaffe said that manuscript pages, which contain notes and edits, could offer fresh insight into Ms. Lee’s creative process.“What’s most interesting is, what happened, how did she do that, how did she pull that off?” he said, adding that, as a first novel, “it has all the faults of a first novel. Mockingbird’s a masterpiece. How do you get from here to there?”Mr. Jaffe said he did not meet with Ms. Lee during his visit, and he did not ask Ms. Carter why the author did not participate in the review. Ms. Lee, 89, has difficulty hearing and seeing but can read documents and books using a magnifying machine, according to people close to her.Some lawyers and scholars have said they were surprised by Ms. Carter’s decision to have an outside expert, rather than the author, determine what the manuscript pages represented.“This is what you would do if there was a new Faulkner manuscript,” said Max Kennerly, a trial lawyer who has raised questions about Ms. Carter’s stewardship of Ms. Lee’s affairs in his blog. “The problem here is Harper Lee is alive and, according to Tonja Carter, she is in great, sound mental health.”For now, Mr. Jaffe’s report has ended speculation that a third novel by Ms. Lee might be published. Many were shocked when HarperCollins announced earlier this year that it would publish “Watchman,” a novel that Ms. Lee wrote and set aside in the 1950s. After the success of “Mockingbird,” Ms. Lee had long maintained she had no interest in publishing another novel. There have been conflicting reports about when the “Watchman” manuscript was discovered. Initially, Ms. Carter said that she stumbled upon the manuscript for “Watchman” last August, but she later acknowledged that she had first seen “Watchman” in 2011, when the manuscript pages were reviewed by an appraiser from the Sotheby’s auction house. In her Wall Street Journal article, she said that she had not recognized what “Watchman” was at first. She went back for a closer look in August 2014 after someone in Ms. Lee’s inner circle mentioned that she had written another novel.Mr. Jaffe said he was not hired to give a formal appraisal of the manuscript pages. He added that it would be difficult to determine the financial value of the document without knowing what else Ms. Lee’s archives include. A full early draft of “Mockingbird” would be highly valuable.“I think the best thing that could happen would be if someone would gather up whatever papers Harper Lee has and preserve them,” he said.Advertisement