AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadAfter several years of delays, Japan’s first commercial airliner in about half a century is scheduled for its first test flight — an hourlong ride out of Nagoya Airport.The Mitsubishi Regional Jet — a small commercial jet plane seating up to 92 passengers and powered by new-generation Pratt and Whitney turbofan engines — aims to break into the regional market dominated by Embraer of Brazil and Bombardier of Canada. Mitsubishi Aircraft Corporation, the Japanese plane maker, said on Monday that the first test flight would take place in the second half of October. The exact date will be disclosed the day before the flight, it said in a statement.The announcement is a significant milestone for the program, which is about three years behind schedule. It is also a major test of the capacity of Japan’s aerospace industry to find customers beyond its borders and win market share in a highly challenging business. The MRJ is expected to enter into service in 2017.Plane makers have been building increasingly larger jets to fill the needs of a growing global air travel market. The Boeing 737, the smallest airplane now manufactured by Boeing, seats 130 passengers, and the smallest from Airbus, the A319, seats 124. This has created an opening for makers of smaller planes to cater to shorter routes or less popular markets.But while the market for larger jets is expected to grow considerably in the coming decades, the prospects for regional jets are not nearly as robust; that segment of the market has been a victim of high oil prices in recent years, restrictive pilot contracts and generally poor economics.A recent report by the Teal Group, an aviation consulting group, noted that the regional segment of the aviation industry was the only one that did not grow during the boom years of 2003 to 2008. While large commercial jet deliveries grew at an annual rate of 7.4 percent, and then at 12.4 percent between 2008 and 2012, regional aircraft deliveries grew at 4.4 percent between 2003 and 2008.Even so, this growth was entirely attributable to sales of turboprop airplanes, while jet deliveries were flat. What is more, the regional segment declined by a third between 2008 and 2012.“There is little about the regional jet market that inspires hope,” according to Richard Aboulafia, the author of the report.In 2014, Teal Group noted, regional jet deliveries amounted to 6.8 percent of the global transportation market by value, down from 15 percent in 1989.Still, the success of Embraer — which controls about half the market — as well as national industrial policies and pride have spurred other countries to build their own commercial jet business. In addition to Mitsubishi, two other regional jet programs are being developed, one in Russia with the Superjet, and the other in China with the Comac. Japan’s last passenger plane was the YS-11, a turboprop aircraft. Between 1964 and 1973, only 182 of those planes were built by Nihon Aircraft Manufacturing, a consortium of Japanese heavy industries, including Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, which now owns Mitsubishi Aircraft; Kawasaki Heavy Industries; and Fuji Heavy Industries.In recent years, Japan has developed a major aerospace industry building airframes, wings and other components for Boeing and Airbus. For example, about a third of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner, including its wings, is manufactured in Japan. (A Japanese company also produced the plane’s batteries, which suffered from repeated problems and led to the fleet’s grounding for three months.)Mitsubishi saw an opening when Bombardier focused on building a bigger jet, the C-Series, to compete with Airbus and Boeing, and Embraer initially failed to offer a new version of its regional jet with new, more fuel-efficient engines, known as turbofans.Mitsubishi first unveiled the MRJ at the Paris Air Show in 2007. The Japanese company initially sought to build a jet made of carbon composite, capitalizing on its experience building composite structures for the Boeing 787. But as the plane’s design evolved, the company eventually settled on a more conventional metal airframe.Still, Mitsubishi has said the plane will be less costly to operate than its rivals because of its more efficient engines. But some of the MRJ’s first-mover advantage has been eroded because of delays with the program.The MRJ is offered in two versions, a 92-seat jet with a list price of $40 million and a 78-seat jet, listed at $35 million.The company has received about 400 orders, including 223 firm orders. Most are from regional airlines in the United States — including an order of 100 planes from SkyWest. The United States is the largest regional air market in the world.To bolster its market presence in the United States, Mitsubishi opened an engineering center in Seattle in August that will eventually employ 150 engineers, including about 50 from Japan. The company said then that it hoped the move would help “tap professional expertise on aircraft development” and help speed production of the MRJ.Mr. Aboulafia, the aviation consultant, said that producing a regional jet was also a way for Japanese companies to maintain some domestic expertise in jet design if the country decided to build its own military planes again.“It’s sort of a consolation prize for Japan’s failure to create its own national air combat industry,” Mr. Aboulafia said. “Japan has been doing great in aero-structure business, particularly composite structures. Whatever happens with the MRJ is pretty insignificant compared with the structure business.”Advertisement