AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe likelihood that Charter Communications’ takeover of Time Warner Cable will close before the end of the year — as the companies predicted earlier — now “feels ambitious,” the chief executive of Time Warner Cable said Thursday.Federal regulators are now scrutinizing Charter’s pair of deals totaling $67.1 billion for Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks. If approved, those mergers would create the country’s second-largest cable operator, with about 24 million customers in 41 states, after Comcast.The transactions were announced in May. In April, Comcast’s $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable collapsed under regulatory pressure.“If there’s one thing I’ve learned over the last couple of years, it is that I am not terribly good at projecting when regulators act on our deals,” Robert D. Marcus, the Time Warner Cable chief executive, said during a conference call on Thursday.Thomas M. Rutledge, chief executive of Charter, said during a separate call that the company was “operationally” ready for the deal to close by the end of the year but that realistically he expected the transaction to close during the first quarter of 2016.He said the company was working closely with federal regulators to ensure they had all the information they need to evaluate the transaction. He also noted that the deal had received approval from shareholders, as well as from most of the state governments from which it is needed.The comments came as both Time Warner Cable and Charter reported strong third-quarter results that — at least for now — brightened the gloom-and-doom outlook on cord cutting, when people cancel their cable subscriptions in favor of cheaper streaming alternatives. Both companies beat expectations for video subscriber losses and broadband subscriber gains.“It’s time to change the narrative about cord cutting,” Craig Moffett, an analyst with MoffettNathanson Research, said in a research note. “It is turning out that even cable’s video business may be a bit more future-proof than imagined.”Mr. Moffett noted that the cable industry’s efforts to increase the availability of video-on-demand offerings and of slimmer channel bundles, as well as more digital and interactive apps to receive cable television, means that the industry “may not be such a dinosaur after all.”At Time Warner Cable, the country’s second-largest cable operator, the company reported a loss of 7,000 video subscribers during the third quarter this year, the best third quarter since 2006. That compares with a loss of 184,000 video subscribers during the same quarter last year.Total revenue increased 3.6 percent to $5.9 billion during the quarter. Net income attributable to Time Warner Cable shareholders for the period was $437 million, down 14 percent from last year.At Charter, the country’s fourth-largest cable operator, the company reported a gain of 12,000 video subscribers during the third quarter this year. That compares with a loss of 9,000 video subscribers during the same quarter last year.Total revenue was $2.5 billion, up 7.2 percent from the same period last year. Net income was $54 million, up from a $53 million loss last year.Charter said its costs related to the pending transactions accounted for $12 million of total third-quarter operating costs.The results, combined with strong third-quarter results at Comcast, set a more positive tone going into next week, when big media companies, including Walt Disney, 21st Century Fox and Time Warner, report earnings. Three months ago, media industry stocks suffered sharp declines because of fears of cord cutting, ratings drop-offs and weak advertising sales.The companies will continue to face questions as to whether the stronger results from the cable companies reflect just a temporary fix or a rosier picture in the long term.“We expect this will be a good day for media stocks,” Todd Juenger, a media analyst with Bernstein, said in a research note. “We question whether that will last.”Advertisement