
Breakingviews By                     
JOHN FOLEY

OCT. 29, 2015
There’s no easy cure for tax.Pfizer, the pharmaceutical giant, is weighing a merger with its rival Allergan. No wonder: Pfizer is duty bound to pay 25 percent of its profit to the United States government, while its Botox-making peer has a tax rate of just 5 percent. Yet persuading Allergan to share its expertise could be as painful as the saggy-face surgery its customers hope to avoid.Pfizer’s effort to merge with its tax-light rival AstraZeneca fizzled in May 2014. Astra is now too small to tick one of the likely must-haves for a so-called inversion where one company body-snatches another’s tax rate — namely that the target emerges with 40 percent of the combined company.Given the desire of Ian Read, Pfizer’s chief, for a “competitive tax rate,” the most likely targets are GlaxoSmithKline and Allergan. The latter, domiciled in Ireland but largely in the United States, may come with fewer political strings than the former, which has a similar size and is British.The question is at what price. Allergan would have only 34 percent of the $332 billion combined group if the companies were crunched together at their latest traded values. That means Pfizer would need to pay a premium out of whatever savings it hoped to make on its taxable profit.AdvertisementThose are not small. Analysts estimate that Pfizer’s pretax profit in 2017 will be $21 billion. Cut its tax rate from 25 percent to, say, 15 percent, and the annual savings would be $2.1 billion. Finally, pop that on the 10 times forward earnings at which Pfizer has, on average, traded over the last decade, according to Thomson Reuters data, and it is worth $21 billion.The snag is that Allergan is in a strong position to demand a big chunk of that value for itself. The companies’ combined values, including tax savings, are a notional $353 billion. Giving Allergan shareholders 40 percent of that to satisfy the tax inversion requirements would produce a 25 percent uplift. And it leaves no uplift at all for Pfizer.AdvertisementPfizer can smudge the numbers a little. The real tax rate could turn out to be even lower. And Pfizer could create more value by cutting Allergan’s costs – though if that is the game, the boss, Brent Saunders, may rather pursue acquisitions of his own. There is doubtless room for negotiation – but Allergan holds the upper hand.John Foley is Reuters Breakingviews editor for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »