AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioSFX Entertainment, the beleaguered promoter of dance music events, has canceled the One Tribe festival outside Los Angeles, the company’s first business casualty in the face of mounting financial problems in recent weeks.One Tribe, planned for Sept. 25 and 26 at Lake Perris, in Riverside County, had been planned as the inaugural California festival of ID&T, a major dance promoter from Holland that SFX bought in 2013. The festival was advertised as a mix of music, yoga and “spirituality,” with performers including Kygo, Carl Craig and Damian Lazarus.Consolidation in the concert business has resulted in many of the biggest outdoor festivals coming under the control of just a handful of companies. Here is a sampling of some of those events and the promoters that own them, either in full or in partnerships.But on Tuesday, organizers announced that event had been “indefinitely postponed.”Jacob Smid, managing director of SFX Live North America, added in a statement: “We had an ambitious plan to bring an innovative and unique experience built around the spirit of community, art and music to an amazing venue in Southern California. Unfortunately, disappointing ticket sales put us in a position of choosing between compromising our vision and the overall experience at One Tribe, or canceling it.”SFX, which presents dozens of festivals and other dance events around the world, has faced speculation from Wall Street analysts that it might go bankrupt. The company’s stock has lost more than 80 percent of its value this year. Much of that drop came in the last month after Robert F.X. Sillerman, its chairman and chief executive, failed to complete a deal to take the company private.SFX has posted growing losses and amassed $295 million in debt. Last week, its credit rating was downgraded by both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s. On Tuesday, SFX also disclosed in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that those downgrades had caused short-term disruptions in its business, forcing it to make “upfront payments to more of its live event vendors, impacting the company’s liquidity.”A spokesman for SFX said that none of its other events had been canceled, including the Electric Zoo festival in New York this weekend and TomorrowWorld, planned for Sept. 25 to 27 outside Atlanta.Advertisement