By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and LESLIE PICKEROCT. 29, 2015
Pfizer has long played an important role in United States history over its 166 years, including producing painkillers during the Civil War and penicillin in World War II.Yet the company, one of the country’s oldest drug makers, is again looking to renounce its corporate citizenship by buying a foreign rival, raising the prospect of another messy fight with lawmakers in Washington.Both Pfizer and Allergan, which makes Botox and has its tax domicile in Ireland, confirmed on Thursday that they were in friendly talks to combine, a move that would create a pharmaceutical behemoth. With the market value of the smaller Allergan at nearly $120 billion, it would be the biggest merger in a banner year for deal making and the biggest takeover ever in health care.While Pfizer is likely to wring cost savings and other efficiencies from a deal, one of the main advantages to buying Allergan is undoubtedly the chance for Pfizer to lower its own tax rate, which will be about 25 percent this year. Pfizer’s chief executive, Ian C. Read, has made no secret of his disdain for his company’s tax rate, which he says leaves Pfizer at a competitive disadvantage against foreign rivals.AdvertisementOne of the chief ways that Pfizer has looked to reduce its taxes is through what is known as an inversion. In such a transaction, an American company buys a sizable company that has its headquarters abroad. If certain conditions are met, the American buyer can then move its corporate home abroad.AdvertisementLast year, Pfizer sought to buy the British drug maker AstraZeneca, spurring protest from lawmakers and other critics. The takeover effort failed in the face of strong opposition from AstraZeneca and eventually prompted the United States Treasury Department to tighten some of the guidelines that made inversions so attractive to corporations.The regulatory changes led to the scrapping of a number of mergers, including the planned union of the drug makers AbbVie and Shire. But Mr. Read’s interest in pursuing an inversion has not wavered: If he could make one work, he would.“If we believe the value is still there and we believe, under our interpretation of these rules, there is still value, I see no reason why we wouldn’t be able to do an inversion,” he told Bloomberg News last fall.Pfizer, which has a long history of acquisitions, spent $15 billion to buy the biopharmaceutical company Hospira this year. But now it has set its sights on a deal that could finally yield the inversion it has long desired.Though much of Allergan’s operations are in Parsippany, N.J., the company technically has its headquarters in Dublin. Being based there has bestowed tremendous advantages for the smaller drug maker: In contrast to Pfizer’s 26.5 percent tax rate last year, Allergan reported an effective tax rate of just 4.8 percent for the same period. (Its tax rate this year is about 15 percent.)Allergan itself is the product of numerous mergers. The current version of the company was born of the merger of Allergan and Actavis, which was completed this year, while Actavis itself grew from previous acquisitions like those of Forest Laboratories and Watson Pharmaceuticals. The company’s Dublin headquarters are a product of a $5 billion deal struck by Actavis in 2013 for the Irish drug maker Warner Chilcott.Together, Pfizer and Allergan would have nearly $53 billion in annual sales, with products including Lipitor, Viagra and Botox.AdvertisementBoth companies cautioned on Thursday that their talks were at a preliminary stage and could still fall apart.Shares of Allergan surged 6 percent in trading on Thursday, to close at $304.38, while Pfizer’s shares slipped nearly 2 percent, to $34.77.Transferring Pfizer’s corporate home abroad may not be an easy task, financially. New rules that the Treasury Department introduced last fall require a larger target for an inversion to make sense.Allergan’s shareholders would need to own 40 percent of the combined company. That could require creativity in the structure of the deal, given that Pfizer’s $219 billion market value is nearly twice the size of Allergan’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To achieve that threshold, Pfizer would have to pay at least $340 per share of Allergan in an all-stock transaction, according to a research note by Cowen. That would be an 11 percent premium on top of the stock’s closing price on Thursday. A Nomura analyst expected a minimum of $400 a share.The potential inversion has already drawn renewed criticism from Capitol Hill. The size of the deal could encourage legislators to pass reform that limits tax-driven acquisitions, said Senator Jack Reed, Democrat of Rhode Island.“They’re trying to get the best of both worlds: All the benefits of taxpayer-supported programs in the U.S., selling to Medicare, the V.A., getting our best scientists through American universities, and being a foreign country for tax purposes,” Mr. Reed said in a phone interview. “That’s not fair.”Other lawmakers said that Congress should fix the tax system that allows inversions.Even Carl C. Icahn, the billionaire activist investor, who is known for taking stakes in public companies and urging management to find ways to extract value, publicly denounced the deal.“Today Pfizer confirmed they are planning to move out of the country,” Mr. Icahn said Thursday via Twitter. “The situation is much more dangerous than most people believe.”AdvertisementIn addition to generating a lower tax rate, though, the transaction would help enlarge Pfizer as part of its quest to eventually split into two companies. It has been looking to separate its higher-growth, brand-name products from its more mature drugs.A combination of Pfizer and Allergan would make an eventual separation even more likely, said Richard Purkiss, an analyst with Piper Jaffray.Ultimately, the deal could be structured so that Pfizer’s generics business could take the Irish domicile and pay lower taxes on the cash it generates outside the United States, Mr. Purkiss said.Regardless of how the talks with Pfizer go, Allergan said on Thursday that it would continue with its planned $40.5 billion sale of its generic-drugs business to Teva Pharmaceutical Industries.Even if the deal with Allergan falls through, Pfizer’s record for pursuing only deals that benefit the company led Piper Jaffray to reiterate to investors on Thursday that they should buy the stock, Mr. Purkiss said.“The prospect of doing M.&A. has been clearly laid out by the management team at Pfizer over the recent past,” he said in a phone interview. “They won’t do a deal that’s value-destructive because they have a track record of being relatively prudent.”A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Pfizer Bid for Allergan Has Its Eyes on Ireland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.