AdvertisementSupported byBy Barry MeierRICHMOND, R.I. — At summer carnivals like the Washington County Fair recently held here, migrant laborers spend long days running the Whip, the Orbiter, the Polar Express and other popular rides.So when a new union signed contracts with dozens of companies that operate at fairs and carnivals, it seemed that a group of workers long considered exploited had found a new ally.Labor advocates, however, have since charged that the new union was really a stalking-horse for industry, not a champion for laborers, many of whom come from Mexico. And instead of demanding that companies pay the carnival workers more, the advocates say the union deals assured the employers they would not have to do so.Several officers of the union, the Association of Mobile Entertainment Workers, also had close ties, it turned out, to two businessmen — one in Texas, the other in Mexico — who have long supplied carnivals and fairs with itinerant Mexican workers.“This was a fraud on the system,” said Art Read, a lawyer with Friends of Farmworkers, one of the groups that filed a complaint last year about the union with the National Labor Relations Board.The Association of Mobile Entertainment Workers is a new player in a long legal battle between labor advocates and the carnival industry over the pay and working conditions of migrant laborers. In separate lawsuits, migrant laborers from Mexico have charged that carnival companies forced them to work long hours, often at little or no additional pay, and threatened to send them home if they complained.One laborer, Enrique Vasquez-Alejo, who worked at fairs in Maryland and Virginia, testified in a lawsuit that his bosses told him, “If you don’t like it, get your things together and go back to Mexico.”The union case is unfolding in the face of a wider national debate about a higher federal minimum wage, a standard from which carnival workers are exempted. Also, in April, the Labor Department proposed new rules to better protect seasonal employees, like those at carnivals, who enter the United States on temporary visas, rules that the industry has filed suits to block.In their complaint about the union, Mr. Read’s group and another, Florida Legal Services, asked the N.L.R.B. to declare it invalid and to order companies that signed deals with it to increase workers’ wages.A spokeswoman for the labor board declined to comment on the case, saying its investigation was still underway. A labor recruiter involved in the case, James K. Judkins of Rio Hondo, Tex., did not return calls and a lawyer representing Mr. Judkins, Leon Segueria, declined to comment, citing the continuing inquiry.But Mr. Judkins’s sister, Deborah Judkins, who was the union’s administrator, said in a telephone interview that it was formed to improve conditions for carnival workers and that Mr. Read, by filing a complaint, had torpedoed that effort.“He stopped a real worker-based union from getting off the ground,” said Ms. Judkins, who lives in Upton, Me.Along with carnival and fair companies, businesses involved in forestry, landscaping and seafood production bring foreign laborers into this country through the temporary visa program, which is known as H2B.In many cases, federal law requires employers who use H2B workers to pay them an hourly salary known as the “prevailing wage.” To set those hourly benchmarks, the Labor Department conducts surveys to determine minimum wages paid for certain types of work in different parts of the country.But companies that operate rides and concessions at fairs have long argued that because they travel through geographical areas that have different prevailing wage rates, it is less burdensome for them from a record-keeping standpoint to pay workers a weekly salary, which averages about $350.Paying workers on a weekly, rather than hourly, basis assures a predictable income that allows workers to budget how much to send home, said Robert Johnson, president of the Outdoor Amusement Business Association, a trade group in Winter Park, Fla. He added that employers treated carnival workers fairly and provided them with good income.But Anita Sinha, a lawyer with the Immigrant Justice Clinic at American University, said companies used the weekly approach to avoid paying laborers, who often work far more than 40 hours a week, the money they deserve. Other strategies are employed to reduce pay, including charging laborers fees for housing, said Ms. Sinha, co-author of a 2013 report critical of the carnival industry’s treatment of H2B workers.Carnival workers have also said they were forced to live in filthy trailers or bunkhouses. Some “didn’t have a window, or it was a broken window,” one laborer, Andreas Contreras-Hernandez, who worked at fairs in Pennsylvania and elsewhere, testified in a 2013 deposition. “When it rained you got wet.”From all appearances, Mr. Judkins, the labor recruiter based in Texas, would seem an unlikely union advocate. A onetime carnival performer and manager, he has testified in lawsuits that his company, JKJ Workforce, has supplied H2B workers or performed other services for dozens of carnival and fair companies.For many years, he worked closely with a major labor recruiter in Mexico, Victor Apolinar Barrios, who is the mayor of Tlapacoyan, Mexico, an area from which many carnival workers come. Some workers have testified that they had to pay Mr. Apolinar Barrios $350 to $500 a year to secure a carnival job, money they often borrowed at very high interest rates. Such recruiter payments are illegal in the United States.Mr. Judkins and Mr. Apolinar Barrios are not listed on any public documents filed by the union. But people close to them, like Mr. Judkins’s sister and two brothers of Mr. Apolinar Barrios, are. According to the complaint by labor advocates, the Mexican politician’s brothers took over his recruitment business after he was elected last year.Mr. Apolinar Barrios did not return telephone calls to his office, and one of his brothers referred a reporter’s call to Mr. Judkins.Labor advocates like Mr. Read said workers probably signed up with the union because they feared being blackballed by labor recruiters. And the evidence, advocates say, that the union was formed to serve the interests of carnival companies rather than workers is reflected in the bargaining agreements it struck. Those deals allow companies to pay workers a weekly rather than hourly salary and give them the right, under certain circumstances, to use the cost of housing to offset added pay. The Labor Department has taken the position that carnival companies, because they travel, are not permitted to charge workers for the cost of housing.Rockwell Amusements, a company in North Scituate, R.I., which operated rides at the Washington County Fair, was one of the companies that signed an agreement with the union, documents show. Officials from Rockwell did not respond to requests for comment.It is unclear when the N.L.R.B. will issue its ruling in the case against the union. But Mr. Johnson, the trade group executive, said he had been told that regulators had notified some companies that entered into agreements with the union that they probably would face penalties.Mr. Johnson said that a lawyer affiliated with his organization had raised questions about the union but that some carnival companies had decided to strike deals with it anyway.“I think they were looking for ways to get around the regulations, and this was an alternative,” he said.Advertisement