By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSSEPT. 1, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Growth at American factories fell last month to the lowest level since May 2013, pulled lower by a strong dollar and China’s economic slowdown. Construction spending in the United States, though, rose in July, reaching its highest level in over seven years.The Institute for Supply Management reported Tuesday that its manufacturing index slid to 51.1 in August, from a reading of 52.7 in July. It was the second consecutive decline; economists had expected the index to rebound modestly in August. A reading above 50 indicates growth.The report suggests that a strong dollar and slowing growth in China and other foreign markets may be taking a toll on United States manufacturers and perhaps the overall American economy. The rising dollar makes their goods more expensive in foreign markets. Two surveys released on Tuesday showed that Chinese manufacturers continue to struggle.The institute, a trade group of purchasing managers, reported that growth fell in United States factory production, employment and exports. Raw materials prices dropped for the 10th consecutive month. The index is down from 58.1 in August 2014.AdvertisementJoshua Shapiro, chief United States economist at the research firm MFR, said the August reading for American manufacturers “does raise a warning flag concerning overall real economic growth, particularly should the weakness be sustained in September.”
            Total construction spending at a seasonally adjusted annual rate.        MAY+2.3%JUNE+0.7%JULY+0.7%$1.10 trillion1.000.950.950.90’14’15SEPT. 1, 2015
In another economic report on Tuesday, the Commerce Department said that construction spending rose 0.7 percent in July, bolstered by an increase in the building of houses, factories and power plants.AdvertisementThat put the seasonally adjusted annual rate at an estimated $1.08 trillion, the highest level since May 2008. The report also revised the June increase in construction spending to 0.7 percent, from 0.1 percent previously.Groundbreakings for houses, apartment complexes and commercial centers have helped improve overall economic growth. The government said last week that the economy expanded at an annual rate of 3.7 percent in the April-to-June quarter, after edging up just 0.6 percent in the first quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We expect housing activity will continue to strengthen, underpinning greater residential investment in the coming quarters,” said Gregory Daco, head of United States macroeconomics at the forecasting firm Oxford Economics.After the construction spending report, analysts at Barclays projected that the economy was on track to grow 2.6 percent in the third quarter and that the second-quarter growth rate would be revised up to 3.8 percent.Total construction spending has risen 13.7 percent over the last 12 months.In July, construction of single-family houses advanced 2.1 percent. Factories rose 4.7 percent and power plants increased 2.1 percent.Spending on government building projects slipped 1 percent, although it has risen over the last year largely because of the construction and maintenance of highways and streets.A version of this article appears in print on September 2, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Growth at U.S. Factories Falls, but Construction Spending Reaches a 7-Year High .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.