AdvertisementSupported byBy Katrin BennholdLONDON — As the push for higher minimum pay builds momentum on both sides of the Atlantic, Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain on Tuesday threatened companies with tough fines if they fail to pay what he called a “national living wage.”The current minimum wage for workers age 21 and older in Britain is 6.50 pounds, or about $10, an hour. Beginning in April, companies will have to pay at least £7.20 to employees age 26 or older, an hourly rate that will gradually rise to £9 by the end of the decade.“Businesses are responsible for making that happen, and today I’m announcing how we will make sure they do,” Mr. Cameron wrote in an article in The Times of London published Tuesday. “The national living wage will only work if it is properly enforced.”The prime minister’s announcement comes as the fight for higher wages at the bottom of the income ladder has been gaining traction in parts of the United States, including New York and California, and in several other European countries, like Germany.Long a pledge of the opposition Labour Party, the cause of higher minimum pay was swiftly appropriated by Mr. Cameron after his re-election in May.Under the new enforcement process detailed by Mr. Cameron, employers would face fines worth 200 percent of unpaid wages up to a ceiling of £20,000, doubling previous penalties. In addition, heads of companies who fail to comply would be barred from serving on company boards for up to 15 years, according to Mr. Cameron.“To unscrupulous employers who think they can get labor on the cheap, the message is clear,” Mr. Cameron wrote. “Underpay your staff, and you will pay the price.”In an attempt to rebrand the Conservative Party as the party of the working people, Mr. Cameron has made replacing benefits with a higher minimum wage the centerpiece of a “new settlement” for Britain, which also included measures to raise the personal tax allowance and double the amount of free child care available to parents, raising it to 30 hours a week.The British economy has shown impressive growth, expanding 3 percent last year, the fastest among the Group of 7 richest countries, and slowly reducing its budget deficit. But productivity and wages have been sluggish, even as the country’s unemployment — 5.6 percent in the second quarter — is among the lowest in the European Union.Critics of a higher minimum wage warn that it would prompt companies to invest more in automation and decrease the number of jobs, hitting hardest those it is intended to help. Even Mr. Cameron’s chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, has said that the higher wage floor would cost 60,000 jobs.Tax credits for the working poor, which Mr. Cameron’s government is scrapping in favor of his national living wage, are more effective at keeping people in jobs, the critics say. Advocates of higher pay counter that such credits effectively subsidize companies with taxpayer’s money, even if most of the benefit goes to employees, economists say. They also point to studies on both sides of the Atlantic showing that at a low level — less than 50 percent of the median income — increases in the minimum wage have little impact on the employment rate.Some companies have volunteered to pay a living wage, defined as a wage adjusted for the cost of living in a given city. Oliver Bonas, a fashion and gift retailer that employs 500 people, promised to pay its employees at least £7.85 an hour — and £9.15 in London, where the cost of living is higher — as of Tuesday.Rhys Moore, the director of the Living Wage Foundation, was quoted in an article on The Guardian’s website on Tuesday, saying that the Oliver Bonas decision was a “significant milestone” that would help end a “low wage culture” in British retailing.“Major players in the retail sector have for a long time claimed that the living wage is too expensive to implement on the High Street,” Mr. Moore was quoted as saying. “This move demonstrates that while it’s not always an easy choice, it is the right choice.”Advertisement