AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaBloomberg News laid off as many as 90 journalists on Tuesday in its newsrooms in New York, Washington and across the world, part of a plan to refocus the organization’s coverage on business, finance, economics, technology and politics.The rationale for the dismissals was outlined in a lengthy memo to the staff from Bloomberg’s new editor in chief, John Micklethwait. In addition to refocusing on certain areas, Mr. Micklethwait said the organization would drop areas of coverage like sports and education. The memo was the first time that Mr. Micklethwait had articulated a comprehensive vision for the newsroom’s future since starting the job early this year. About 20 journalists were dismissed in New York, about a dozen in Washington and the rest in the company’s global newsrooms, according to three people with knowledge of the layoffs who spoke on condition of anonymity. In Washington, those who were laid off were called to a conference room and given the news. The 3,000-word memo from Mr. Micklethwait outlined a spate of changes — some organizational, some visual, and some editorial — and the thinking behind them. Though Bloomberg aims to “expose financiers’ mistakes and vanities, to probe into imperfect markets, and to point to potential speculative bubbles,” he said, it can distinguish itself with a “passion for business, finance and markets. So if you are not intrigued by how people make money, or are inclined to sneer at those who are good at it, or yearn to practice ‘gotcha journalism’ on investment bankers simply because they’ve chosen to be bankers, Bloomberg is probably the wrong place for you.” Over the last six months, he wrote, he had visited many offices and begun to put changes into effect. This reorganization, he said, “is bigger — and friends and colleagues have lost their jobs. It always hurts to let talented, dedicated people go, and no journalist likes to tell other journalists that they are losing their jobs. But this is not about downsizing; it is about refocusing our considerable resources.” On Tuesday, the editor in chief of Bloomberg News, John Micklethwait, outlined a slew of changes — some organizational, some visual, and some editorial — and the thinking behind them in a lengthy email to the staff.Bloomberg’s purpose as a news organization, he said, is to be “the definitive ‘chronicle of capitalism’ — to capture everything that matters in global business and finance.” The focus will be on six main subjects, he said: business, finance, markets, economics, technology and power (politics and government). Resources will, he said, turn toward “our new fast commentary team (‘Bloomberg Gadfly’), our custom morning briefing (‘Daybreak’), more data journalism, increased social media monitoring, our new markets TV show, our global radio network and better coverage of venture capital, market structure and campaign finance.”Among those laid off Tuesday was Dawn Kopecki, a reporter in Washington who wrote an email critical of the company’s news operations that was subsequently leaked to the news media in June.Last week, the company’s founder, Michael Bloomberg, announced in a memo to staff members that its chief of TV, Claudia Milne, hired with great fanfare in 2014, would move to special projects. She will be succeeded by Al Mayers, who has run the organization’s radio operations, Mr. Bloomberg said in the memo.Since Mr. Bloomberg returned in September 2014 to the company he founded, after three terms as mayor of New York, he has made both sweeping and minute changes to its media operations, part of an apparent effort to reorient it toward its core consumers — the financial professionals who pay about $21,000 a year to subscribe to the information terminals that provide about 85 percent of the company’s revenue. The organization’s target audience, Mr. Micklethwait wrote, is readers, such as terminal customers, who are short of time. And so he has limited the number of longer articles, pushed a more global focus, sought to translate more articles into local languages, expanded a team that monitors social media for news, and will unveil a new look for some parts of its coverage. “And I hope,” he concluded, “the path that we are taking is now clearer to all of you and you can see its promise.”Advertisement