By SYDNEY EMBERSEPT. 1, 2015
Carmelo Anthony is Vice Media’s newest teammate.Anthony, the New York Knicks star, has joined Vice’s sports site as a founding partner of The Clubhouse, a new channel where well-known athletes, including Anthony and Rob Gronkowski of the New England Patriots, will host their own video series. DraftKings, the daily fantasy sports website, has signed on as a sponsor.The Clubhouse, which the company introduced on Tuesday, will feature shows that focus on life beyond the stadium, said Will Kiersky, the publisher of Vice Sports. Anthony, for instance, will look at sports cultures around the world in his series “Stay Melo.” In the first episode, Anthony goes to Cuba to examine the country’s rising interest in soccer. (Anthony recently became the owner of a team in Puerto Rico that will play in the North American Soccer League next year.) In another, he visits Baltimore, his hometown, to explore the intersection of sports and social issues.The Clubhouse “pulls back the veil a little bit more on what athletes are like off the field and what really interests them,” Mr. Kiersky said.For Vice, which is aggressively expanding its video offerings, The Clubhouse represents a further push into youth-oriented entertainment. Although much of Vice’s content is geared toward young men — Vice began in 1994 as a free punk magazine in Montreal — the company is also trying to expand its reach. Vice has video offerings on topics like fashion, food and technology and recently started a channel for women called Broadly.Vice said traffic to Vice Sports had grown considerably since its debut last June, with local editions in Britain, Germany, Spain, Canada and Mexico. Mr. Kiersky said the site would have editions in five more countries by the end of 2015, including Brazil and Italy.AdvertisementFor DraftKings, sponsoring The Clubhouse is part of a broader attempt to reach potential customers, especially as the fantasy football season begins, said Jason Robins, the company’s chief executive.Advertisement“This right now is the most important time of year for us in terms of advertising,” Mr. Robins said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.DraftKings recently introduced a new ad campaign, with the tagline “Welcome to the Big Time,” to coincide with the beginning of the National Football League season. It also announced partnerships with the Patriots, the Dallas Cowboys and the Kansas City Chiefs for fantasy sports lounges at the teams’ stadiums.Anthony will help determine the overall aesthetic of The Clubhouse. Vice declined to comment on the specifics of his financial involvement with the site.In a statement provided by Vice, Anthony said, “I’ve been a fan of Vice for a long time. Their ability to find incredible stories and tell them in the most captivating way is inspiring.”A version of this article appears in print on September 2, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Sports Channel From Vice Adds Some Star Power.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.