AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Portugal is having trouble selling the bank salvaged from the wreckage of one of the country’s biggest private lenders.The Portuguese central bank on Tuesday missed its own deadline for selling Novo Banco, the salvaged entity, after talks with the leading bidder faltered. The Bank of Portugal did not identify the bidder, but it has been widely reported to be a Chinese insurance and asset management company.The central bank said that it would begin negotiations with a second bidder, which the Portuguese news media have identified as the American private equity firm Apollo Global Management. The firm declined to comment on Tuesday.The auction of Novo Banco is meant to complete Portugal’s restructuring and rescue of Banco Espírito Santo, which required a state-led bailout in August 2014 of 4.9 billion euros, or $5.5 billion at current exchange rates. The rescue occurred after the bank was forced to disclose unsustainable losses linked to loans it had made to other companies in the Espírito Santo family business empire.Under the bailout, the Portuguese authorities decided to break up the bank and transfer the healthy assets to a new entity, Novo Banco. The plan was to then auction Novo Banco to private investors and to recover as much of the cost of the bailout as possible.Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho, who is seeking re-election on Oct. 4, has indicated that his coalition government wanted to complete the sale of Novo Banco as soon as possible.Banco Espírito Santo was at the heart of a complex web of family-owned companies with investments that stretched from mining projects in Angola to hotels in Portugal. The bank, led by Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva Salgado, executive chairman and the great-grandson of the founder of the family business, was increasingly used as a lender of last resort for other companies in the conglomerate. That also helped the group and its subsidiaries mask their financial problems and issue more debt to other investors.As the family group’s problems mounted, Mr. Salgado stepped down in July 2014 and was then arrested and ordered to post bail of €3 million, as part of a separate money laundering and tax evasion investigation. He was subsequently put under house arrest, pending a trial.Separately, the central bank has accused Mr. Salgado and other officials of his bank of mismanagement and concealing information when they sold debt to investors without disclosing existing losses.This summer, the Portuguese central bank made a short list of three bidders for Novo Banco, without identifying them. It then entered into exclusive talks with the highest bidder, with a view to closing the deal by the end of August.When the central bank made that list, the Portuguese news media, citing officials and bankers involved in the auction, said that a Chinese company, the Anbang Insurance Group, had made the highest offer, followed by Apollo Global Management. Fosun International, another Chinese insurance and asset management company, was reported to have been third.The collapse of Banco Espírito Santo was a blow not only to Portugal’s banking sector but also to the reputation of the government and the central bank, because it occurred only months after the country emerged from a €78 billion, three-year international bailout program. Portugal, Greece and Ireland were among the countries hit hardest in the eurozone’s sovereign debt crisis.The continued difficulties of Novo Banco, linked to the investments and unchecked lending activities of Banco Espiríto Santo, have been seen as an impediment to Portugal’s securing a high auction price for the institution.On Monday evening, Novo Banco reported a first-half loss of almost €252 million, mostly because of the cost of writing off interest payments from big corporate loans inherited from Banco Espiríto Santo. Novo Banco also had to state provisions for the loss of value in some of its telecommunications holdings.Advertisement