AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinA market sell-off that ricocheted across the globe last month reversed the fortunes of many of Wall Street’s star investors. But it is not all doom and gloom in the $3 trillion hedge fund industry.A number of hedge funds, both big and small, are recording double-digit gains this year and putting up the kind of performances that just might justify the industry’s famously hefty fees.Among the better-performing funds are those that were started in the past several years by former disciples of Steven A. Cohen, the billionaire investor who founded SAC Capital Advisors.One is Jason Karp, whose Tourbillon Capital Partners, a $2.9 billion fund, is up 18.44 percent in its main portfolio, said a person briefed on the firm’s performance. Mr. Karp, 38, who worked for Mr. Cohen for nearly four years, created Tourbillon in 2012.And he is not the only former SAC trader enjoying what has been a long, hot summer for hedge funds.Aaron Cowen’s Suvretta Capital Management, a $2 billion hedge fund, is up 7 to 9 percent in its main funds, said a person briefed on that firm’s performance. And Melvin Capital, a roughly $1 billion firm that Gabriel Plotkin founded last year, is up nearly 20 percent, said a person briefed on the matter.Mr. Cowen, 43, is a former chief investment officer at SAC and Mr. Plotkin, 36, once one of Mr. Cohen’s top traders, started his firm with a $200 million investment from Mr. Cohen.All three former protégés are running classic long-short hedge funds that make both bullish and bearish bets on stocks. But they come from the SAC tradition of moving quickly in and out of stocks — a tactic that may be serving them well at time when the speed and unpredictability of the recent big swings in the markets may be unnerving other managers.That tactic can also be found at Israel Englander’s Millennium Management, a $31.5 billion firm with a wide array of trading strategies. Some of its 170 portfolio teams trade stocks in the same kind of short-term trading fashion that SAC helped popularize during its heyday. Millennium is up 9.6 percent for the year, said two people briefed on the firm’s performance.The most famous stock trader, Mr. Cohen, who is 59, now runs a more than $10 billion family office called Point72 Asset Management that manages mostly his own money. It is not clear how he has done with Point72, which remains an active force on Wall Street. A spokesman for Mr. Cohen declined to comment.In 2014, its first year of existence, Point72 generated a gross profit of $2.5 billion to $3 billion. The firm prospered even after Mr. Cohen was forced by federal prosecutors to give back money to his outside investors in the wake of an insider trading investigation that led to SAC pleading guilty to securities fraud and paying $1.8 billion in fines and penalties to prosecutors and federal securities regulators.Firms that make trades off the turmoil have done especially well. For instance, Ionic Capital Management, a $2.5 billion hedge fund that performs best in volatile markets, is up about 16 percent for the year, after notching an 11 percent gain in August, said a person briefed on the numbers.These kinds of performances stand out in a year when the average hedge fund, as measured by the HFR Index, is down about 1 percent. In comparison, the benchmark Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index is off 5.3 percent for the year.Other hedge funds of varying investing strategies that are recording gains this year include Visium Asset Management’s flagship fund, which is up 11.2 percent, Kerrisdale Capital, up 6.2 percent, and Renaissance Technologies’ Renaissance Institutional Equities Funds or RIEF, which is up 3.32 percent, said several people briefed on the performance of those firms.Hedge funds with more concentrated positions and longer-term views have tended to fare the worst the past month and at other points this year.Hedge funds like Omega Partners, the $9 billion hedge fund founded by Leon Cooperman, have had disappointing performances, partly because they have increasingly abandoned short positions for long ones in a roaring bull market in the United States that had clobbered short-sellers. The firm is down 8 percent for the year, said a person briefed on the matter.David Einhorn’s nearly $11 billion Greenlight Capital is one of the best-known underperformers, down 14 percent for the year.In recent years, investors have preferred to park their money with hedge funds that offer long-only funds, according to a recent report by Deutsche Bank. In this environment, even short-sellers — investors who take bets against the market — have had to change their strategies.William A. Ackman’s $20 billion Pershing Square sustained steep losses in August, with some of the firm’s top holdings down between 5 and 15 percent over the month. In a letter to investors, Mr. Ackman highlighted that the current price of holdings like Zoetis and Canadian Pacific did not reflect the real value of the businesses in the longer term. Pershing Square went into August with a yearly gain of 10 percent, but lost 9.2 percent over the month. Pershing Square is down 0.1 percent for the year.Daniel S. Loeb, who manages about $17 billion and is best known for penning acerbic letters to corporate boards, also had a rough August. His Third Point flagship fund lost 5.1 percent in August, cutting its full year performance to a gain of 0.6 percent.Jana Partners, founded by the billionaire Barry Rosenstein, lost 4.3 percent in August and is up less than 1 percent for the year, according to a person briefed on the firm’s performance.All three men are considered activist investors, a class of hedge fund manager that has been too focused on long positions, said Mark Yusko, the chief investment officer of Morgan Creek Capital Management. “That works great in a bull market, but they aren’t really hedged funds. Because they charge incentive fees people talk about them as hedge funds,” he said.Speaking broadly of the fact that so many hedge funds have become focused on long stocks positions, Mr. Yusko said: “Long only is long only. If people want to pay for stock-picking alpha with incentive fees, great. But people shouldn’t expect them to protect capital in down markets.”Advertisement