AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Thursday was supposed to be an occasion for Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, to take a victory lap.Instead, he may face questions on why he and his policy council are not running even harder, given all the new uncertainties in global and European economies.Mr. Draghi would probably prefer to note the positives. Six months after the central bank began an unprecedented stimulus program, eurozone growth has improved. Unemployment is edging lower. Inflation is back above zero, if just barely. There are signs that credit is flowing more easily. The crisis in Greece has faded, for now at least.But on Thursday, when Mr. Draghi presides at a regularly scheduled meeting of the central bank’s Governing Council, he will need to address the welter of new and in some cases unexpected threats from around the globe, which could create pressure for yet more stimulus spending.A slowdown in the economy of China and other emerging markets has prompted wild swings in stock prices, although markets were relatively calm on Wednesday.The Federal Reserve is poised to raise interest rates in the United States as early as this month, possibly causing borrowing costs to rise in the eurozone before growth is strong enough.Some economists are even warning again about the eurozone’s lapsing into deflation, a broad decline in prices that is considered poisonous to growth and employment.An influx of refugees into Europe from Syria and other conflict zones, while outside the purview of monetary policy, adds to the uncertainty. Confusion among European leaders about how to deal with the crisis raises questions about the political unity that is essential to the survival of the eurozone.These factors could undermine the positive effects of the bond-buying stimulus program, known as quantitative easing, that the European Central Bank began in March as a way to pump money into the eurozone economy and force down market interest rates.As a result, some analysts, so far apparently a minority, expect Mr. Draghi to send a strong signal on Thursday that the central bank’s Governing Council is ready to step up its bond purchases and continue them longer than currently planned.But any talk of more stimulus would reawaken tensions on the Governing Council between those who think the central bank has already done too much and those who favor aggressive, pre-emptive action. It took years for Mr. Draghi to resolve those tensions and begin the bond-buying program in the first place.“I can imagine that the controversy within the Governing Council and the debates within the Governing Council continue to be quite heavy,” said Zsolt Darvas, a senior fellow at Bruegel, a research organization in Brussels. “Since there are some improving signs in the eurozone, those governors who were against quantitative easing will be against it even more.”Partly because of that dissent, Mr. Darvas said he did not expect any major shift in policy from the European Central Bank on Thursday. Many analysts seem to agree.Nor, Mr. Darvas said, is major action necessary right away. While China is an important export market for Germany and other European countries, he said, a slowdown there will not derail eurozone growth.And while an increase in official interest rates by the Fed could spill over into the eurozone and raise borrowing costs, higher interest rates in the United States would also tend to strengthen the dollar and weaken the euro. That would be good for eurozone exporters, because their products would be cheaper for customers paying in other currencies.Still, at a news conference on Thursday, Mr. Draghi is almost certain to at least repeat earlier statements that the central bank is ready to deploy further stimulus if circumstances warrant.As of Aug. 28, the central bank had spent 290 billion newly created euros, or about $327 billion, buying eurozone government bonds on open markets. The sum is roughly in line with its aim of monthly government bond purchases of €50 billion.There is scope to increase the pace of the purchases, analysts said, and some see a chance that on Thursday Mr. Draghi will signal an increased willingness to do so.He could also signal that the European Central Bank intends to continue the stimulus spending beyond September 2016, the earliest it has said it would end the program. The central bank could also step up its purchases of private sector assets, in addition to the €10 billion per month it is buying already.“A time extension of the asset purchase program to beyond September 2016 is the most likely option,” analysts at Barclays said in a note to clients, adding that the decision could come as early as Thursday, and before the end of the year in any case.There are arguments in favor of stronger action.Unemployment in the eurozone fell to 10.9 percent in July from 11.1 percent in June, according to official figures published Wednesday. That is the lowest jobless rate in the 19 countries of the eurozone since February 2012. Still, it is almost double the rate in the United States and far from a level considered healthy.Inflation, at 0.2 percent in August, was unchanged from June and July. The rate is still well short of the European Central Bank’s official target of just below 2 percent.Some economists remain concerned that the eurozone could yet slip into deflation, which has already infected some eurozone countries like Greece.And while China and the global market have at least temporarily pushed Greece from the financial headlines, that country continues to lurk as a risk to eurozone integrity. Fears have faded that Greece will be forced to drop out of the eurozone, but the country’s economy is still in a shambles and there is uncertainty about whether a stable government will emerge after national elections scheduled for Sept. 20.Mr. Draghi could help calm those worries by announcing on Thursday that the central bank is ready to lift a ban on buying Greek government bonds as part of the stimulus program. Greece should now qualify because it has agreed to conditions demanded by other eurozone countries in return for as much as €86 billion in additional aid.If so, Greece’s hard-pressed commercial banks would be among the main beneficiaries because they have large holdings of their own government’s debt. European Central Bank purchases would help raise the market value of those bonds and help restore confidence in the country’s banks.And Greeks who have withdrawn cash from their accounts might begin depositing money again and help the banking system return to normal.But economists and investors hoping for powerful action by the European Central Bank on Thursday may be disappointed. The central bank is not known for acting pre-emptively, and it is likely to wait until the Fed has taken action and until it is clearer what effect China’s problems will have on Europe.“Others are betting the E.C.B. will step up quantitative easing, but it’s too early,” said Carsten Brzeski, chief economist for Germany and Austria at ING Bank. “They still want to see what the Fed will do.”Advertisement