By JANET MORRISSEYSEPT. 2, 2015
When vandals broke into Stephanie Ciancio’s Land Cruiser in 2014 and stole her car stereo, she did not have the time and money to replace it. It was particularly vexing for Ms. Ciancio, a 34-year-old San Francisco resident, because she had been planning to take a four-day road trip to Fern Canyon, Calif., over the long July 4 weekend, and the idea of making the eight-hour drive without music was depressing.So she logged onto Peerby.com, typed in her predicament, and within 40 minutes was connected with someone willing to lend her a Beats wireless Bluetooth speaker for her car trip. “I thought, ‘Oh, my God, it’s so easy,’ and it was free!” Ms. Ciancio said. “It was easier and faster than buying one or ordering one on Amazon.”Ms. Ciancio is among a growing number of people who are using mobile apps to find, borrow or rent items as diverse as power drills and drones from people living nearby. It is an extension of the successful Airbnb, Uber and Lyft model, but for household items.Want to try out an iPad before buying one? Got it. Need a bike while visiting another city? No problem. Want a power drill to help you hang those blinds? It’s just a mouse click away.AdvertisementA flurry of websites has appeared to tap the trend, with Peerby.com a front-runner. Since its beginning in Amsterdam in 2012, Peerby has expanded to 20 cities in Europe, including London and Paris, and it is doing pilot projects in 10 American cities, including New York. It expects to have a network of owners and renters in all major American cities by 2017.It has processed more than 100,000 transactions, has more than $1 billion worth of items in its database and expects to have 500,000 members signed up by the end of 2015, according to its founder, Daan Weddepohl.It all sounds promising. However, its future as a viable moneymaking business is far from certain. The road to profitability is littered with the carcasses of early start-ups that went belly-up in this niche: CrowdRent, Share Some Sugar, Bid & Borrow, Ecomodo, ThingLoop, OhSoWe and Hey Neighbor!, which started between 2007 and 2010, all folded. Can Peerby truly succeed where others have failed?AdvertisementSome experts claim it is all about timing: The failed start-ups hit the scene before mobile apps and the sharing economy trend really took off. Others blame poor business models.On the surface, it seems like a no-brainer. Who hasn’t amassed a stockpile of household items, unwanted Christmas gifts and even clothing collecting dust in a basement or storage unit?Advocates are betting that people would willingly share those items if a neighbor asked for them. The 2008 recession and the ubiquity of the smartphone app seemed to trigger the “sharing economy” revolution, said Rachel Botsman, author of “What’s Mine Is Yours: The Rise of Collaborative Consumption.”People sought out creative ways to raise extra cash, and there was a shift toward renting and sharing items, rather than buying them. “We’re shifting from an ownership society to an access society,” with much of it happening through the smartphone, said Simon Rothman, a partner at Greylock Partners, whose firm was an early investor in such companies as Airbnb and Facebook.Millennials are particularly big on sharing rather than owning, said Ann Miura-Ko, a founder of Floodgate, which has invested in such start-ups as Chegg, Lyft and TaskRabbit. And nothing seems off-limits: There is even borrowmydoggy.com for people who want to share ownership of their pets.A recent survey by Ericsson ConsumerLab found that more than half of smartphone users were open to renting other people’s leisure equipment, rooms and household appliances.“People are used to the idea of renting a car or getting a taxi ride just by using an app,” and sharing household items is just an extension of that, said Michael Björn, the report’s author.Sure, there could be “trust” issues: What happens if a friendly neighbor returns an item broken or doesn’t return it at all? Or predators use the site to lure people to their homes?Advertisement“If it isn’t a trust issue to have a stranger spend the night in your house, then it won’t be a trust issue to have a stranger rent your lawn mower,” Mr. Rothman said, contrasting Peerby’s business model with that of Airbnb.Even if one bad apple makes huge headlines, it is unlikely to kill the trend. “The Craigslist killer didn’t actually kill Craigslist,” noted Ms. Miura-Ko.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Philip Markoff, a medical student, was charged with murder and assault in 2009 after targeting victims he found through ads on Craigslist. He killed himself in jail in 2010 while awaiting trial.Mr. Weddepohl of Peerby was born in Rotterdam in 1980 and developed a passion for computers and programming at a young age. “I asked for a compiler for my 13th birthday,” he said.He pored over books and joined online bulletin boards to hone his programming skills. His parents, both psychiatrists, encouraged his entrepreneurial spirit and interest in technology. But it was a fire that ignited the Peerby dream.In February 2009, fire ripped through Mr. Weddepohl’s apartment building, forcing him and his girlfriend to scramble frantically to escape the thick black smoke rushing into his fourth-floor unit. Firefighters ultimately rescued the two. However, most of Mr. Weddepohl’s belongings were destroyed by fire, water or smoke.He was devastated. But in the months after, Mr. Weddepohl watched in amazement as friends — and even strangers — offered furniture, tools and other items to help him get back on his feet. It was a revelation. “I discovered that the people around me were so much more important than the stuff,” he said. “People love to help other people out — we’re wired to help others.”With 25,000 euros (about $28,700) in his pocket, which he inherited from his mother, he set out to build a website and app that could cash in on the sharing concept. He entered Amsterdam’s The Founder Institute, which showed him the entrepreneurial ropes and introduced him to potential angel investors. In September 2012, Peerby was born. (The name combines “peer 2 peer” with “nearby.”)Mr. Weddepohl analyzed the companies that had failed. “I knew I had to do it in a different way,” he said.AdvertisementHe reversed the business model to focus on the renter rather than the supplier. Instead of posting long lists of classified ads, he focused on demand. He developed an algorithm of questions to create a network of potential suppliers among the site’s registered members. When a member requests an item, a push notification is sent to nearby members based on the algorithm.  The site took off, catching the attention of investors. He raised about $3 million from investors and from prize money from such entities as the Postcode Lottery Green Challenge, which is a member of the Clinton Global Initiative.Herman Kienhuis, investment director at SanomaVentures, became the company’s first and largest investor. “Peerby is indeed exploring a market with limited proven models yet,” he said. However, he was impressed with Mr. Weddepohl’s team, business model and early results in Amsterdam.Another investor, Jon Bradford, managing director of Techstars’ London office, admits his colleagues were a little nervous about investing in the niche, given the companies that failed in the past. “I had a lot of criticism when I did the investment,” Mr. Bradford said. “But Daan demonstrated that he was getting real traction from people not just talking about doing this, but actually doing it in Amsterdam.”Building a successful active network is critically important, said Mr. Weddepohl. For this reason, Peerby didn’t collect any revenue from transactions until this year.Recently, Peerby rolled out its “Peerby Go” model, which takes a commission on each transaction by offering insurance and delivery of the item. So far, the transition has been smooth, and the company says at least 60 percent of requesters are connected with a potential supplier within 30 minutes.Are investors concerned about Peerby’s long-term moneymaking prospects? Mr. Bradford looks at it like Facebook, which initially made no money.If the business model works, then the money will follow, he said. “When you can create engagement with a product, there are always ways to find money around it.”A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Smaller Start-Ups for the Sharing (and Borrowing) Economy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.