By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHSEPT. 2, 2015
Puerto Rico has secured a first foothold in its struggles with a towering $72 billion mountain of debt.The island’s electric power authority and a group of big investors agreed late Tuesday on terms for restructuring as much as $5.7 billion of bonds. That deal offers a possible model for a much bigger, and almost certainly messier, restructuring of debt that Puerto Rico’s governor, Alejandro García Padilla, has described as “unpayable.”Melba Acosta Febo, president of Puerto Rico’s Government Development Bank, called the agreement “an example of the promising results that can be achieved when the commonwealth and its creditors work together.”Each side granted concessions, but the agreement also has elements that each side can point to as victories. Bondholders, who had initially feared that they might end up with losses of more than 50 percent, were happy to take a loss of 15 percent on their holdings. Puerto Rico in turn gets to receive interest rate relief and a five-year payment moratorium.AdvertisementSuch harmony has been rare. The island’s government is close to running out of cash and can no longer borrow on reasonable terms. Last month, it defaulted on a $58 million bond payment. At the same time, Puerto Rico has been trying without success to get access to the federal bankruptcy courts, something that would take an act of Congress.AdvertisementRestructuring the utility’s debt alone does not solve those problems. Still, the new term sheet gives the Puerto Rican government something to show other creditors why a negotiated restructuring could be more beneficial for all than a long, ferocious battle in the courts.“I hope this process — and its outcome — will further confirm our commitment to work collaboratively with our creditors to find satisfactory solutions for them and the people of Puerto Rico and their families,” Governor García Padilla said in a statement.He previously asked the island’s creditors to work with his administration on a “negotiated moratorium.”His idea is to buy time and preserve cash so the government can keep providing essential services while trying to revive the island’s depressed economy.But bondholders have shown little enthusiasm, and some say they believe Puerto Rico can, in fact, pay its debts.Some also question whether any democratically elected government could use a moratorium to achieve the kind of economic reforms that Puerto Rico needs, because they are likely to resemble the tough austerity measures that the International Monetary Fund must impose unilaterally on troubled sovereign debtors.Mr. García Padilla initially said the details of his proposed moratorium would be ready at the beginning of this week, but on Saturday his chief of staff announced a one-week delay, attributed to a tropical storm.AdvertisementThe new restructuring plan covers only bonds issued by Prepa, Puerto Rico’s public electric power monopoly. Its debt has a total face value of $8.1 billion, but $2.4 billion of that is insured, and the insurers are expected to negotiate separate terms for resolving that debt later.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That leaves about $5.7 billion worth of bonds, held by a variety of investors, including hedge funds, mutual funds and individuals.The agreement calls for an exchange of debt, according to a summary posted on Prepa’s website and people briefed on the terms. Current bondholders have agreed, as one option, to accept new bonds with a par value of 15 percent less than the bonds they now hold. The new bonds are to be backed by a securitized stream of revenue that is intended to make them much safer and likelier to repay investors than Prepa’s current bonds.With less risk, the new bonds are also intended to cost Prepa less in interest. The bonds have not yet been rated, but the securitization is supposed to make them so much stronger that they would pay an average interest rate of 4 to 4.75 percent — significantly less than the double-digit interest that Prepa would presumably have to pay if it tried to issue ordinary bonds in the current uncertainty. As Puerto Rico’s financial problems mounted over the last year, some of Prepa’s bonds changed hands for less than 50 cents on the dollar.The terms also call for one category of the new bonds to pay only interest — no principal — for the first five years, to help Prepa conserve cash.Another optional category of bonds would pay neither interest nor principal for the first five years, then make cash interest payments until maturity, when the holders would get their principal back. Those bonds would allow Prepa to conserve even more cash over the next five years, but they would involve more risk for investors and would therefore offer a higher yield.Stephen Spencer of the investment bank Houlihan Lokey, which advised the bondholders, said the deal was structured to produce savings that the utility could use to get back on its feet.“We believe it provides Prepa with a fresh start and financial flexibility, with bondholders providing meaningful sacrifices to make that happen,” he said.Ms. Acosta of the Government Development Bank said the Prepa deal represented “the type of equitable burden sharing” that would ultimately “contribute to the Commonwealth’s ongoing economic recovery.”AdvertisementThe negotiations for Prepa’s restructuring have been going on for more than a year. The participating bondholders included mutual funds, hedge funds and other institutions that hold about 35 percent of Prepa’s debt. Individual “retail” bondholders did not participate directly, but the agreement includes an option with terms intended to attract risk-averse small investors. If all of them decide to participate, roughly 80 percent of Prepa’s debt would ultimately be restructured.The details are not final, but the restructuring is expected to include a cash tender facility that would give risk-averse small investors a way to redeem their bonds for cash, instead of new Prepa bonds. The loss in that case would be bigger — perhaps 35 percent — but small investors frightened by Puerto Rico’s recent financial turbulence might welcome the chance to cash out, even at such a loss.Prepa said on Wednesday that negotiations with its bond insurers, MBIA and Assured Guaranty, and with the banks that finance its purchases of fuel, would continue.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Puerto Rico to Restructure Up to $5.7 Billion in Debt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.