By PETER EAVIS and PAUL MOZURSEPT. 1, 2015
Stocks in the United States bounced back on Wednesday, a day after another sell-off on the global markets, even as worries about economic growth persisted.The decline on Tuesday followed a weak Chinese report on manufacturing that heightened broader concerns about global economic growth. Some analysts said it was too early to tell whether Wednesday’s market gains were a sign that stocks were close to bottoming out.“We are getting a little bit of a letup today, but the headache may continue,” said Bruce McCain, chief investment strategist at KeyBank.The benchmark Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 1.8 percent to end at 1,948.86. The Dow Jones industrial average rose nearly 300 points, closing up 1.8 percent, to 16,351.38. Technology shares were particularly higher, with the Nasdaq composite index gaining 2.5 percent.AdvertisementThe S.&P. 500 is now 8.54 percent below its nominal high, reached in May. The Dow Jones industrial average is 10.71 percent below its peak. After its surge on Wednesday, the Nasdaq is still nearly 9 percent off its high.AdvertisementAs welcome as Wednesday’s recovery was to many investors, they are expected to keep watching for signs of weakness in China — although they will have a two-day break, with markets there closed the rest of the week.The Shanghai composite index closed down 0.2 percent on Wednesday, leaving it almost 40 percent lower than its recent peak. A late rally was driven by huge trading volume, suggesting government intervention in the market.The weakness in Chinese shares was by no means the worst the country has seen over the last month, but coming ahead of closely stage-managed celebrations in China to commemorate the end of World War II, it has raised concerns about Beijing’s ability to manage economic growth.In particular, international investors and economists worry that heavy-handed state intervention to prop up sagging stocks, and poor communication before a currency devaluation in August, signal uncharacteristic sloppiness from the technocrats who have guided China’s steady rise in gross domestic product over the last three decades.“There are growing doubts about China’s leadership and the direction of the economy,” Alex Wolf, an emerging markets economist at Standard Life Investments, wrote in a note. “Indeed, some have even begun to question whether the Chinese government has ‘lost control’ of the economy.”
            Position of the Dow Jones industrial average at 1-minute intervals on Wednesday.        16,40016,30016,200Previous close16,058.3516,10016,00010 a.m.Noon2 p.m.4 p.m.SEPT. 2, 2015
In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng closed 1.2 percent lower, while the Nikkei 225 in Japan closed 0.4 percent lower.The United States benchmark for crude oil, West Texas intermediate, rose 1.8 percent on Wednesday to $46.25 a barrel. On Tuesday, its price fell nearly 8 percent, after three days of increases. Brent crude oil from the North Sea also rose nearly 2 percent to settle at $50.50 in London trading on Wednesday.AdvertisementThe yield on the 10-year Treasury note moved up slightly on Wednesday, to 2.19 percent from 2.16 percent on Tuesday. Yields move in the opposite direction from prices. Investors have often piled into United States government bonds as a safe-haven investment during periods of instability in the markets. But the 10-year note has not rallied sharply during the latest sell-off in the stock market.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some analysts said this could indicate that most investors were not expecting a severe downturn.“Bonds would be showing a lot more activity if investors felt this was going to lead to a recession or a bear market,” Mr. McCain of KeyBank said.Major European indexes moved higher. The FTSE 100-stock index in London ended up 0.4 percent and the DAX in Frankfurt rose 0.3 percent.Despite the worries about China, most analysts say they believe that the country will be able to avoid a sharp economic slowdown. But restoring confidence in its stock markets, they say, will require continued loosening of monetary policy by the Chinese central bank, initiatives like share buybacks from companies and broader market-oriented changes.The Chinese government’s continued direct intervention in the market, on the other hand, will strengthen concerns, according to an analyst’s note from Citibank.“Significant reduction of administrative intervention into domestic equities is more important to regain global investors’ confidence,” the note said.Even so, China’s largest brokerage firms, under the direction of regulators, have vowed to pour in additional investments to support the equity markets, according to a number of recent filings with the stock exchanges. For example, in a note on Tuesday, Haitong Securities said it would invest an additional 4.5 billion renminbi, or roughly $700 million, on top of the 15 billion renminbi it had pledged to a stock market bailout fund.The move was made “to maintain the long-term stability of the securities market, promote the positive role of a securities company and fulfill its corporate social responsibility,” Haitong said in its filing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.Though analysts say such moves will eventually help support the market, many also worry that the measures indicate that the broader Chinese economy could be in worse shape than official data suggests.A version of this article appears in print on September 3, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Markets Close Higher, Though Concerns About Global Growth Linger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.