
Breakingviews By                     
CAROL RYAN

SEPT. 3, 2015
Yoox is losing Net-a-Porter know-how at an important time.Shares of Yoox jumped 5 percent on Sept. 3 as Natalie Massenet, Net’s founder, took her cash out of an all-share merger of the online retailers of luxury brands. The Yoox exuberance may be short-lived.Richemont, which bought a majority stake in Net-a-Porter in 2010, sold Ms. Massenet’s creation in March for around 950 million pounds in stock. Ms. Massenet thought the terms meager and had severance arrangements that included the right to call for an independent valuation. As a result, she was able to sell her slice of the Yoox Net-a-Porter business at a higher price.Yoox’s 20 percent upward share price move since March suggests investors already saw the deal as a good one for them. The stock is nearly 90 percent ahead since rumors of talks first emerged in October 2014. For Richemont, which took shares in the merged entity and says it is in for the long term, the precise terms of the exchange were less crucial.Yoox and Net-a-Porter were both started in 2000. Federico Marchetti, who set up the Milan-listed Yoox, is strong on logistics and runs the more profitable operation. He increased revenue to 524 million euros, or about $583 million, in 2014 from 152 million euros in 2009. He also saw Yoox make a profit — its margin of earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation was 9.3 percent last year.AdvertisementMs. Massenet’s Net-a-Porter has spent most of the past 15 years in the red, although it posted a 1.4 million pound profit on sales of 654 million pounds last year.Still, she has enviable industry contacts and a stellar individual reputation. The newly merged group may be easier to run with Yoox’s Mr. Marchetti as the single, clear leader. But Yoox may well miss Mr. Massenet’s input.AdvertisementYoox also loses her just as online luxury is heating up. LVMH announced it is hiring Ian Rogers of Apple to head up its digital innovation. McKinsey research also shows the strongest growth in online luxury sales happening on the websites of individual luxury brands and leading department stores. For multibrand websites like Yoox Net-a-Porter, the trends are becoming more challenging.An earlier version of this column misstated the performance of Net-a-Porter. It recorded a profit of 1.4 million pounds on sales of 654 million pounds last year. It did not post a loss of 2 million euros on sales of 816 million euros.Carol Ryan is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »