
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

SEPT. 3, 2015
Imagine a situation where a client refuses to pay a lawyer’s bill, claiming that the bill is too high or the quality of the work was poor. The normal rule is that the lawyer eats the cost of defending the bill, even if the lawyer eventually prevails against the client.This traditional rule – also called the “American rule” – provided the basis for a recent Supreme Court ruling in Baker Botts v. Asarco , which held that Section 330 of the bankruptcy code, which provides for the payment of bankruptcy lawyers’ fees, does not itself allow for the reimbursement for time spent defending those fees. I joined an amicus brief urging the court to reach the opposite conclusion.The opinion in the case has been widely panned by the bankruptcy bar. Cynics will say “of course,” but the opinion does suggest that the Supreme Court does not really understand the dynamics of large Chapter 11 cases. In short, the traditional rule arises in traditional litigation, but a Chapter 11 case is not traditional litigation.In response to the court’s opinion, firms have begun to take the obvious and understandable step of putting these “fees for fees” into their retention agreements. Whether that is permissible is the subject of litigation, including two cases pending in the Delaware Bankruptcy Court.AdvertisementStrictly speaking, the Supreme Court’s opinion addresses only whether such fees are reimbursable under Section 330, and the court did acknowledge that the traditional rule could be overridden by express statute or contract. On the other hand, some of the court’s language is quite broad, and the United States Trustee – the government watchdog in bankruptcy cases – is arguing in the Delaware cases that the language shows that the Supreme Court actually pronounced a broad rule against “fees for fees.”AdvertisementAnother provision of the bankruptcy code – Section 328 – does allow for retention of professionals under “any reasonable terms and conditions of employment.” The Supreme Court’s opinion does not really engage with Section 328, and thus rather than hide behind some slack language from the court, it is probably better to wrestle with the question of whether these new contractual provisions are “reasonable.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One difficulty is that these new provisions address an issue that is largely unique to bankruptcy. So we don’t have any good sense about whether nonbankruptcy clients would retain professionals with a term providing for reimbursement of “fees for fees.” And the new contractual provisions would arguably provide more to professionals than was permitted by some courts under case law before the opinion in the Asarco case.In particular, some of these new provisions would seem to allow for reimbursement in most cases – or at least all cases where the professional prevails. As the case law on indemnifying corporate directors shows, what precisely “prevailing” means in a matter that is likely to settle is often quite vague.On the other hand, the bankruptcy code was amended in 1978 to provide that professionals in bankruptcy cases would receive the same level of compensation that they receive outside bankruptcy. That is, “market rates.”If a party can plausibly threaten to object to fees – and thus effectively reduce the professional’s compensation below market — the party can obtain a strategic advantage in the case. Clearly, that should not be permitted. The Supreme Court, through Justice Clarence Thomas, said that rules against fraudulent pleadings would protect against that. But there is a good deal of space between an objection that is made in bad faith and one that is actually “sanctionable” under the rules.Perhaps the best solution would be to permit a contractual provision that provided that the court would have the discretion to award fees for time spent successfully defending a fee application. That is, the professionals would not automatically receive such fees, but they would get them in cases where the court thinks it was warranted. This would protect against cases where the fee objection was driven by strategic considerations, or simple spite, as it might have been in the Asarco case.Stephen J. Lubben holds the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and is an expert on bankruptcy.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »