
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

SEPT. 3, 2015
Buyout barons are jumping on the blank-check bandwagon.David Bonderman’s TPG and Alec Gores’s Gores Group are the latest investment firms to pursue initial public offerings for special-purpose acquisition companies, or SPACs. But not all deal-making nous is necessarily the same.Once faddish, these acquisition enterprises now offer more conservative terms that are attracting longer-term investors willing to fund purchases that have not yet been specified. Private equity firms want a piece of the action. The one-off nature of these deal ventures can suit situations that traditional buyout structures would not, including mature businesses already loaded up with debt or ones that might buy rivals over a longer time frame.For instance, after failing to sell the slow-growing Iglo Group to BC Partners and the Blackstone Group in 2012, Permira instead offloaded the frozen-food maker earlier this year to a shell company created by the serial acquirer Martin E. Franklin. In April, the hedge fund boss Marc Lasry used another SPAC, Boulevard Acquisition, to land Dow Chemical’s food packaging business, AgroFresh.The stock of such enterprises offers a ready-made acquisition currency that may help private equity buyers compete in today’s cutthroat merger market, where they are often at a disadvantage. Conflicts of interest, meanwhile, are being addressed head-on. Both TPG’s Pace Holdings and the Gores Group’s equivalent entity make clear in their initial public offering prospectuses that their sponsors’ private equity funds will get first crack at any investment opportunities.The bigger question is whether private equity expertise necessarily applies to the blank-check approach. Each buyout fund typically accumulates a portfolio of companies over half a decade, thus both diversifying and spreading out the timing, and sells them over another five years. Along the way, private equity firms often restructure balance sheets and operations. Debt is an integral component.A SPAC, in contrast, has just two years to find a single target, often with a longer investment horizon and the need for greater focus on the equity side of the capital structure. Deal size can be different, too: The Gores Group’s buyout funds specialize in investing $50 million to $150 million of equity at a time, while its SPAC raised $375 million. It is understandable why buyout firms want blank checks, but it is less obvious that investors should be signing them.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »