AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack EwingFRANKFURT — Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, pledged on Thursday to intervene by increasing economic stimulus spending if the turmoil in the global economy continues.But the central bank will not act until it has more information about the effect of a slowdown in emerging markets and other risks, Mr. Draghi said at a news conference. Also on Thursday, the central bank cut its previous growth forecasts for the eurozone economies because of the global turbulence.“The Governing Council wanted to emphasize its willingness to act, its readiness to act and its ability to act,” Mr. Draghi said after a meeting of the council, the bank’s policy board.For now, the central bank still needs to assess whether what is happening in the rest of the world is “worsening our medium-term outlook or is just a transitory thing,” Mr. Draghi said. “And then we’ll decide whether to do more or not.”Staff economists at the European Central Bank, in a report issued Thursday, scaled back their eurozone growth projections for this year and through 2017, citing lower demand from emerging markets — a clear reference to the repercussions of the economic slowdown in China.Growth in the 19 countries of the eurozone will be 1.4 percent this year, central bank economists said, compared with a forecast of 1.5 percent that they made in June. Inflation is now projected at 0.1 percent for the year, compared with an earlier forecast of 0.2 percent.Analysts had not expected such a robust indication of stronger stimulus, and some took it as a sign that the Governing Council had grown comfortable deploying measures that were extremely controversial only a few months ago. A long debate had preceded the central bank’s decision in January to begin buying government bonds and other assets to pump money into the eurozone economy. Opponents on the council had argued that the government bond purchases violated a provision in the central bank’s charter that prohibits it from financing governments.Jörg Krämer, chief economist at Commerzbank, said that Mr. Draghi would have been more cautious on Thursday if he still faced opposition from conservatives like Jens Weidmann, a member of the council who is also president of the Bundesbank, the German central bank. But Mr. Weidmann and other skeptics appear to have softened their resistance to government bond purchases as a stimulus measure.“I don’t think resistance within the E.C.B. council is a major argument” against additional action, Mr. Krämer said.European stocks, which had already been up for the day, were further buoyed by Mr. Draghi’s remarks. The euro also fell against the dollar, which bolsters the eurozone economy because it makes European exports cheaper abroad.The only concrete change in monetary policy by the European Central Bank at its meeting on Thursday was to raise self-imposed limits on how much it can buy of any single government’s or private lender’s bond issue. The change gives the central bank more leeway to increase the asset purchases that it began in March as a way of pumping money into the eurozone economy and forcing down interest rates.“Once again the E.C.B. has managed to provoke a desired market reaction (particularly a weakening of the euro) without any actual change in policy,” Karen Ward, senior global economist at HSBC Bank, wrote in a note to clients.In coming months, economists will probably focus on whether, and how soon, the European Central Bank might see a need to step up that bond-buying stimulus program, known as quantitative easing. Currently, the bank is buying government bonds and other assets at a rate of 60 billion euros, or about $68 billion, a month. It has said the purchases will continue at least until September 2016.Mr. Draghi said that the central bank was prepared to adjust the “size, composition and duration” of that program if necessary. Many economists now expect it to act before the end of the year, by raising the volume of assets it buys or by extending the program beyond September 2016, or both.The big challenges for the central bank include the threat that inflation in the eurozone will fall below zero, that there will be less demand for eurozone exports because of economic problems in China and other emerging markets, and that there will be upward pressure on eurozone interest rates because of action under consideration by the Federal Reserve in the United States.Mr. Draghi declined to comment on what effect Fed policy would have on the eurozone, except to say that if a rate increase is necessary to achieve “the objectives of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, this is a plus for the world.”The central bank left its benchmark interest rate at 0.05 percent, where it has been for almost a year, and a change would have been a big surprise.Unlike the Fed, which could begin raising interest rates as soon as this month, the European Central Bank is expected to keep its main rate at close to zero for some time. The annual rate of inflation in the eurozone is 0.2 percent, far below the official target of just under 2 percent.Though the central bank displayed a willingness to increase its stimulus measures, it remains reluctant to apply the stimulus to Greece.A Greek journalist asked Mr. Draghi whether the bailout agreement that Athens reached this summer with its international creditors would allow the European Central Bank to start buying Greek government bonds as part of its stimulus program. Such purchases would increase the market demand for Greek bonds as well as their value.Mr. Draghi said it was too soon to make that move, however. As Greece reaches various milestones in its bailout program in the coming months, he said, the European Central Bank would assess whether to begin buying Greek bonds.OpinionPaul KrugmanAdvertisement