By BROOKS BARNES and MICHAEL CIEPLYSEPT. 4, 2015
TELLURIDE, Colo. —  Aretha Franklin prevailed on Friday in an 11th-hour legal bid to stop the Telluride Film Festival from screening Sydney Pollack’s posthumous documentary “Amazing Grace,” which shows the making of Ms. Franklin’s album of the same name more than four decades ago.In a strongly worded emergency order, Judge John L. Kane of the United States District Court for Colorado said Ms. Franklin had “a high likelihood of success on the merits” of her case. “A film that essentially recreates the entire concert experience is not fair use of this footage,” he added.The injunction specifically barred screenings in Telluride, including what would have been the film’s premiere on Friday night at the 500-seat Chuck Jones Cinema, and did not mention other film festivals. The judge’s order, which will expire in 14 days, also blocked screenings scheduled for Saturday and Sunday.The injunction clouds the future of what had been one of the festival season’s most highly anticipated documentaries. The movie was set to show on Thursday at the Toronto International Film Festival, where distribution rights were to be sold at an accompanying film market.AdvertisementMs. Franklin had long opposed the release of the movie, which she said violated her contractual and other rights. While those issues remain to be settled, Friday’s injunction throws into disarray the plans for a splashy debut and high-profile sale.AdvertisementIn a statement, a spokeswoman for the festival told attendees of the ruling late Friday afternoon and said another documentary, “Sherpa,” would be substituted at the planned screening.“Amazing Grace” was shot in early 1972, as Ms. Franklin recorded her album at the New Temple Missionary Baptist Church near Los Angeles. Mr. Pollack experienced difficulties in matching sound with his film, and eventually shelved the project.But it was later revived by the producer Alan Elliott, who acquired the rights from Warner Bros. and apparently solved the technical problems. Mr. Elliott did not respond to queries on Friday. A spokesman for William Morris Endeavor, which was to oversee the sale of film rights, had no immediate comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement issued before Judge Kane ruled, Thom Powers, a documentary programmer with the Toronto festival, said: “We’re proceeding with plans to screen ‘Amazing Grace’ at TIFF. We haven’t heard of any legal procedures regarding the film in Toronto.” Whether the ruling would change that position remained unclear.It is extremely rare for a festival to remove a film from its lineup after it has been announced. Courtney Love successfully stopped the unflattering documentary “Kurt & Courtney” — about her and her late husband, Kurt Cobain — from playing at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, but she had a rather direct legal claim: The documentarian, Nick Broomfield, had not cleared the necessary music rights.At this year’s Sundance festival, lawyers were on call to defend against any attempt by the Church of Scientology to block a screening of “Going Clear,” Alex Gibney’s documentary about the church. But the church, despite a public relations campaign against the film, which was released by HBO, did not go to court.In 2011, Ms. Franklin sued Mr. Elliott, aiming to block his revival of the “Amazing Grace” film. But the case was resolved when she understood Mr. Elliott to have said that he had no intention of releasing it publicly, according to a recap in the complaint filed Friday. That complaint maintains that Mr. Elliott’s deal with Warner Bros. requires him to get Ms. Franklin’s permission before using Mr. Pollack’s footage.“The film is the functional equivalent of replaying an entire Aretha Franklin concert without her consent,” the complaint said. It cited rights of publicity, the right to the use of her name and likeness, invasion of privacy and antipiracy concerns as matters to be considered in blocking the film.Even before Judge Kane’s ruling, Ms. Franklin had become persona non grata at Telluride.“I’m sorry, I thought maybe Aretha had sent you,” a festival volunteer said after being startled by the sudden approach of an attendee.Advertisement“She’s suing the festival, you know. What gall.”Brooks Barnes reported from Telluride, Colo., and Michael Cieply from Los Angeles.A version of this article appears in print on September 5, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Aretha Franklin Sues to Stop Screening of Documentary.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.