By STEPHANIE STROMSEPT. 4, 2015
As meat companies scramble to eliminate antibiotics from their products to address consumer and regulatory concerns, the federal Agriculture Department has quietly opened a new front in the debate over the use of drugs in the livestock and poultry industries.In the next few months, consumers will start seeing the phrase “produced without ractopamine” on packages of Organic Buttercroft Bacon from Tendergrass Farms, a company that markets “natural” and organic meats.Ractopamine hydrochloride is among a class of drugs called beta-agonists, which are used to add muscle weight to animals in the weeks before slaughter. Animals gain weight while eating less, making them cheaper to raise. By some estimates, 60 to 80 percent of pigs raised in the United States are given the drug.But the European Union, China, Russia and many other countries prohibit imports of one or more of beef, pork and turkey raised with ractopamine out of concern that its effect on human health is unknown.AdvertisementFor that export market, Smithfield Foods, Tyson and other major meat companies have for several years produced meats from animals raised without the drug, and in 2013, the U.S.D.A. came up with the Never Fed Beta-Agonists Program to certify such meat as ractopamine-free.AdvertisementThat program was for only the export market, however, and those companies have continued to use ractopamine in raising animals for meat for the domestic market.Now, the Agriculture Department is permitting other producers to use new language to advertise how the animals were raised without such drugs.David Maren, a founder of Tendergrass Farms, which markets organic and “natural” meats, had been trying to get wording approved for some time. “I’d been talking with the U.S.D.A. about this over the last year or so, and they kept telling me I couldn’t use the word ractopamine,” he said.“Then all of a sudden, they changed their minds.”Tendergrass Farms now can carry a label that says, among other things, “Made from organic pork raised on family farms with a vegetarian diet and no ractopamine (a beta-agonist growth promotant) or antibiotics — ever!”A spokesman for the Agriculture Department, which has already given a second company permission to use similar language on its packaging, said it had not banned using the word ractopamine on a label.“Our job and our goal is to make sure that the label is truthful and not misleading — and misleading can mean, among other things, missing facts necessary for a consumer to understand the claim being made on a label,” said Philip Derfler, deputy administrator of the food safety and inspection service, which oversees meat labeling.He said the agency approved Tendergrass’s label after the company changed it. “Factors came together in way they hadn’t come together, that’s all,” Mr. Derfler said. “A label statement that only says a company doesn’t use growth promotants, for instance, doesn’t provide enough information to the consumer.”AdvertisementAccording to recent consumer research by the Hartman Group, a consumer research firm, food labels are gaining in importance to shoppers seeking information about food and beverages. The survey, done in May with 1,562 respondents ages 18 to 79, also found that more consumers were looking for fewer ingredients in food.Laurie Demeritt, chief executive of Hartman, said consumers were looking for food they perceived as fresher, more “real” and minimally processed. “Even though they likely have no idea what ractopamine is, the fact that it sounds like a chemical and is called out on the label will send a signal that it’s something that doesn’t need to be there,” Ms. Demeritt said. “To a consumer, that may say it’s less processed or about how the animal was treated.”The Food and Drug Administration approved use of the drug for veterinary purposes in 1999, establishing a level for acceptable residues of the drug in meat. Ractopamine generally passes through an animal quickly, but because it typically is administered in the last weeks before slaughter, residues can be found. China, one of the largest international consumers of United States pork, has rejected American imports several times after finding residues in samples.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chinese crackdown on pork imports has alarmed American producers, especially because the Chinese eat parts of a pig like ears and stomachs that are hard to sell at home. And this year, there’s a glut of pork in the United States, fueling the need for producers to find other markets.Exports of pork to China dropped almost 20 percent to 337,306 metric tons in 2014, knocking sales down to $775 million, from $903 million in 2013. The country currently has a big appetite for pork because its own pig herd has shrunk by nearly 100 million pigs, according to a new research report by Rabobank.Smithfield Foods, one of the largest pork producers in the United States, did not respond to a request for comment about the U.S.D.A.’s approval of a ractopamine-free label for the United States market. But just days before it was bought by Shuanghui International, a large Chinese meat processor, in 2013, Smithfield had announced that it aimed for half of its production to come from pigs raised without the drug.Tyson Foods, another large pork producer, also did not respond to requests for comment.The National Pork Producers Council, the industry’s trade group, said pork was exported to 120 countries, roughly 100 of which allow the use of ractopamine. Dave Warner, a spokesman for the group, said it had not asked its members to reduce or eliminate ractopamine.“We support allowing the market determine the use of ractopamine,” Mr. Warner said in an email. “If customers are willing to pay more, to cover the costs of additional feed, for ractopamine-free pork, great.”Bryan Karwal, a hog farmer in southwest Iowa, said he had tried the drug in the past but no longer used it. “I can tell you, it does change the pigs,” Mr. Karwal said. “It makes them really hyper — when I tried using it, I once went into a barn and my pigs were all standing on top of each other in one corner.”AdvertisementHe said it would not be hard for pig farmers to eliminate the use of ractopamine, estimating that it would cost them at most $1 a pig in lost revenue.Elanco, a division of Eli Lilly, which originally developed the drug as a potential asthma treatment for humans, said it could add as much as $5 per pig in additional revenue to the farmer.Elanco, the F.D.A. and the pork industry say the drug’s use in animals poses no risk to humans.“Elanco believes that ‘ractopamine-free’ labels will confuse consumers on the product’s safety and contribution to sustainability in farming,” the company said in a statement. It said the drug reduced the amount of feed needed for cattle and hogs, helping lower the carbon footprint of the livestock industry.Organic meat producers do not use beta-agonists, and meat marketed as “natural” by companies like Niman Ranch, Coleman Natural Foods and Applegate comes from animals that were not fed the drugs.Julie DeYoung, a spokeswoman for Perdue, which owns Coleman, said the company told its business customers that it did not use ractopamine, but said it would be difficult to explain that practice on labels for consumers. “It is not an easily understood item to talk to consumers about,” Ms. DeYoung said.Similarly, Applegate, which is owned by Hormel, doesn’t tell consumers that its meats are ractopamine-free. Neil Leinwand, senior vice president for marketing at Applegate, said the prohibition on the drug and other beta-agonists was part of the animal welfare the company talked about.“I don’t see it becoming as big an issue as antibiotics, but I could be wrong,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on September 5, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: New Label Identifies Pork Without a Growth Drug.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.