AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The German drug maker Bayer said on Friday that it planned to list its newly spun-off polymer business, Covestro, in an initial public offering in Germany this year.Last year, Bayer announced plans to spin off the high-tech polymer business, formerly known as Bayer MaterialScience, as it shifts its focus primarily to health care. Bayer started in 1863 as a chemical company.This week, Bayer announced that the polymer unit  would have a new name, Covestro. Polymers, or plastics, are used in a variety of industries, including the automotive, electronics and medical fields.On Friday, Bayer said that Covestro would seek a listing on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and that the I.P.O. was expected to be completed in the fourth quarter.“We have been evaluating the optimal way for the separation of the MaterialScience business and believe that an I.P.O. delivers clear benefits for both Bayer and Covestro and their stakeholders,” Marijn Dekkers, the Bayer chief executive, said in a news release. “This transaction will allow both businesses to pursue their strategic goals.”The offering will consist of new shares issued by Covestro. It will be offered publicly to retail and institutional shareholders in Germany and Luxembourg, as well as in private placements to institutional investors elsewhere.Bayer did not indicate a price range or potential value of the offering.Covestro intends to use the proceeds from the I.P.O. primarily to repay debt owed to Bayer.“Covestro’s I.P.O. is a further step in the transition to an independent company,” Patrick Thomas, the Covestro chief executive, said in a news release.The material science business was split off as its own division within Bayer in 2004, but it traces its roots to the beginning of the 20th century. One of its scientists, Fritz Hofmann, helped create the first synthetic rubber. Its plastics and coatings are used in passenger and commercial vehicles, in CDs and DVDs, and in the construction industry.Covestro had sales of 11.7 billion euros, or about $13 billion, in its 2014 financial year. It employs about 14,200 people.Deutsche Bank and Morgan Stanley will act as global coordinators on the offering.Advertisement