By PHYLLIS KORKKISEPT. 5, 2015
James Ward began collecting office supplies about 10 years ago, but he has always loved pens, pencils and paper. They remind him of walking into class at the beginning of the school year with a brand-new pencil case “and at that moment everything’s perfect.” To this day, empty notebooks beckon to him with their potentiality.“You can go into an office supply store and spend half an hour finding the perfect pen and the perfect notebook to write that novel,” Mr. Ward said. With his office supply collection, he’s trying to capture that brief window of hope before the pencils start breaking and the novel goes into a drawer.His collection numbers in the “high hundreds,” he said, and includes paper clips, staplers, pens, pencils, pencil cases and sharpeners, erasers, rulers, notebooks and desk organizers. He buys many of his office supplies on eBay. “For quite a lot of the stuff, I’m the only bidder,” he said, which makes the prices quite reasonable. The oldest items in his collection are some paper clips from the early 1900s.Mr. Ward, 34, is an account manager for a public relations company in London. In his spare time he helped found the Stationery Club, whose members gather to discuss topics like pens and notebooks. People have very strong opinions on whether narrow-, wide- or college-ruled notebooks are the best, it turns out.He also founded the Boring Conference, where people discuss topics that sound as if they should be boring but aren’t. One person gave a lecture on the noises that vending machines make and played a selection of them that she had taped. Another lecturer discussed electric hand driers.Office supplies also fall into the “at first glance boring but actually interesting” category. In his book “The Perfection of the Paper Clip,” published this year by Touchstone, Mr. Ward explains the origins of these common objects and seeks to convey their importance in our lives.A version of this article appears in print on September 6, 2015, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Seeing the Potential in a Humble Paper Clip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.