
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
SEPT. 4, 2015
Infiltrating the supersecret world of private equity is difficult, so any glimpse into how these firms operate is worth highlighting.A recent ruling in a 2014 lawsuit over payouts made to private equity owners of Hellas Telecommunications, once Greece’s third-largest mobile phone operator, is a case in point. Even though the lawsuit relates to a transaction that’s almost a decade old, its allegations resonate today as securities regulators and the Internal Revenue Service question private equity practices and increase their scrutiny of these firms.A formerly thriving company with little debt, TIM Hellas, as it was known, was taken over in 2005 by two giant private equity outfits — Apax Partners, of London, and TPG Capital (then called the Texas Pacific Group), a $75 billion shop based in Fort Worth whose founders include David Bonderman. Using mostly borrowed funds, the sponsors paid 1.6 billion euros, about $1.8 billion at the current exchange rate, for TIM Hellas.In the fall of 2006, the private equity firms tried to sell the company but found no bidders at their price. So that December, the company issued about €1.4 billion in debt and then redeemed complex securities held by Apax and TPG that were received in the buyout.AdvertisementThose securities — known as convertible preferred equity certificates — were cashed out at a huge premium: 35 times their par value, court documents show. The transaction generated €974 million to the private equity holders and others.AdvertisementIn 2007, Apax and TPG sold the telecom company to an Egyptian investor for €3.4 billion. But by 2009, Hellas II, as it is now known, was struggling under its debt load. That fall, the company went into administration, the British form of bankruptcy.The €974 million paid to the private equity firms in 2006 is the subject of a lawsuit filed against Apax and TPG by liquidators appointed to Hellas II. They are seeking recovery of the money on behalf of creditors, contending that the company did not have sufficient earnings to cover the payout to the private equity firms. The plaintiffs argue it was a fraudulent transfer.A parallel case being heard in Luxembourg, where the company was organized, will also determine whether the payout was a breach of corporate law and whether the former directors of the telecom company will be held liable.The private equity firms maintain that Hellas II was healthy when they sold it in 2007 and that the company’s subsequent collapse was because of the financial crisis. A joint statement issued on Wednesday by Alex Wessendorff, a spokesman for Apax, and Luke Barrett for TPG, said attempts to blame the firms for the default were meritless.There are two central questions in both cases. One is how the former Hellas board, made up mostly of representatives from the private equity firms, came up with the high valuation for the certificates redeemed in 2006; the other is whether the redemption met the terms of the certificates and abided by Luxembourg law.Under their terms, the certificates can distribute profits generated by the company or proceeds from an asset sale; in addition, before any distribution was made, the company had to secure an independent valuation of its equity. Finally, the distribution had to comply with Luxembourg law, which says that payouts cannot be made to shareholders in the absence of distributable earnings at the company.None of these requirements were met, the creditors contend.The fraudulent transfer suit is being heard by Martin Glenn, a judge in Federal Bankruptcy Court in New York, under Chapter 15 of the bankruptcy code, which involves cross-border insolvencies. Apax and TPG have fought hard to keep the case from going forward, but on Aug. 19, the judge ruled that the plaintiffs could file a new complaint, allowing the case to proceed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To make his ruling, Judge Glenn had to determine whether the plaintiff’s allegations had given rise to a so-called strong inference that fraud may have occurred.AdvertisementHe referred to emails and other material presented by the plaintiffs indicating that the private equity firms knew their decisions were jeopardizing Hellas’s financial position.For example, a Dec. 2, 2006, email from a TPG executive to a colleague at Apax noted that the firms were “putting the business under huge pressure” to take their money out in the redemption. Another email about two weeks later from a TPG executive to James Coulter, a co-founder of the firm, warned of the precarious position Hellas would be in if the 2006 redemption took place.The redemption went forward, the judge noted, even though these concerns had been shared with TPG executives. “These shared concerns raise a strong inference that the TPG defendants’ top brass had a factual basis to suspect that Hellas II was carrying on business with a fraudulent purpose through the December 2006 transaction, but the TPG defendants turned a blind eye to this suspicion,” the judge wrote.Apax and TPG characterized the judge’s ruling as procedural and not a “comment by the court on the underlying merit of the case.” They said in their statement that the emails cited in the ruling were taken out of context by the plaintiffs, who ignored the “thorough diligence process conducted by a large team of corporate finance professionals at the time of the transaction.” Six similar Hellas bondholder cases have been dismissed, the firms added.Bertrand des Pallières is chief executive of SPQR Capital, a London investment firm that was a bondholder in Wind Hellas, a predecessor company to Hellas II.“It’s now clear as day that the private equity funds, going right to the very top of their organizations, knew that their actions would eventually destroy the company,” Mr. des Pallières said.The case is expected to go to trial early next year. In the meantime, the Hellas deal is attracting attention in other jurisdictions. Tax authorities in Greece and Luxembourg are looking into whether appropriate taxes were paid on the money generated in the certificate redemption, including bonuses paid to senior managers who approved the deal, said Andrew Hosking, the lead liquidator for Hellas II in London.“We expect that increased scrutiny of private equity firm practices by the taxing authorities will see the wheels come off on these types of transactions that might previously have passed under the radar,” Mr. Hosking said.It is only by sheer dint of persistence that the creditors of Hellas II are still fighting. But the passage of so much time may not be all bad. Regulators and investors have grown increasingly concerned about private equity practices recently. That means heightened interest in the Hellas II story is likely to continue.A version of this article appears in print on September 6, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rare Peek Into a World of Secrets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »