By GEORGE GENE GUSTINESSEPT. 6, 2015
Judd Winick is ready for his reboot.After detours through the worlds of reality television, comic books and animation, Mr. Winick has returned to his roots as a cartoonist with “Hilo,” an all-ages graphic novel. The title hero is an enigmatic boy who crashes to Earth and befriends two children, D.J. and Gina. The book, which came out last week, is the first installment of what is planned to be a six-book series.“Hilo” — pronounced “high-low” — is being marketed as a graphic novel for children, but Mr. Winick likens it to a Pixar film, a story that can be enjoyed by the entire family. One early review described it as “whimsical and serious.” The book balances slapstick (bodily noises, unfamiliarity with societal norms) and pathos (the ups and downs of childhood friendships). It also has a multiethnic cast: D.J. is the only one of five Asian-American siblings who is not “awesome at something,” and his best friend, Gina, who is black, has two aggressively positive sisters who are cheerleaders. Each book will reveal more about the characters and the mystery of Hilo’s destiny.Giving “Hilo” a multigenerational appeal was a tribute to what initially drew Mr. Winick to newspaper comic strips.Advertisement“They were mainstream, all-ages cartoons,” he said. “As a kid, you had a daily dose of comic strips. We read them all. We even read the ones we didn’t like.”In creating “Hilo” — Book 1 is subtitled “The Boy Who Crashed to Earth” — Mr. Winick said he took the lessons of 10 years of writing comic book stories and meshed them with the humor he enjoyed from newspaper comic strips. He realized he “could tell long-form action-adventure stories that had plenty of drama, tension and stakes — and they could still be funny.”Mr. Winick, 45, is best known to many people from his time as a cast member on the third season of “The Real World” on MTV, in San Francisco, in 1994. He appeared on the show just as his development deal with Universal Press Syndicate, a distributor of newspaper strips, was canceled.His time on the show was life-changing in several ways: One of his housemates, Pam Ling, became his wife. Another, Pedro Zamora, came to personify the struggles of gay men living with AIDS. Mr. Zamora died in 1994 and Mr. Winick commemorated their bond in the 2000 graphic novel “Pedro and Me: Friendship, Loss, and What I Learned.”Mr. Winick also worked on many comics: his creator-owned “The Adventures of Barry Ween, Boy Genius,” in 1999, about a potty-mouthed 10-year-old, published by Image; “Green Lantern,” for DC Comics in 2000, in which he introduced a gay supporting character; and Marvel’s “Exiles,” in 2001, about parallel-world explorers, including a lesbian superhero.AdvertisementThe “Green Lantern” issue in which Terry Berg came out as gay won the best comic book of the year award from the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (now called Glaad). It was also the beginning of Mr. Winick’s reputation for supporting diversity and social causes, which elated some fans and made others lament his “liberal soapboxing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Judd is a very talented writer and I think he has a gift for knowing his audience,” said Andrew Farago, curator of the Cartoon Art Museum in San Francisco.He added, “He’s also great at pushing his audience” by introducing contemporary issues or by creating stories that feel personal.By 2005, Mr. Winick had branched out to animation with “The Life and Times of Juniper Lee,” which ran for two years on the Cartoon Network, about an 11-year-old Chinese girl who must keep the balance between the real and supernatural. He is now head writer for “The Awesomes,” an animated series about superheroes created by Seth Meyers and Mike Shoemaker. (Mr. Meyers is scheduled to have Mr. Winick as a guest on “Late Night” on Sept. 15.)The experience on “Juniper Lee” led Mr. Winick to several seasons of pitching live-action television series and, a few years ago, to a revelation: “When you meet people and you answer ‘What do you do?’ I tell them I’m a cartoonist, even though I had not put pencil to papers in years,” he said. “I forgot what made me happy.”His wife agreed. She once remarked that he was a different man while working on “Hilo.” “It’s like Judd minus the 60 percent misplaced anger,” she said.Adding fuel to the creative fire was a request from his preteen son to read Mr. Winick’s comics. But when he surveyed his work, he found none that were age-appropriate. He recommended Jeff Smith’s “Bone” series and grew envious when his son enjoyed it.“I can do that too,” he decided, and “Hilo” — which “began with an image of a boy who could fly, him falling down and this other boy finding him” — was soon born.The experience also helped him come to another discovery.“For self-deprecating New York Jewish fellows like me, calling yourself an artist — especially if you’re a cartoonist — is something we do with great reluctance,” he said. “We feel we’re in the clown car of the art world.”In the end, Mr. Winick said, “I’m an artist in the sense that I don’t do this because I can, but because I have to.”An article on Monday about a graphic novel series that represents the return of the television writer Judd Winick to his comic book roots misstated part of the name of the syndicate with which Mr. Winick once had a development deal. It is Universal Press Syndicate, not United Press Syndicate.A version of this article appears in print on September 7, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Graphic Novels Drawn From Comic-Strip Roots.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.