AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills on Tuesday and an auction of four-week bills on Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.04 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.24 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: TUESDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $195.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYWashington, $155.8 million of Washington University revenue bonds. Competitive. Washington, $59 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAllina Health System, Minn., $250 million of taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Austin, Tex., $307.3 million of public improvement bonds and others. Jefferies.Emerald Coast Utilities Authority, Fla., $51.8 million of utility system refinancing revenue bonds. Raymond James. Fresno, Calif., Unified School District, $51.7 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Hidalgo County, Tex., $54.7 million of certificates of obligation and limited tax refunding bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Illinois Finance Authority, $100 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Lancaster County, Pa., Hospital Authority, $50.9 million of health center revenue refinancing bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Montana Board of Housing, $64.4 million of single family mortgage bonds. RBC Capital Markets.North Texas Tollway Authority, $750 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Oregon Tri-County Metropolitan Transportation District, $133.6 million of revenue bonds and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Riverside County, Calif., Public Financing Authority, $52.7 million of tax allocation revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Sacramento, $65 million of tax allocation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.San Diego County Water Authority, $153 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.University of Hawaii Board of Regents, $185 million of debt securities. Bank of America.University of Oklahoma Board of Regents, $240.5 million of general revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.West Virginia Housing Development Fund, $70.1 million of housing finance bonds. Raymond James.Advertisement