AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesChina reports a basket of monthly data this week that is expected to provide a clearer picture of how much its economic growth is slowing. On Tuesday, it will release trade figures for August; exports have been flat so far this year, and imports declined 15 percent in the first seven months of 2015. Other reports include inflation figures on Wednesday and industrial output, investment and retail sales on Saturday. Investors will also be watching on Monday for August data on China’s foreign exchange reserves. While still the world’s largest, China’s reserves are expected to have declined after the surprise devaluation last month of its currency, the renminbi, which has raised concerns over capital outflows. — Neil GoughThe Puerto Rico government is planning to complete its debt restructuring plan on Tuesday. The much-awaited plan is expected to include a moratorium on certain bond payments as well as structural changes to the commonwealth’s budget. The plan has been in the works since Gov. Alejandro García Padilla announced in June that the island’s $72 billion of debt was not payable. The completion of the plan was postponed by about a week because the government said it was busy dealing with a tropical storm. — Michael CorkeryToyota Motor is scheduled on Tuesday to unveil the next generation of its Prius hybrid, the leader in sales among alternative-fuel vehicles. While electric cars are drawing more attention, the Prius continues to dominate the market for vehicles not powered solely by gasoline engines. The auto research firm Edmunds.com estimates that the Prius accounts for 23 percent of sales of alternative-fuel vehicles in the United States. The new model, which will be shown at an event in Las Vegas, is expected get better mileage and feature more technology, as Toyota seeks to re-establish its credentials as an innovator in more environmentally friendly vehicles. — Bill VlasicA new era in late-night television begins Tuesday at 11:35 p.m. when Stephen Colbert officially takes over duties as the host of “The Late Show” on CBS. Mr. Colbert will reintroduce himself to viewers as he sheds the abrasive and satirical character he played for nine years on Comedy Central’s late-night program, “The Colbert Report.” His list of guests for the first week suggests his “Late Show” will be eclectic. They include Hollywood royalty (George Clooney and Scarlett Johansson), a writer (Stephen King), tech stars (Elon Musk of Tesla Motors and Travis Kalanick of Uber) and a presidential hopeful (Jeb Bush). — John KoblinApple plans to unveil a host of new products on Wednesday at an event to be held at the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in downtown San Francisco. Among the new products is a revamped iPhone, the company’s most crucial product. The iPhone 6S will have a higher-quality camera and a feature called Force Touch, which lets users gain access to phone functions by pressing hard on the screen, according to people briefed on the products. An upgraded Apple TV that supports video games will accentuate Apple’s desire to become a bigger presence in the living room. And Apple fans can expect updated iPads, too. — Katie BennerOn Thursday, the Bank of England will announce its monthly decision on whether to raise a main interest rate. The Monetary Policy Committee is expected to leave the benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. After the committee’s August meeting, Mark Carney, the Bank of England’s governor, told reporters that the timing for the first rate increase was “drawing closer,” but most experts have said they believe that the committee will not raise rates before the first half of next year. According to the minutes of the committee’s August meeting, one member, Ian McCafferty, said the central bank needed to begin the process of gradually raising rates or face the possibility that it might have to increase rates “more sharply later on.” — Chad BrayThe preliminary Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan survey of consumer sentiment will be released Friday morning, providing an early snapshot of consumer attitudes this month. Although Wall Street does not expect much change from the final August reading of 91.9, analysts will be watching for any sign that the recent sharp stock market sell-off has made consumers more anxious. This survey has been stable this year, after a big rise in 2014 as employment rose and energy prices fell. Despite the recent market volatility, most other economic data has been relatively positive, so a big drop in consumer sentiment would catch some traders by surprise. — Nelson D. SchwartzThe European Commission is scheduled to rule by Friday on whether it will block General Electric’s $13.5 billion bid for Alstom’s power business on antitrust grounds. G.E. has been negotiating with the commission for months, proposing the sale of some assets to allay competitors’ fears that the proposed combination with the French company would give it too much sway over the market for heavy gas turbines. Jeffrey R. Immelt, the G.E. boss, has said that he expects to win approval, but that G.E. would agree only to remedies that maintained the commercial logic of the deal. — David JollyAdvertisement