By RAPHAEL MINDERSEPT. 7, 2015
FUENLABRADA, Spain — Can a Spanish court force a multinational company to bottle Coca-Cola against its will?That, at least according to the company, is the issue at a factory here that reopened its gates by court order on Monday, 18 months after it was closed as part of a cost-cutting plan.But fewer than half of the site’s 220 employees returned to work on Monday, instead demanding that they be given their previous jobs. The trouble is, those jobs involved bottling tasks no longer done at this factory on the outskirts of Madrid. The owner, Coca-Cola Iberian Partners, has converted it to a logistics center that will now mainly store beverages bottled at other plants.As a tense face-off played out at the factory gates on Monday, both sides await a Spanish national court ruling on the case, which might come as soon as this week. That decision could test the conservative government’s effort to give employers greater flexibility as a way to address the country’s high unemployment.AdvertisementThe outcome, which either side might choose to appeal to a European Union high court, could also help determine how much leeway Pan-European companies have in doing business within individual member states. And the case is shaping up as a political litmus test ahead of national elections in December that will pit the conservative party of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy against mostly left-leaning opponents.Advertisement“Today is a day of victory for the working class, but tomorrow we continue our fight until we all get back inside and are doing our old jobs,” Juan Carlos Asenjo, a representative of the Workers’ Commissions, the main labor union at this factory, told workers from a platform erected outside the gates.He spoke as a group of employees prepared to take over from their colleagues for the afternoon shift. Even most of those who had agreed to go back to work wore red T-shirts with slogans denouncing the company’s downsizing.Coca-Cola Iberian Partners is making plans for a recently announced three-way merger with two other European bottlers that would create the world’s largest Coke bottler, serving Western Europe with more than 50 bottling plants and about 27,000 employees. (Bottlers often operate separately from, but under license to, the Coca-Cola Company.)The dispute and court ruling are not likely to derail the mega-merger, experts say. But in the view of Martín Godino Reyes, a managing partner of Sagardoy, a Madrid law firm that represents Coca-Cola Iberian, the face-off is sending the wrong message to multinational companies looking at Spain.Although the country’s economy, as elsewhere in the eurozone, is slowly healing from the recession of a few years ago, Spain is still hampered by a jobless rate of 22 percent. Such a court battle “isn’t good news when you’re trying to present Spain as an investment destination,” Mr. Godino said. “There’s far too much legal uncertainty.”But union leaders say Coca-Cola Iberian is taking unfair advantage of labor reforms pushed through in 2012 by Mr. Rajoy that were meant to reinvigorate Spain’s employment market and make labor rules less rigid, notably by making it easier for employers to hire and fire workers.“This is a clear case of corporate greed,” said Sebastián Serena, an official from the General Union of Workers, the other main Spanish union. “Companies can’t be allowed to do whatever they want to boost profits because, in the end, there are not just numbers but people working for them, who have their own problems, families and mortgages.”AdvertisementMr. Rajoy is hoping to convince voters that Spain is now outpacing other European economies, with expected growth of at least 3 percent this year. But left-leaning opposition parties and unions argue that the high jobless rate and the protest by the bottling workers show Spain’s two-speed recovery is increasing inequality.“If Spain is coming out of the crisis, that must benefit every citizen, and not just the wealthy and a few shareholders who care nothing about workers,” said Mercedes Pérez Merino, another official from the Workers’ Commissions, who has worked for 32 years at different bottling factories near Madrid.The Fuenlabrada factory, which was opened in 1980 and was formerly one of the biggest Coke bottling plants in Europe, has been the epicenter of the labor conflict. Workers not only went on indefinite strike, but also blocked access to the factory and built a makeshift camp at its gates to ensure management could not surreptitiously dismantle production lines. The workers also tried to promote a boycott of Coke products.Many of Fuenlabrada’s workers are second-generation employees who speak of feeling betrayed, like Lorenzo Pérez, 44. He wore a T-shirt on which he had crossed out the word “Coca-Cola” and written “Traitor” instead.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I used to have Coke running in my blood, but it’s now almost evaporated,” Mr. Pérez said. Even if the Spanish bottler isn’t owned by Coca-Cola, he argued, “Of course, such a powerful brand bears some responsibility as it had the means to stop this absurd restructuring plan.”Spain has been struggling with near-record joblessness since 2008, when its construction bubble burst and the country was pushed into recession and a banking crisis. The Rajoy government, arguing that rigid worker protections were impeding a recovery, sought to promote job creation with its labor overhauls.But as highlighted by the Coca-Cola Iberian dispute, the new labor rules resulted in a flurry of court cases. Since 2012, Spanish judges have sided with unions in about half of the 200 cases they have reviewed involving collective layoffs, either forcing changes or blocking the job cuts altogether.“The labor reform has added flexibility to what was a very rigid labor market, but it’s also given judges a lot more influence and opportunities to make their own interpretations” of what precisely amounts to an improper dismissal, said Jesús Lahera, a professor of labor law at the Complutense University of Madrid.The dispute at this factory dates from January 2014, when Coca-Cola Iberian announced it would close four of its 11 Spanish factories, including Fuenlabrada. The company said the plants were operating at about half of production capacity. The original plan called for the company to lay off 1,190 of its nearly 4,600 workers in Spain.AdvertisementAfter street protests and strikes, the company said it would reduce the job cuts to 840 workers. Unions nonetheless took the company to court — and won. In June 2014, Spain’s national court found that the company had not adequately informed workers of its layoff plans and had illegally circumvented their right to strike by using alternative production and distribution channels.The company appealed to the Spanish Supreme Court, losing again. In April, the Supreme Court ordered Coca-Cola Iberian to rehire any employee who did not accept the company’s layoff package, worth an average 135,000 euros per dismissed worker, according to the Spanish bottler.About 300 workers, including the 220 holdouts in Fuenlabrada, are now hoping that the lower Spanish national court will grant them the right not only to resume work, but also to return to the same jobs that they previously held — namely, bottling Coke and the company’s other beverages.Legal experts said that it would be unprecedented for a court to force a company to produce a specific product against its will. But the Coca-Cola brand name is being “used as a symbol” by disgruntled workers as part of their broader fight against multinational capitalism, according to Román Gil Alburquerque, another partner at the Sagardoy law firm.“This dispute with the unions is no longer about working conditions, but more about achieving a victory over this kind of company,” Mr. Gil Alburquerque said. Should the unions win again and force the bottling of Coke, he warned, “This will then be creating more uncertainty around the negotiating tables” of other companies trying to downsize.If the high court orders Coca-Cola Iberian to resume its previous bottling activities at Fuenlabrada or the other plants it closed, it is unclear how the company could comply. It has already given up the lease on one of the factories it was renting. Forced resumption of bottling in Fuenlabrada could “kill the whole reorganization plan,” or cause the company to shut other factories, Mr. Gil Alburquerque said.But some workers warned that the Spanish dispute could play out elsewhere in Europe if the bottling merger results in future job cuts. “Whatever happens in Spain,” warned Ms. Pérez Merino, the union official, “this is the start of a conflict that will unfortunately spread soon to the rest of Europe — be sure of that.”A version of this article appears in print on September 8, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Spanish Court to Rule on Jobs at a Onetime Coca-Cola Bottling Plant .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.