AdvertisementSupported byBy Nicola ClarkPARIS — When the French-Israeli billionaire Patrick Drahi bought a St. Louis cable TV company in May and was mentioned as a potential suitor for Time Warner Cable, it may have been the first time many Americans had heard his name.But Mr. Drahi, 52, is no stranger to American cable.Back in 1990, fresh from his honeymoon and living in a Paris suburb, he surprised his new wife by abruptly resigning his job in a fiber-optics lab at the European electronics giant Philips. He told her he was going to try his hand in the cable industry in the United States.The decision was largely driven by boredom and frustration with corporate bureaucracy, Mr. Drahi has said. But it was also inspired by his observation that the Forbes list of the world’s wealthiest people included, at the time, a significant number of American cable entrepreneurs.“So that’s where I went, because I figured that would be where I would have the best chance,” Mr. Drahi recalled recently at a Paris gathering of students and alumni at the École Polytechnique, a leading French engineering school where he earned his undergraduate degree.Setting off for the United States, the young engineer offered his services as a consultant to American cable investors, advising them on potential European acquisitions. Within three months, Mr. Drahi said, he was earning more than he had been making at Philips.Now, 25 years later, Mr. Drahi has amassed enough of a war chest that he may soon be on an American cable-buying spree, building on his acquisition of Suddenlink Communications, the United States’ seventh-largest cable operator, for $9 billion in May. Next week, he plans to be in New York for an annual conference of telecommunications executives sponsored by Goldman Sachs.The Time Warner talks, Mr. Drahi said at a news conference in May, were only the most preliminary of discussions. Indeed, shortly after the talks concluded, Time Warner accepted a $56 billion offer from Charter Communications.But the publicly traded company that Mr. Drahi controls, Altice, based in Amsterdam, has a stock market value of 25 billion euros, or nearly $28 billion. And the Suddenlink deal has set off media and analyst speculation that the company, which has never been shy about making debt-driven acquisitions, may next seek to buy cable systems from any number of midsize American players, including AT&T, Cox Communications, Cablevision or Verizon.As Altice plots to expand its American footprint, investors on either side of the Atlantic are taking a closer look at Mr. Drahi and his strategy, which in Europe has focused on the convergence of fixed-line cable, Internet services and wireless communications.“Patrick believes that high-speed communications networks today are the equivalent to what networks for water, electricity and railways were to economic development in the 19th and early 20th centuries,” said Jérôme Yomtov, a former investment banker at HSBC who runs Altice’s main French cable and telecommunications business, Numericable-SFR.Mr. Drahi declined to be interviewed for this article. But a series of interviews with a half-dozen friends and colleagues revealed some sense of his early career and his American ambitions.Born in Casablanca and raised in that city’s small, tightly knit community of European Jews, the young Patrick Drahi was the shy and soft-spoken son of math teachers. A self-taught pianist, he was also gifted with numbers, helping his parents grade their students’ exams from the age of 11.At 15, he left Morocco for France with his parents and sister, settling in the southern city of Montpellier. It was a difficult transition for the family, which, like many of the era’s “pieds-noirs” — North Africans of French descent — struggled for acceptance in France.Although he continued to excel at school, his outsider status made him ill at ease with any public acknowledgment of his talents.“I discovered that, in the end, if you succeeded at something, it wasn’t necessary to brag about it, and it was better to keep quiet,” Mr. Drahi said in a videotaped interview shown this year at a Paris dinner where he received an award from an association of French donors to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.Mr. Drahi was eventually accepted into the prestigious École Polytechnique, and he subsequently studied fiber optics at the École Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications. When he finished his degree, in 1986, Mr. Drahi looked set to follow a traditional engineering career path, joining Philips. But that was before he became impatient with what he considered the plodding pace of a big corporation.Mr. Drahi’s penchant for quick, high-stakes decisions was evident in his school days, friends and colleagues said.While still a graduate student, for example, Mr. Drahi was introduced at a party to a young medical student — an Orthodox Christian from Syria — who happened to be the sister of one of his professors. By the end of the evening, he had proposed. (Mr. Drahi and his wife, Lina — now married 25 years — have four grown children.)On his first day back at Philips after his honeymoon, Mr. Drahi resigned before lunchtime and announced the news to his stunned wife. Their trip to the United States quickly followed.Mr. Drahi soon gained enough experience in America that he felt ready to try his hand at running a business and returned to France. Cable, where it existed, was owned by local utility companies with little interest in investing in what was, for them, an ancillary business.Mr. Drahi lacked the cash to pursue his ambitions. When he failed to persuade any of his new American contacts to back his first French investment, Mr. Drahi turned to what quickly became his signature financial tool: debt.In 1994, Mr. Drahi transformed a student loan of 50,000 French francs — or a little over $9,000 at the time — into the seed money for his first cable company, Sud Câble Services.But customers weren’t signing up fast enough to cover his costs.To solicit subscriptions, Mr. Drahi went door to door. And to entice the area’s large North African community to sign up, he quietly introduced several Arabic channels — even though French regulations at the time barred broadcasters from showing foreign-language content.“I didn’t list them in the brochures,” Mr. Drahi said in the awards dinner video. “People started saying, ‘Hey, did you hear? If you get cable, you can have all these channels.’”By 1998, Mr. Drahi’s dealings caught the eye of executives at UPC, a Dutch subsidiary of Liberty Global, a group based in Colorado owned by one of those rich American cable barons he had read about: John C. Malone. In exchange for Mr. Drahi’s cable assets in France, UPC offered him a 5 percent stake and hired him to run the company’s Western Europe business, based in Geneva.Mr. Drahi sold his UPC shares two years later, becoming a multimillionaire. He quickly put his new fortune to work, founding Altice with the aim of fully consolidating the French cable industry.By 2012, Altice was ready to move more aggressively into mobile communications. With the backing of Cinven and the Carlyle Group, it made an unsolicited offer for SFR, France’s second-largest mobile operator, which was owned by Vivendi, the media group that owns Universal Music. The two sides were unable to agree on a price, but Mr. Drahi walked away undeterred.When Vivendi eventually put SFR up for sale early last year, Mr. Drahi succeeded with a €13.4 billion bid, though he faced a fierce public battle against Martin Bouygues, the billionaire owner of Bouygues Telecom. Mr. Bouygues tried to rally his well-placed allies in the French government to support his competing offer for SFR and even publicly questioned the “Frenchness” of Mr. Drahi, who is a dual citizen of France and Israel and maintains his legal residence in Switzerland.Even as his profile has risen, Mr. Drahi remains an intensely private man who shuns public appearances and rarely gives media interviews.Despite a personal fortune estimated at close to €17 billion, Mr. Drahi indulges in few of the trappings of great wealth, friends and colleagues said. Although he keeps several elegant homes — in Geneva, Paris and Tel Aviv — his personal tastes and habits hew to the mundane. He wears a plastic Swatch instead of a Rolex and often arrives at business meetings on foot or a bicycle, instead of by chauffeured car.This no-frills style extends to the workplace, where, Altice colleagues said, Mr. Drahi — like the rest of his top staff — works without an assistant, making his own travel arrangements and booking his own appointments from his iPhone. He has no business card.“It is not a face-time organization,” said Bernard Mourad, a former Morgan Stanley investment banker who recently joined Altice to run the group’s nascent media business, which includes the French newspaper Libération, the magazines L’Express and L’Expansion, as well as i24, an Israeli television station.Analysts estimate that Altice has the financial firepower to pursue up to €30 billion in new debt-driven deals, provided that interest rates remain low and the group continues to generate sufficient revenue to service its debts.All that borrowing, though, has made some French leaders nervous about Altice’s “bulimic” acquisition strategy. Emmanuel Macron, the French economy minister, recently worried aloud that Mr. Drahi was building an enterprise that had become “too big to fail” and might one day require a government bailout to preserve jobs.To Mr. Drahi, such concerns are overblown.“When you are focused on debt reduction, it’s because you have a growth problem,” Mr. Drahi told a French legislative committee in June.“If I stop my so-called bulimic development, in five years, I would have no debts,” he said. “And then what? That would be stupid, because I will not have grown for five years.”Advertisement