AdvertisementSupported byItinerariesBy Martha C. WhiteAs workers become less tethered to their desks, hotels are giving their old in-room work spaces the pink slip.Traditional, boxy desks with drawers are being replaced with more minimalist, flexible tables that can serve a multitude of purposes; laptop trays that allow guests to type away on a sofa or bed; and an abundance of electrical outlets that let travelers plug in just about anywhere.Even the well-appointed stationery, neatly placed on top of the desk, is gradually going the way of the wish-you-were-here postcard.“If there’s a choice between working at a table and working at a desk, 100 percent of the time, I’ll work at the table,” said Jason Dorsey, who is based in Austin, Tex., and travels frequently in his work as a consultant and a speaker about younger consumers.Driving the changes are younger travelers like Mr. Dorsey, who have a more fluid approach to work, hotel executives say — plugging in anywhere, anytime.“One of our early hypotheses was that the traditional desk is going away,” said Jennifer Gribble, vice president for the Americas of the Holiday Inn Express brand at the InterContinental Hotels Group.In a recent redesign, Holiday Inn Express replaced the usual desk with what could best be described as a wall-mounted shelf at desk height, smaller than the previous desk but big enough for a laptop and paperwork.For travelers who want to work while reclining, Holiday Inn Express added what it called a mobile desk — essentially an adjustable-height tray on wheels that can be pulled up to a bed or sofa so guests do not need to have their laptops literally in their laps.“There’s a number of travelers who still want a desk,” Ms. Gribble said. “We’ve evolved it and made it more sleek and modern.”Starwood Hotels and Resorts’ Westin brand introduced a new room design last fall that eliminates the traditional desk in favor of what the company calls a “blended space” concept, which includes a smaller desk, a sofa with an ottoman and a movable side table so travelers have more options.By the end of the year, Courtyard by Marriott will have at least 60 hotels in the United States with a new design that includes a mobile desk and a small table with one open side, so a guest can slide it over the lap and work from the sofa.“We are certainly moving more toward a residential feel in the guest rooms, and that residential feel often comes with a table rather than a desk,” said Mike DeFrino, chief executive of Kimpton Hotels and Restaurants. Kimpton has bistro tables instead of desks in two new hotels, and is renovating a third, Ink48 in New York, in the same style.Travelers today have different expectations and work in different ways, Mr. DeFrino said.“The way people are sort of expected to work perpetually around that clock has made it more common for people to work in stranger places,” he said, whether that is at the kitchen table at home or on a hotel couch. “People are just much more comfortable with that.”Softening the layout with a table instead of a desk also appeals to leisure travelers, who make up about 40 percent of Kimpton’s guests, Mr. DeFrino said.“People are more looking to create rooms that feel like a bohemian apartment,” said Niki Biszantz Vercollone, director of communications at Suite New York, a furniture showroom. “You can have something that’s stylish and different, but it’s still a work surface.”At the Grand Hyatt New York, 80 percent of the rooms now have low tables and comfortable chairs; the remaining 20 percent were left as is for guests who prefer a traditional work space.“We’ve definitely had the opportunity to rethink our rooms by taking into account how people are working these days,” said Mark Pardue, the hotel’s general manager.Another factor driving change is wireless Internet access that gives guests the means to work anywhere in the room. For this reason, hotels have had to increase the number of electrical outlets. Holiday Inn Express’s new room design, for instance, includes 15 outlets — five more than the previous design — and four USB ports, on average, built into the bed and desk as well as on the wall.“It’s on trend in terms of travelers’ having mobile devices and other electronics,” Ms. Gribble said. Other hotel brands also are adding outlets near or embedded in desks, beside lamps or even in sofas.Even as they add outlets, hotels are trying to take advantage of the mobility by squeezing more functionality into smaller rooms. “The common thread is that the size of the standard hotel room is generally shrinking,” Ms. Vercollone said.But compact can easily become cramped in the wrong context. Mr. DeFrino at Kimpton said it could be easy to overlook details that make a difference in whether a table-and-chairs arrangement really works, or comes up short.“A dining chair is not quite as upright as a desk chair,” he said. “You have to have the right ergonomics so people are comfortable eating as well as working, so your elbows hit the right point at the table. Things like that can make the difference.”For this reason, hotels are moving cautiously. Omni Hotels and Resorts is testing a layout with the Omni Atlanta Hotel at SunTrust Park. When it opens in 2017, each room will have a round table perpendicular to the TV instead of a desk, something that might be incorporated into future room designs.Some hotel guests are thrown for a loop when they arrive and discover that the work space has been altered beyond recognition — or usefulness.“I kind of grew up in a laptop era and I still like to sit down at a desk,” said Mark Hamilton, 50, a general manager for a life sciences company who lives in the Toronto area and is on the road about 70 nights a year. “The thought never even crossed my mind that they wouldn’t have a desk.”As a result, he was frustrated on a recent business trip when he checked in and found that the in-room desks had been eliminated in a recent renovation.Mr. Hamilton said the room had what he described as a “pop-up table,” but it wasn’t big enough to serve as an effective desk. The room did have a sofa, but that wasn’t a good candidate because of its deep seat cushions.“I would’ve had to sit forward and not have any back support, and probably would have ended up with a sore lower back,” he said. “I’m not as flexible as I was when I was 20.”Advertisement