AdvertisementSupported byBy Tara Siegel BernardRetirees will no longer be permitted to use certain strategies to increase the amount they collect from Social Security by as much as tens of thousands of dollars.The claiming strategies were eliminated as part of the federal budget bill, which was passed this week by both the House and Senate and is expected to be signed by President Obama. The agreement includes a section to close what it called “unintended loopholes,” ending two income-bolstering approaches that largely benefited married couples and, in some cases, their dependents.The rules on claiming Social Security are incredibly complex, but retirees generally stand to receive higher checks the longer they wait to collect. The strategies being eliminated essentially allowed individuals to collect spousal benefits while their own checks continued to grow.“The main takeaway is that couples who want to coordinate on their claiming strategies have far fewer choices on how to do it,” said Michael Kitces, director of planning research at Pinnacle Advisory Group. “Any dual-income couple is impacted by this,” he added. And it could end up costing them anywhere from $10,000 to $60,000, he estimated, depending on the size of the couple’s spousal benefits.One of the tactics being targeted allowed married retirees to file for benefits but then immediately suspend them: That enabled individuals to collect benefits on their spouses’ record, while the spouses waited to collect their own benefits. The spouses’ benefits, meanwhile, would continue to grow by 8 percent a year. The second strategy permitted married people who reached their full retirement age — generally age 66 for the current crop of retirees — to file what was known as a “restricted application.” That allowed individuals to collect only a spousal benefit, while their own benefits continued to increase.In the future, individuals who are eligible for a spousal benefit will be deemed to have filed for their own retirement benefit as well, explained Mr. Kitces, who wrote about the change on his blog. That means retirees will get whichever is larger.The new restricted application rules apply to those who reach age 62 after 2015, he said, which means people born before 1954 can still pursue this strategy. The limitations on the file-and-suspend approach go into effect six months after the budget’s effective date.According to a 2009 report from the Center for Retirement Research, the restricted application approach could cost the Social Security Administration as much as $9.5 billion a year if everyone eligible pursued the strategy. The file-and-suspend tactic was estimated to have a more modest impact.The elimination of the claiming strategies will save about 0.02 percent of the taxable wages and self-employment income subject to Social Security taxes over the next 75 years, according to the Social Security Administration’s estimates. That is a small fraction of the program’s long-term deficit of 2.65 percent of taxable payroll. Closing the so-called loopholes, along with measures to change the disability investigation process and combat fraud, are projected to save about 0.04 percent of the total taxable earnings for the Social Security trust funds over the next 75 years.AARP supported the change, noting that it would affect a small group of retirees. The organization said that only about one-tenth of 1 percent of all Social Security recipients took advantage of the file-and-suspend strategy.Cristina Martin Firvida, AARP’s director of financial security and consumer affairs, said in a statement, “The claiming strategies impacted would apply entirely to future beneficiaries,” adding that those people would “have at least some time to adjust their claiming strategy.”Advertisement