By PETER EAVISSEPT. 8, 2015
A wide-ranging government investigation into Wall Street bond trading practices has produced new charges against three traders who worked in New York for a large Japanese financial firm.The Securities and Exchange Commission accused the former employees of Nomura Securities International on Tuesday of misleading customers about bond prices so they could earn illicit profits.In addition, Deirdre M. Daly, the United States attorney for Connecticut, on Tuesday announced criminal conspiracy and fraud charges against the men, Ross B. Shapiro, formerly Nomura’s head trader of mortgage-backed bonds in New York; Michael A. Gramins; and Tyler G. Peters. All three previously worked as traders of mortgage-backed bonds at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank that collapsed in 2008.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is considering whether to overturn the conviction of Jesse C. Litvak, a bond trader who is accused of misdeeds similar to those the Nomura traders are charged with committing. In their appeal, lawyers for Mr. Litvak argued that the Federal District Court that convicted Mr. Litvak did not prove that his misstatements were “material.” In other words, they did not prove that a reasonable investor would find the misrepresentations important when making an investment decision.AdvertisementMr. Litvak’s appeal may embolden the lawyers representing the Nomura traders.Marc L. Mukasey of Bracewell & Giuliani, a lawyer for Mr. Gramins, said his client had done nothing wrong and added in an emailed statement, “This is a case that is not even on solid legal ground, given that several Court of Appeals judges have asked serious questions about the government’s theory.” A lawyer for Mr. Shapiro said his client would plead not guilty. A lawyer for Mr. Peters did not respond to a request for comment.AdvertisementEven if the government loses in the appeals court, money managers might welcome law enforcement efforts, which could help them get better deals from their brokers. The markets for certain types of bonds have long lacked clear prices, making it hard for investors to determine whether they are getting a fair price as they buy and sell. Brokers make money by buying bonds for less than they sell them; the difference is known on Wall Street as a spread. A broker can artificially widen that spread by exploiting the ignorance of the investors on both sides of the trade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The S.E.C. contends that this happened in deals brokered by the Nomura traders. In one transaction involving Mr. Shapiro, the S.E.C. said, Nomura made misstatements that led a customer to sell bonds for a price below what the buyer ultimately paid. By getting the price down, the S.E.C. said in its complaint, Nomura booked $1.1 million in extra profits for itself when selling the bonds at a higher price to the buyer.“The alleged misconduct reflects a callous disregard for the integrity and obligations expected of registered securities professionals,” said Andrew J. Ceresney, director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division. The S.E.C. also said the three traders had coached junior traders to mislead customers in the same way.In the complaint, the S.E.C. said the traders generated at least $7 million in extra revenue for Nomura. Over nearly four years, the agency said, Mr. Shapiro earned compensation of $13.3 million, while Mr. Gramins made $5.8 million and Mr. Peters earned $2.9 million.Other banks, including JPMorgan Chase, have said that law enforcement agencies are looking into their bond trading practices.A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: 3 Nomura Traders Accused of Deceiving Customers About Mortgage Bond Prices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.