AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThe lawyer for Steven H. Davis, former chairman of Dewey & LeBoeuf, told a state jury on Tuesday that the criminal case against his client was a “fantasy fraud” brought by prosecutors in Manhattan with “fanciful theories” about the spring 2012 collapse of the once-prominent law firm.Elkan Abramowitz, in a closing statement of more than three hours, told a jury in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan that prosecutors had failed to prove Mr. Davis was aware of any wrongdoing that might have occurred in the firm’s finance department to make the law firm’s revenue appear better than it was to lenders and creditors.“There’s no evidence that he acted in anything but good faith,” said Mr. Abramowitz.He said even the prosecution’s star witness, Frank Canellas, the law firm’s former finance director, testified that he never told Mr. Davis about any improper accounting adjustments being used by the finance department.“Their theory goes that he must have known and should have known,” Mr. Abramowitz said of the case presented by prosecutors working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney. “Canellas was forced to admit he never discussed any adjustments with Mr. Davis at any time.”The closing argument comes after three months of trial during which prosecutors presented testimony from more than 40 witnesses to support charges that Mr. Davis and two other former top executives at Dewey — Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders — used a series of accounting gimmicks to keep the firm afloat during the financial crisis. To bolster the case, prosecutors also introduced dozens of emails that supposedly show the three defendants scheming to orchestrate the fraud in late 2008 and keep it going right up until the time of the firm’s bankruptcy filing in May 2012.On Wednesday, the jury will also hear closing arguments from lawyers for Mr. DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, the former chief financial officer. Prosecutors are expected to present their side on Thursday, and the case could go to the jury as soon as the end of the week. The lawyers for the defendants began their closing statements without calling any witnesses, instead relying on the strength of their cross-examination of the prosecution’s witnesses to poke holes in the case.During several breaks in Mr. Abramowitz’s closing statement, Mr. Davis appeared at ease. He smiled and chatted with several of the people in the crowded courtroom gallery.While much of the testimony in the trial has been less than riveting, the proceedings are being closely watched in the legal community because it is one of the rare times the top executives of a major law firm have been charged criminally with grand larceny and scheme to defraud. Over the course of the trial, several former Dewey partners, many of them well known within the legal profession, were called by the prosecution as witnesses.In the end, Mr. Abramowitz may have an easier time than his colleagues in persuading the jury that Mr. Vance’s office did not prove its case against his client. The emails involving Mr. Davis tend to be the least incriminating. Besides Mr. Canellas, the other former Dewey employees who testified at the trial also failed to link Mr. Davis directly to any wrongdoing. In fact, several of those employees said they had barely talked to Mr. Davis during their time at the firm, which at its peak employed 3,000 people including more than 1,200 lawyers.In all, seven lower-level employees at Dewey, including Mr. Canellas, pleaded guilty to lesser charges in hopes of receiving little or no jail time.Mr. Abramowitz said prosecutors could not even tie Mr. Davis to the offering statement for a $150 million bond deal that Dewey sold to investors in 2010. Prosecutors contend the defendants sold that bond while concealing the law firm’s failing finances from investors. The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a lawsuit raising similar charges against Mr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders.But Mr. Abramowitz noted that at a dinner for investors in the deal on April 7, 2010, none of the people called as witnesses could remember much of anything said by Mr. Davis. He said the most memorable thing about the dinner at an Italian restaurant, Da Umberto in Manhattan, was that a number of the bankers in attendance had ordered Grey Goose vodka to drink.To drive his points home with the jury, Mr. Abramowitz used a slide projector to boil down his arguments to 15 “reasons for doubt” about the prosecution’s case. He told the jury that any one of those points should be enough to acquit his client on all charges.Setting the stage for the other defense lawyers, Mr. Abramowitz said most of the accounting adjustments seized on by prosecutors were either legitimate or open to debate. He noted that several of the former Dewey employees had testified on cross-examination that they did not think they were doing anything wrong at the time. He said just because something is called an accounting adjustment does not make it wrong.“Every nickel owed to the banks was paid up until the bankruptcy,” he said.In his closing, Mr. Abramowitz returned to a theme established by the defense lawyers in their opening statements, which was that Dewey was ultimately done in by the decision of a group of senior “greedy partners” to bolt from the firm in early 2012. The decision by those lawyers to leave, plus the news that prosecutors were investigating Mr. Davis and the firm for wrongdoing, is what led to the collapse of talks to merge Dewey with another firm.“What brought this firm down was the anger and greed of a handful of partners,” said Mr. Abramowitz.Advertisement