

 Eduardo Porter
 

ECONOMIC SCENE
SEPT. 8, 2015
There is something appealing about the concept of “shared value.”The strategy, first articulated by Michael E. Porter of Harvard Business School and the management consultant Mark R. Kramer, is based on the belief that companies can increase profits and enhance their businesses even as they address pressing social problems.They have good examples. Exxon Mobil put $125 million toward training teachers in science, technology and engineering — so that it might have skilled workers to hire later on. IBM joined with New York City to create an innovative, technology-oriented high school in Brooklyn. Southwire, a family-owned maker of wires and cables in Carrollton, Ga., tackled a shortage of high school graduates for hire by staffing a new factory entirely with students at risk of dropping out, and requiring them to stay in school to keep their jobs.The Southwire initiative, which started in 2007, worked so well that Harvard Business School wrote it up. The students stayed in school, drawn by jobs that paid more than the minimum wage. The county’s high school graduation rate jumped 10 percentage points. And Southwire made money. Within five years, the factory was adding $1.7 million to earnings.“If you are creative, you can find ways to create economic value and social value simultaneously,” said Stuart Thorn, Southwire’s chief executive. “Some stuff that we are doing results in lifting up people that otherwise might not have the opportunity, while the business is also lifting itself up.”AdvertisementSuch outcomes are promising. Done on a large scale, reconfiguring companies’ relations with their multiple stakeholders — their workers, customers and communities — could, advocates hope, help reconstitute the nation’s social fabric.AdvertisementAnd yet the case for enlisting corporations to address rising inequality and stagnant mobility warrants some skepticism. For starters, social and corporate objectives are obviously not always aligned. If so many so-called win-win opportunities for companies exist, why haven’t more been taken?Harvard Business School is in a privileged position to explore this issue. On Wednesday, it will release a report based on a survey of its alumni— a notably well-heeled set — about their concern over America’s lack of shared prosperity. While it offers a case for optimism, it also suggests that executives’ enlightened self-interest is probably not enough to bring about social change.Surprisingly, perhaps, executives care about such things. Two-thirds said it was more important to address poverty, inequality, middle-class stagnation or economic mobility than to stimulate economic growth.“There is a compelling new sense that generally very wealthy and senior business leaders are starting to understand this is a significant problem,” said Professor Porter, a co-author of the study with his colleagues Karen Mills and Jan W. Rivkin.Most interestingly, many executives say they believe the growing gap in income and opportunity is not just bad for the country, it is bad for business, too. It curbs consumer spending, undercuts worker morale and produces political polarization. “Even with their business hat on, the system isn’t working for them,” Professor Rivkin said.Much of this concern grew out of the financial crisis and the ensuing Great Recession. Public frustration over the slow recovery of workers’ fortunes while businesses prospered reached the executive suite.And yet Professor Porter argues that executives are driven by a broader set of business considerations. It’s about businesses that cannot find skilled workers and realize they have not paid attention to what he calls “the supply chain for skills.” It’s about companies’ realization that low wages can be costly, too, sapping motivation and increasing turnover.AdvertisementOf the respondents to Harvard’s survey whose companies employed low-wage workers, a third said they had either already increased pay or planned to do so in the coming year. “Companies that have customer-facing employees and want to keep them must rethink the issue of worker pay,” Professor Porter said.The most significant shift in corporate decision-making, he said, may stem from a serious re-evaluation of globalization.The wave of outsourcing to cheap labor markets across the world is being reassessed in light of the growing importance of flexible production schedules and proximity to customers. In tech-heavy industries, piracy has increased the cost of outsourcing. In other businesses, automation and rising Chinese wages have changed the cost-benefit equation.This dynamic offers the tantalizing possibility that multinationals that long ago shed the local bonds that characterized the industrial giants of an earlier era might again anchor their prosperity on the success of American communities, families and workers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Does this add up to meaningful social transformation? While these new business dynamics could add up to powerful forces for change, addressing America’s lack of shared prosperity may also require higher taxes, more stringent regulations and other changes that lavishly paid corporate leaders with Harvard M.B.A.s would be unlikely to welcome.Surprisingly, perhaps, one in seven respondents to Harvard’s survey acknowledged tax policy had contributed to widening inequality, second only to inadequate education. But weak labor unions and outsize executive pay were nowhere near the top of the list.“I don’t see too many people inside companies thinking that pay in some absolute sense is too high,” Professor Porter said. There is interest in better tying pay to performance, he added, but “lots of people are still offended by the discussion saying that somebody is getting paid too much.”Harvard’s survey offers good reason to temper one’s optimism: Corporate chieftains are pretty pessimistic, too. More than a third of respondents forecast wages and benefits will be lower three years from now, a bigger share than those forecasting wages and benefits will be higher.Things do not pick up from there. Over half of respondents expect inequality to be worse a decade from now, if the United States sticks to its “current economic and political institutions.” Almost half expected poverty to deepen. A quarter expect economic mobility to deteriorate further. (Only one in 10 expected it to improve.)AdvertisementSocial change will not happen without profound changes in corporate culture and practice. The growing chasm between the incomes and opportunities of the rich and the rest is not fixable with taxes and transfers alone.“We need to think of ways to change the market determination of income,” Robert M. Solow, a Nobel laureate in economics, once told me. “We have a better shot at doing something with changes in corporate governance than with direct redistribution.”But can we rely on the executive suite to effect change?There are promising examples. “Many companies have prospered by improving wages and training their workers that then yield higher productivity, better service and larger profits,” Hillary Rodham Clinton said in the first speech on economic policy of her presidential election campaign.But there are also reasons for despair. In Times Square, a billboard was erected a few days ago, paid for by the fast-food lobby, to protest the new $15 minimum wage for fast-food workers in New York State.Regardless of the merits of a $15-an-hour wage for fast-food workers, the billboard’s message shows little understanding of the challenges low-wage workers face. “What, I get $30,000 a year with no experience or skills?” asks the slacker in the picture, meant to represent fast-food workers. The billboard goes on to ask, “Who needs an education or hard work?”The companies behind that billboard appear to have no time for “shared value” initiatives like those put in place by Southwire. It is making an entirely different case: Addressing social problems will have to take a back seat to the bottom line.Email: eporter@nytimes.com; Twitter: @portereduardo A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Corporate Action on Social Problems Has Its Limits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »