By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 8, 2015
As part of Wall Street’s race to advise the technology industry, JPMorgan Chase has hired a banker from one of its big rivals.It has hired Greg Mendelson from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, the company announced in an internal memorandum on Tuesday.At JPMorgan, Mr. Mendelson will focus on advising both tech services companies and private equity firms. Among the transactions he has worked on were the $4 billion sale of iGate, a technology and outsourcing company, this year and the $1 billion takeover of Evry, a Norwegian information technology provider, by the investment firm Apax Partners last year.Mr. Mendelson will join JPMorgan in November as a managing director in the bank’s New York office, according to the memo from Michael Millman, the chief of the company’s North American tech practice. He will work with Rick Diamond, who runs JPMorgan’s tech services team worldwide.“Greg’s extensive experience and deep relationships will help expand our leadership in the technology services sector,” Mr. Millman said in a statement.A spokeswoman for JPMorgan, Tasha Pelio, confirmed the contents of the memo.The full memo is below:As we continue to prioritize the expansion of our technology practice, we are pleased to announce that Greg Mendelson will be joining the technology investment banking team as a managing director reporting to me. Greg will be based in New York and will be responsible for advising technology services companies and private equity firms, partnering with Rick Diamond, who runs the technology services practice globally.Greg joins us from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, where he specialized in the coverage effort for the technology services sector. With more than 15 years of experience, Greg is a high-impact banker who will help expand our strategic coverage footprint in this area. His extensive industry knowledge and transaction experience will be a tremendous complement to our strong existing franchise and will help us to further elevate our strategic advisory dialogue in this rapidly growing sector.He will officially join the firm in November following his garden leave. Please join me in welcoming Greg to J. P. Morgan and supporting him in his new role.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.