AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaAustin Beutner, the publisher and chief executive of The Los Angeles Times, was dismissed on Tuesday after only a year in that position, the latest upheaval at a newspaper buffeted by management turmoil over the last decade.Tribune Publishing, which owns The Times, had planned to inform Mr. Beutner, a politically connected former investment banker who later became a deputy mayor of Los Angeles, on Tuesday morning that he was being ousted, when the news leaked. He later confirmed his departure in a post on Facebook. “I am not departing by choice, nor is this some ‘mutual agreement’ on my part and Tribune Publishing,” Mr. Beutner, 55, wrote in the post. “Tribune Publishing has decided to fire me. I am sorry you will read this on social media, but I no longer have access to my Times email.” Within hours of Mr. Beutner’s dismissal, Tribune named Timothy E. Ryan, the publisher and chief executive of The Baltimore Sun, as his replacement. Mr. Ryan has held that position at the Sun, another Tribune paper, since 2007. He will also be in charge of The San Diego Union-Tribune, which Tribune Publishing purchased in May. Behind the dismissal, said several people with knowledge of the situation, was a fundamental difference of opinion on the best way to run The Los Angeles Times, a storied newspaper that won two Pulitzer Prizes last year for a total of 43 over all, and has in the past been coveted by billionaires including David Geffen. Mr. Beutner, according to those people, believed that The Times had to engage closely with its community, with specialized articles specific to its readers and the region. In 2013 he had tried to engineer a purchase of The Times, backed by Eli Broad, the billionaire philanthropist and a Los Angeles resident. This year he was a driving force behind Tribune’s recent purchase of the San Diego newspaper, part of a strategy to consolidate the papers as a way to reduce costs and generate greater revenue for digital initiatives. There had also been preliminary conversations with representatives from The Orange County Register.He had sought to build his own team of executives, including prominent hires like the Internet strategist Nicco Mele, who was appointed deputy publisher late last year, and Johanna Maska, a former Obama administration staff member who was appointed vice president for marketing and communications in April. Tribune Publishing executives, led by its chief executive, Jack Griffin, believed that operations and strategy should be centralized in Chicago — Tribune’s corporate home — and that many articles could be shared among newspapers, rather than being specialized. They resented the hires, the people with knowledge of the situation said, and suggested that Mr. Beutner, who had briefly run for mayor of Los Angeles, might be stealthily staffing up for another effort to win political office. The issues were compounded by a lack of personal chemistry between Mr. Griffin and Mr. Beutner, who were said to have had very little contact. And matters seemed to have peaked last week, when executives considered a new offer that Mr. Broad had recently made for The Times. That offer was rejected at the same meeting at which executives decided to dismiss Mr. Beutner, whom they felt was increasingly pursuing his own agenda. For years there has been a power struggle between Los Angeles and Chicago, and Mr. Griffin and Chicago appeared to have won, the people with knowledge of the situation said. Mr. Ryan, they said, is likely to be far more amenable to his corporate parent, where he has long been an executive, than his predecessor.The move continues a time of turmoil and discord for The Los Angeles Times. One of The paper’s most beloved editors, John S. Carroll, had brought home a trove of Pulitzer Prizes in the early 2000s, but had to battle against staff cuts that the paper’s owner at the time, the Tribune Company, had demanded to improve profitability. He resigned in 2005, weary of the fights, and turned the paper over to its managing editor, Dean Baquet. Mr. Baquet was forced out in 2006 for defying further job cuts. He is now the executive editor of The New York Times.(At its peak, The Los Angeles Times employed about 1,200 journalists. The current number is around 500.) The Tribune Company, which also owned The Chicago Tribune and The Hartford Courant, among other papers, was itself in peril. The billionaire Samuel Zell took a controlling stake in 2008, but less than a year later the company tipped into bankruptcy amid tales of a controversial and reckless management culture. It emerged from bankruptcy in 2013, after a messy and exhausting process. A year later, Tribune joined other media companies like News Corporation and Time Warner in spinning off its publishing assets as a separate company, called Tribune Publishing. It started life on the stock exchange with $350 million in debt, of which $275 million went toward a one-time cash dividend to Tribune’s shareholders. From a high of over $20, shares in the company traded at just over $11 on Tuesday. Tribune Publishing declined to comment on Tuesday’s move, as did Mr. Beutner. Mr. Ryan was not available for an interview and Mr. Broad would not comment. Mr. Beutner, a wealthy founder of Evercore Partners, and a prominent community figure in Los Angeles, became publisher last August. He had worked, he said in his statement, “to breathe new life into an organization which had labored under the burden of massive change in the newspaper industry, compounded by a contentious merger followed by a lengthy bankruptcy.” He mentioned several initiatives designed to more closely engage with, or reflect, the paper’s local readers. “Cost-cutting alone is not a path to survival in the face of continued declines in print revenue and fierce competition in the digital world,” Mr. Beutner said, perhaps taking a jab at years of cuts that have diminished many of the newspapers held by Tribune Publishing. Advertisement