AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranMylan’s $28 billion tender offer for its rival Perrigo, which starts next week, isn’t good enough.The hostile bid by Mylan, a Dutch generic drug firm, for Perrigo, an over-the-counter medicine maker based in Ireland, carries a stingy premium and comes mostly in paper. Perrigo’s owners don’t need to swap stock in a shareholder-unfriendly company with bad governance and financial risk when an auction might generate a better result.Perrigo’s investors may be tempted to take what they can get. But under scrutiny, the offer looks less compelling, starting with just a 14 percent control premium. Mylan has done a respectable job over the last decade, with 300 percent shareholder returns. Perrigo has risen more than tenfold. Perrigo’s business of making store-brand over-the counter medicines has better prospects than Mylan’s business of making generic pills. Analysts expect it to grow more than twice as fast in coming years.Since moving its headquarters to the Netherlands, Mylan hasn’t been obviously run for the benefit of shareholders. This summer, Teva wanted to buy the firm for more than $80 a share. Rather than accept this mouthwatering price, the board and an independent company foundation exercised a poison pill that sent its suitor scurrying away. Mylan now trades at about $48. The company’s legal address in the Netherlands also makes it hard to replace directors. Its proxy statements contain a thicket of related-party transactions.There’s some risk for Perrigo shareholders in voting against the deal. Perrigo shares are trading about 11 percent above where they were before Mylan’s arrival, while the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has fallen about 8 percent. This premium and perhaps more might disappear if shareholders opt for independence.Worse, Mylan needs 80 percent of the vote to squeeze out minorities under Irish law. If more than half but less than 80 percent take up the offer, it would leave Mylan engorged with debt, and an awkward listed subsidiary. Mylan has even threatened to delist Perrigo shares if this happens. The risk is that Perrigo’s growth slows and its minority shareholders are ignored.Perrigo’s board is confident that the record of two companies will persuade investors to dismiss Mylan’s offer. Overconfidence, however, raises the risk that Mylan will succeed, but not achieve 80 percent of the vote. Perrigo could sidestep this risk, and perhaps fetch a better premium, by auctioning itself off.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement