
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

SEPT. 8, 2015
There is nothing quite like the chaos of bumper cars at an amusement park as the drivers slam into one another.That is a bit like what is going on with the challenges to the procedures used by the Securities and Exchange Commission for administrative hearings before internal judges. The federal appeals courts may be on a collision course that could require the Supreme Court to sort everything out.The stakes are significant for the S.E.C. and a number of other federal agencies that rely on more than 1,700 administrative judges to decide cases. If the appointments of those judges or the procedures they employ violate the Constitution, it could throw into doubt numerous decisions stretching back decades.The genesis of the challenges is a provision of the Dodd-Frank Act that gave the S.E.C. the option to file almost any case before an administrative judge rather than pursue it in a Federal District Court. For defendants, that means the broad discovery of evidence provided to litigants and the right to a jury trial would not be available. Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the United States District Court in Manhattan said in a speech that the agency’s claim that efficiency justified greater use of its own judges to resolve complex securities cases “suggests a certain chutzpah.”AdvertisementA number of lawsuits have asserted that the administrative procedures violated the due process and equal protection rights of the defendants.AdvertisementThe decisions in those cases were a mixed bag, with the S.E.C. winning most on the grounds that any challenge to its procedures initially had to be decided through the administrative proceeding, blocking immediate access to the federal courts. Under that process, the constitutionality of the procedures would first be considered by the administrative judge, then by the five S.E.C. commissioners if there was an appeal. Only after that could a further challenge be filed in a federal court of appeals, which might give at least some deference to the agency’s interpretation of the issue.For defendants, that would mean going through the entire process before there was a decision by federal judges about whether the case should have been heard by an administrative judge, giving it a certain Kafkaesque quality. But the administrative procedure reflects the broader question of who should decide first: the agency charged with prosecuting the case or a federal court in a separate challenge that could upend the entire process by dragging it out, perhaps unnecessarily?In the only appellate decision on the issue so far, on Aug. 24 the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit ruled in Bebo v. S.E.C. squarely in favor of the S.E.C. on a challenge filed by the former chief executive of a company accused of accounting violations – the type of case once brought in a Federal District Court. The judges concluded that “courts consistently require plaintiffs to use the administrative review schemes established by Congress” even if it forces them to undertake the expense and disruption of an administrative process that might be flawed.Defendants were successful in stopping the S.E.C. in cases heard by two federal district judges, Leigh Martin May in Atlanta and Richard M. Berman in Manhattan, who gained much greater prominence recently in overturning the four-game suspension of Tom Brady by the National Football League over accusations of deflating footballs and other claimed transgressions.The judges issued injunctions stopping administrative hearings on insider trading charges and against a former Standard & Poor’s executive over her role in how the firm rated mortgage-backed securities. They found that the S.E.C.’s process for appointing its internal judges was unconstitutional because it was carried out like the hiring of any ordinary employee and not by one of the commissioners.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It should not come as any great surprise that the S.E.C. found no merit to the argument that its appointment of the administrative judges was flawed. In a decision issued on Sept. 3, the five commissioners rejected any claims about the authority of its internal judge in a case against Raymond J. Lucia Sr. and his investment advisory firm for making misstatements about its wealth management strategy. It makes no mention of the opinions issued by Judge May and Judge Berman, apparently sloughing them off as irrelevant to its own analysis of the constitutional question.Judge May’s decision is now on appeal before the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta. Unlike appeals in other cases in which the S.E.C. is handling the briefing and argument, in an interesting step lawyers from the Justice Department’s civil division took over the appeal, asking for expedited review of the injunction.That indicates the importance of the issue of the constitutionality of the S.E.C.’s appointment of its administrative judges because the decision could affect other agencies that use similar procedures. In two cases, Gomez v. United States and Nguyen v. United States, the Supreme Court reversed convictions because a judge without the constitutional authority to participate in the case had played a role in the proceeding. The Supreme Court did not pause to consider whether there was any potential harm caused by the presence of the judges. Instead, the Supreme Court concluded that if a judge without the proper authority participates in a case, then the decision cannot remain in force.AdvertisementIf the S.E.C.’s judges were not appointed properly under the Constitution, the result could be that any decisions they made would be overturned. That is an outcome the Justice Department certainly wants to avoid if possible. The Justice Department’s control of the appeal can ensure there is a coordinated response to any questions about the constitutional status of administrative judges because of the potential impact of the case.The United States Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia Circuit and the United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan also have pending appeals about whether challenges to the administrative process should first be heard by the S.E.C. The case in Washington was argued in April, so a decision could be issued soon. The court in Manhattan has not yet received all the briefs in its case, so it is still months away from a decision.If the appeals courts agree with the analysis in the Bebo case, that will strengthen the argument that the S.E.C.’s administrative process provides a sufficient means to consider the constitutional questions that have been raised. But federal appeals courts are not bound by the decisions of judges in different circuits, so all it will take is one conflicting decision to create a situation in which the Supreme Court will have to step in.The justices have not been particularly clear about when someone can bypass an administrative procedure by going straight to federal court to raise a constitutional question about the process. And questions about the constitutional authority of administrative judges continue to swirl about the S.E.C.This may be the time for the Supreme Court finally to address how a challenge to the use of internal judges should proceed, and how they should be appointed.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »