AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher JensenWhile 12 automakers are still dealing with a deadly defect in millions of airbags made by Takata, Fiat Chrysler has been quietly grappling with a different chronic airbag problem: Since 2012, it has now recalled 1.8 million vehicles in the United States because its airbags may deploy without an accident.On Friday, it issued the most recent recall, for almost 316,000 2003 Jeep Liberty and 2004 Jeep Grand Cherokee models, including 284,000 in the United States.The automaker said it was aware of seven injuries, including one concussion, with the others involving scrapes or bruises, a spokesman, Eric Mayne, said in an email.The recall was one of two the company published Friday on the website of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.The airbags can deploy without the vehicle being in a crash when “electrical noise” overwhelms an electronic control module, the automaker said.This is the third time that the automaker has recalled vehicles for the inadvertent deployment of airbags. In January, it recalled about 753,000 vehicles in the United States, again citing “electrical overstress.”But the repairs have proved nettlesome. By the end of July, for example, the automaker had fixed only 223,000 of the 745,000 vehicles recalled in 2012, according to a report from Fiat Chrysler posted on the N.H.T.S.A. website.Mr. Mayne, the Fiat Chrysler spokesman, said the automaker was “working to remedy these vehicles as quickly as possible.”A spokesman for the traffic safety agency did not respond to a request for comment on the completion rate.In May 2014, the repairs attracted the attention of federal regulators, who opened an investigation citing concerns that the automaker’s efforts to rectify the problem were insufficient; six vehicles that had been fixed had their airbags inadvertently inflate again. That investigation remains open.The same problem has troubled other automakers using the same part, which is made by TRW, a major automotive supplier. Toyota, for example, recalled about 888,000 vehicles in January 2013.In the brake recall posted Friday, Fiat Chrysler is recalling almost 276,000 2012-15 Dodge Journey family vans in the United States.The automaker said water could get into the electronic component that controls the anti-lock brakes and electronic stability system, disabling them.The anti-lock brakes are designed to help a driver stop quickly and remain in control in an emergency. The electronic stability system is intended to detect and correct a skid.While those systems would be disabled, the automaker said, the brakes would still work. In addition, warning lights on the dashboard would illuminate. The company said it was unaware of any injuries or accidents related to the problem.In its report to federal regulators, Fiat Chrysler said it first suspected a problem in June 2014, based on warranty claims. But it took until August 2015 to be certain of the cause. This month it decided a recall was necessary.This year, Fiat Chrysler agreed to a settlement of up to $105 million over its handling of recalls. Federal regulators accused the automaker of failing to act promptly on safety problems.Advertisement