By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 8, 2015
LONDON — The Concordia Healthcare Corporation of Canada said on Tuesday that it had agreed to acquire the drug maker Amdipharm Mercury from the European private equity firm Cinven in a deal that valued the company at about $3.5 billion, including debt.The deal is expected to expand Concordia’s geographic footprint to more than 100 countries and give it access to 190 complementary and niche pharmaceutical products, Concordia said.“This acquisition is a key milestone and pivotal turning point in Concordia’s strategy, which gives us the platform to take our business to the next level,” Mark L. Thompson, the Concordia chairman and chief executive, said in a news release.“The combination of our highly complementary yet geographically diverse businesses is truly transformational,” Mr. Thompson added. “It will uniquely position the combined company as a leading, international pharmaceutical company with extensive geographic reach, a diversified and attractive product portfolio, and an asset-light business model that we expect will allow us to focus investments and resources on further growing our business.”AdvertisementThe transaction is expected to close in the fourth quarter.Amdipharm Mercury, based in London, was created from the merger of Amdipharm and the Mercury Pharma Group in 2013. Cinven acquired both companies in 2012 and later merged them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company manufactures and markets a portfolio of niche medicines to patients in more than 100 countries under the Amdipharm, Mercury Pharma, Abcur and Focus brands. It posted revenue of 293 million pounds, or about $446 million, in 2014.AdvertisementUnder the terms of the deal, Concordia will pay £800 million in cash, issue 8.49 million shares and assume about $1.4 billion in debt. It also will pay up to £144 million in cash in the fourth quarter of 2016 based on performance.Following the deal, Cinven will own about 19.9 percent of Concordia.Concordia, based in Oakville, Ontario, is a health care company focused on legacy pharmaceutical products and orphan drugs. Its products include the prostate cancer treatment Nilandron; Lanoxin, a treatment for mild- to moderate heart failure; and Zonegran, a treatment for partial seizures in adults with epilepsy.It reported revenue of $122.2 million for the 2014 fiscal year, which ended in March.Goldman Sachs and the law firms Sullivan & Cromwell, Fasken Martineau DuMoulin and Simmons & Simmons are advising Concordia, while Jefferies and Rothschild and the law firms Clifford Chance, Torys and Jones Day are advising Cinven.A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Drug Merger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.