AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedEdwin Thomas Meredith began the company that bears his name at the turn of the 20th century with a single magazine, Successful Farming, that blossomed into a field of 17 other titles.Now that media giant, the Meredith Corporation, has agreed to sell itself to a competitor, Media General, for $2.4 billion — but on the strength of its television operations.The merger highlights the consolidation underway within the television industry, an arms race among multiple armies to grow ever bigger. Content providers, station operators and cable companies have all sought to gain negotiating leverage, in large part by combining with peers.For local broadcasters, that has led to deals like Gannett’s acquisition of the Belo Corporation for $1.5 billion, as well as a flurry of acquisitions by Media General.With Tuesday’s deal, Media General is betting that its acquisition’s television stations, and not the magazines, will be the path to success. The combined company, to be known as Meredith Media General, will be one of the largest owners of broadcast network affiliates in the United States, with 88 stations in 54 markets. It will reach about 30 percent of American television households, or about 34 million viewers, the companies said.“This merger creates greater opportunities for profitable growth than either company could achieve on its own,” J. Stewart Bryan III, Media General’s chairman, said in a statement.Though perhaps best known for publications like Better Homes and Gardens, Meredith has enjoyed significantly more growth from its 17 television stations. Its local media division increased its sales by 32 percent in the 12 months ending in June, to $534 million. Its print magazine unit, by contrast, saw sales dip by 1 percent, to $1.1 billion. Focusing on television is a strategy that Meredith has explored before. More than two years ago, it held discussions with Time Warner — another media giant seeking to cut its ties to print — to essentially merge their titles into a separate publicly traded company. Those talks eventually fell apart when Time Warner walked away, in part because of concern about the fate of news publications like Time, Fortune and Sports Illustrated, none of which were set to be included in the joint venture. Time Warner chose to spin off all its magazines into a new company, Time Inc. Meanwhile, Media General has already moved to shed its presence in the print industry, selling the bulk of its newspapers to Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. It followed that move with transactions like the takeover of LIN Media last year, growing its television network to 71 stations.Meredith and Media General executives said that they had been working on the transaction over the last month and were not motivated by recent gyrations in the stock market.The deal may have been well timed to catch a surge in political advertising spending for the 2016 presidential campaign, with the combined company owning stations in swing states like Florida and Ohio. (The merger is expected to close by June 30 of next year, pending approval by the Federal Communications Commission.)The fate of Meredith’s print publications may ultimately lie in a sale or a spinoff, according to a research note by Marci Ryvicker, an analyst at Wells Fargo. Meredith’s chief executive, Stephen M. Lacy, suggested during a call with analysts that the newly combined company might still look for potential acquisitions to gain scale.Under the terms of the deal, Meredith investors will receive cash and stock valued at $51.53 a share, representing a 12 percent premium over Meredith’s closing stock price on Friday.Mr. Lacy will serve as chief executive and president of the combined company.“We are excited about the opportunity to create a powerful new multiplatform and diversified media company with significant operations on the local and national levels,” Mr. Lacy said in a statement.The Meredith Media General’s board will consist of eight directors appointed by Media General and four appointed by Meredith. Mr. Bryan will serve as chairman of the combined company.The combined company will maintain corporate and executive offices in Des Moines and Richmond, Va.The companies said television stations in six markets would be swapped or sold to address regulatory considerations.Chad Bray contributed reporting.Advertisement