By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 8, 2015
LONDON — The Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Company said Tuesday that it would acquire the British insurer Amlin for 3.5 billion pounds.The $5.3 billion deal is the latest by a Japanese insurer seeking to expand its operations outside of Japan, as insurers seek growth as the country’s population ages, which is expected to cut into results in the coming years.The deal calls for Amlin shareholders to receive 670 pence a share in cash and to be eligible for an interim dividend of 8.4 pence a share. The deal represents a premium of 36 percent to Amlin’s closing price on Monday.“We are delighted to be announcing the combination of MSI and Amlin to create a world-leading insurance company, with an international business anchored in the Lloyd’s market,” Yasuyoshi Karasawa, the Mitsui Sumitomo president and chief executive, said in a news release. “The combination will accelerate MSI’s strategy of growing its international business and drive a number of benefits across Amlin’s business’’ as a result of its being part of a larger group.AdvertisementAmlin shares jumped 32.7 percent to 653.50 pence in early trading in London on Tuesday. The transaction is subject to shareholder approval.AdvertisementThe Amlin board of directors intends to recommend unanimously that shareholders approve the deal. Investors and directors owning about 16 percent of the company’s shares have agreed to vote their shares in favor of the transaction.Based in London, Amlin is a provider of specialty insurance and reinsurance. Its businesses are structured around three areas of coverage: property and casualty; marine and aviation; and reinsurance.Amlin, which traces its roots to 1903, operates in the Lloyd’s of London marketplace, in which syndicates of specialist companies join to share the risk in underwriting policies. Mitsui Sumitomo also sells insurance through a Lloyd’s of London platform.The company posted gross written premiums of £2.56 billion in 2014 and employs about 1,900 people.“We believe that this combination is extremely compelling,” Charles Philipps, the Amlin chief executive, said in a news release.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have always had a very high regard for MSI, our strategies and corporate values are closely aligned, and this transaction will now provide Amlin with the increased scale and financial muscle that will be required for long term success in our industry,” Mr. Philipps added. “It delivers excellent value for shareholders, improved career prospects for our employees and enhanced continuity and security for our clients.”Japanese insurers have been seeking to acquire companies overseas in recent years as they have looked to diversify their revenue streams outside their home country.In June, Tokio Marine Holdings announced that it would acquire HCC Insurance Holdings for $7.5 billion in cash, one of a series of deals it has undertaken in the United States since 2008. In July, the Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company agreed to acquire the StanCorp Financial Group for $5 billion in cash.In August, the Sumitomo Life Insurance Company of Japan agreed to acquire Symetra Financial Corporation, an American provider of insurance and financial products, for about $3.8 billion.AdvertisementOther Japanese companies seeking growth overseas include Dai-ichi Life Insurance, which announced an agreement to buy the American company Protective Life Corporation in 2014 for about $5.7 billion.Mitsui Sumitomo is a subsidiary of MS&AD, a global insurer listed in Japan, and operates in 42 countries and regions.Founded in 1918, Mitsui Sumitomo provides a variety of nonlife insurance products, including marine, aviation, and property and casualty insurance. It posted net written premiums of 1.69 trillion yen, or about $14.2 billion, for the 12 months that ended March 31.Mitsui Sumitomo was advised by Goldman Sachs and Nomura, while Amlin was advised by Evercore and Rothschild.A version of this article appears in print on September 9, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Insurers Roam.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.