AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressConsumer spending in September posted the smallest gain in eight months, a sign that shoppers grew cautious at the end of the third quarter.Americans increased their spending just 0.1 percent, the Commerce Department said on Friday, the weakest showing since consumers cut spending in January. Income growth inched up 0.1 percent, the smallest amount in four months. Wages and salaries were flat after two months of big gains.Still, spending totals can be influenced by price changes, and falling gasoline costs last month were a big reason for the weaker spending figure. Adjusted for inflation, consumers spent 0.2 percent more in September.Americans snapped up cars and other large manufactured goods, the report showed, and spending on services also rose at a healthy clip. Many economists were reassured that Americans were still willing to open their wallets and pocketbooks, even if at a more modest pace.“Consumer spending is still healthy but it slowed as the third quarter came to an end,” said Jennifer Lee, an economist at BMO Capital Markets.The overall economy slowed sharply in the July-September quarter to an annual rate of just 1.5 percent, less than half the 3.9 percent rate seen in the April-June period. But that was mainly because businesses trimmed their stockpiles. Consumer spending was solid.Spending is closely watched because it accounts for 70 percent of economic activity.Economists are forecasting that it will remain on track in the fourth quarter, reflecting further gains in employment that should give households more income to spend. Consumers are also benefiting from declines in energy prices, which give them more money to spend on other items.The saving rate edged up slightly to 4.8 percent of after-tax income in September, compared to 4.7 percent in August.The Federal Reserve this week left its benchmark interest rate at a record low near zero, where it has been for the last seven years. However, in a statement, Fed policy makers said they would be looking at the progress made on its employment and inflation objectives in deciding whether to begin raising rates at its next meeting, in December.One factor influencing that decision will be the performance of the Fed’s favorite gauge of inflation, which is linked to consumer spending.In Friday’s report, overall inflation actually fell by 0.1 percent in September, reflecting the drop in energy prices. Over the last year, this inflation gauge is up just 0.2 percent, far below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Excluding volatile food and energy, prices are up 1.3 percent, still below the 2 percent.Advertisement