By BEN SISARIOSEPT. 9, 2015
The music industry may be struggling to make money in the streaming age, but one part of the business has been growing consistently: payments to songwriters.BMI, one of the two big agencies in the United States that handle the licensing when songs are played on the radio or streamed online, plans to announce on Thursday that it exceeded $1 billion in annual revenue for the first time, led by rapid growth in digital music.BMI, whose full name is Broadcast Music Inc., collected $1.013 billion for the 12 months that ended in June, up almost 4 percent from the year before. That is slightly more than the $1.001 billion that its competitor Ascap took in last year.In the number that will be scrutinized most closely by musicians — royalties — BMI paid slightly less than its rival. After deducting its operating expenses, BMI distributed $877 million to its thousands of members, including songwriters like Taylor Swift, Nile Rodgers and Adam Levine of Maroon 5. Last year, Ascap paid its members $883 million.AdvertisementLiz Fischer, a spokeswoman for BMI, said that the organization’s expenses included significant legal costs, most prominently a lawsuit against Pandora over royalty rates that was decided in BMI’s favor.AdvertisementBetween them, BMI and Ascap represent the performing rights of more than 90 percent of the commercially released songs in the United States, and their income has been growing even as the industry has faced turmoil. Since 2005, BMI’s collections have increased about 40 percent.Much of the focus lately in the music publishing world has been on digital music and streaming; musicians, publishers and rights groups like BMI complain about the royalty rates paid by services like Pandora and Spotify. In its most recent year, BMI received about $100 million from digital sources, up 65 percent from the year before.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The digital category now makes up about 14 percent of BMI’s $721 million in domestic revenue. As recently as 2010, it was just 3 percent.The biggest chunk of BMI’s income came from cable and satellite sources, which made up 34 percent of its domestic collections. Broadcast radio and television, one of the biggest categories, made up 33 percent, while “general licensing” — payments from restaurants, hotels and other businesses that use music — made up 19 percent.International sources contributed $292 million to BMI’s total, a decline of 5 percent, which BMI attributed to changes in foreign exchange rates.A ruling on a federal lawsuit over royalty rates may help BMI’s digital income increase even more. In May, a federal judge ruled that Pandora’s rate for using BMI’s music should increase to 2.5 percent of its revenue from 1.75 percent. Pandora has appealed that decision.BMI and Ascap are also asking the Justice Department for changes to the federal regulation that has governed them for decades. Both groups, along with several major music publishers, want more control over licensing, which they say could lead to higher royalty payments from online services.“We don’t think that songwriters should have to fund the growth of these businesses,” said Mike O’Neill, BMI’s chief executive.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Digital Music Helps BMI Top $1 Billion in Revenue.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.