By EMILY STEEL and JOHN KOBLINSEPT. 9, 2015
The former chairwoman of NBCUniversal News, Patricia Fili-Krushel, said Wednesday that she was leaving the company, probably in the coming months.Ms. Fili-Krushel served as the chairwoman of the NBCUniversal News Group from 2011 to 2015 before she was moved after the Brian Williams scandal. In the last six months, she worked as an adviser to the NBCUniversal chief executive, Steve Burke, but in that time, she said, a clear path for her future at NBCUniversal never emerged.“Steve and I couldn’t identify the next appropriate role for me,” she said in a brief interview.New York magazine first reported the news of her departure.Ms. Fili-Krushel oversaw various properties when she was in charge, including NBC News, MSNBC and CNBC.AdvertisementBut her tenure has been a tumultuous time for the news division. The “Today” show saw its ratings slide and in 2012 it fell to second place, losing out to “Good Morning America” on ABC. Similarly, “Meet the Press” slipped from its perch as the top-rated Sunday morning show. This year, Brian Williams lost his anchor chair position after a six-month suspension when he lied about a helicopter trip in Iraq. He will move to MSNBC in the coming weeks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Fili-Krushel lost her position after NBC hired an old hand, the former news division president Andrew Lack, to steady the ship after Mr. Williams’s suspension.In her time as chairwoman, Ms. Fili-Krushel appointed NBC News’s first female president, Deborah Turness, who is still in that position.Advertisement“My years at NBCUniversal were both fulfilling and challenging,” Ms. Fili-Krushel said.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: NBCUniversal Executive Set to Step Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.