AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelStanton R. Cook, who as chief executive of the Tribune Company in the 1970s and ’80s transformed it from a privately held, conservative family enterprise into a publicly traded, more centrist media empire, died on Sept. 3 at his home in Kenilworth, Ill., near Chicago. He was 90.The Tribune Company announced his death.Mr. Cook started at the company in 1951 as an engineer in the production department of its flagship newspaper, The Chicago Tribune. He became its publisher in 1973 and chief executive of the company in 1974, cutting a tall, dignified figure in the executive suite. The media reporter Ken Auletta, writing in The New Yorker in 1998, described him as “regal” and looking like “a C.E.O. from central casting.”The company’s presence on the national stage grew during Mr. Cook’s tenure. He led the $20.5 million acquisition of the Chicago Cubs and Wrigley Field in 1981. (The Tribune Company sold the Cubs in 2009 to the Ricketts family in a deal valued at $845 million.) In 1983, Mr. Cook helped take the company public on the New York Stock Exchange after 136 years of private ownership.He went on to establish the Tribune Company as the country’s largest operator of independent television stations with the 1985 purchase of the Los Angeles station KTLA for $510 million and the creation of a separate broadcasting division.He also guided the company through a 40-month printers’ strike in the 1980s, as union production workers protested new technology and changes to workplace rules.A month after Mr. Cook was named the company’s chief executive, The Tribune drew national attention when it published an editorial during the Watergate scandal arguing that Richard M. Nixon was not fit to be president and should resign.The editorial, in a newspaper that had been a longstanding voice of Midwestern conservatism and a supporter of President Nixon during his first term, shocked many readers. The Tribune was flooded with thousands of letters and telephone calls — the most it had received in half a century — many denouncing the paper. Mr. Cook defended the editorial.Stanton Rufus Cook was born in Chicago on July 3, 1925. His father, Rufus Merrill Cook, sold insurance; his mother, the former Thelma Maria Borgerson, was a homemaker. In January 1944, six months after graduating from high school, Mr. Cook entered the Army Air Forces cadet program. He achieved the rank of second lieutenant before being discharged in 1946. He then attended Northwestern University, from which he graduated in 1949 with a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering.He stepped down as chief executive of the Tribune Company in 1990 but remained chairman until 1993 and a board member until 1996. A baseball fan, he was chairman of the Cubs until 1994.Mr. Cook’s survivors include three sons, Douglas, Scott and David; two daughters, Nancy Cook and Sarah Shumway; and seven grandchildren. His wife, Barbara, died before him. After Mr. Cook’s retirement, Tribune’s empire grew to include The Los Angeles Times, The Baltimore Sun and other newspapers. But much of the company’s media empire has been disentangled since its ill-fated leveraged buyout in 2007, subsequent bankruptcy proceedings and the decision to split the company in two. In a 1996 interview, Mr. Cook talked about the highs and lows of his career. “It had its moments of peril, it had its moments of disappointment,” he was quoted by The Chicago Tribune. “But as I look back, this was all part of a mix that was wonderful.”Advertisement