AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadAt first glance, Oscar Munoz might seem like an unlikely pick to run one of the world’s largest airlines.Until his surprise appointment on Tuesday as chief executive of United Airlines, Mr. Munoz had been a rising star at the CSX Corporation, a railroad company where he was recently promoted as second-in-command and considered the likely successor to Michael J. Ward, the chief executive. But in a sudden twist, Mr. Munoz, who has no airline management experience, was named at United after the abrupt resignation of Jeff Smisek in the face of a federal corruption investigation involving the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.Given the complexity of the airline business, it is virtually unprecedented for a major carrier to pick an outsider as its chief. With his new and highly visible position, Mr. Munoz, 56, also becomes one of the most prominent Hispanic executives in the country, leading a company that employs 84,000 people, operates hundreds of flights a day and runs a fleet of 700 airplanes.During a hastily arranged conference call with Wall Street analysts and investors on Tuesday, Mr. Munoz said his goal was to focus on customer service and make United the top-performing carrier in the country.He also pledged to repair relations with employees, which soured under Mr. Smisek. Flight attendants, for instance, have been angered by a lack of progress in getting a single contract for United workers.“I want to talk to as many of you as possible because I want to get to know you and what you think about how things are going. How can we operate better? How can we better serve our customers?” Mr. Munoz said in a letter to employees. He also said he would make the airline “flier-friendly.” It has been a rough period for United. Just before Mr. Munoz’s appointment was announced, United’s new website was down for a couple of hours on Tuesday morning, the latest in a series of technological troubles that have angered passengers and given the airline a reputation for poor service. Several times in June and July, for instance, the airline was forced to ground its flights because of computer problems.The more immediate concern for Mr. Munoz is the current investigation into the company’s relationship with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. The United States attorney for New Jersey has been investigating whether United agreed to reinstate money-losing flights to an airport near the weekend home of the Port Authority’s former chairman David Samson in return for improvements the airline wanted at Newark Liberty International Airport, where United is the dominant carrier.The airline said this year that it had also been conducting its own investigation into the matter. Some analysts speculated that the resignation of Mr. Smisek and two other top officials at the airline might signal that indictments might be issued soon.United’s recent history is that of a troubled carrier that has faced recurring difficulties following its merger with Continental Airlines in 2010. The company’s financial results have been wildly uneven while customers complain about repeated delays, poor on-time performance and generally poor service.United’s share price has lagged that of other airlines by about 15 percent in the last 18 months. The reason, according to analysts at Morgan Stanley, is its poor management since the merger, which led to lower unit revenues and profit margins than its rivals.While Mr. Munoz has no operational experience in the airline business, where executives often like to say that jet fuel runs through their blood, his background does reflect the direction airlines have been taking in recent years, focusing on financial returns, pricing power and capital discipline.“We believe a leader from a well-established rail company, which is an industry that airline managements aspire to replicate and investors use as a comparison given margins that are twice higher, may be a positive for shares over time given the performance history and the opportunity ahead for United,” Morgan Stanley analysts said in a note to investors on Wednesday.Others were more skeptical of Mr. Munoz’s ability to bring his financial expertise running a large freight organization to a customer-minded business.“UAL needs to take a hard look at which hubs work and which hubs don’t,” said Hunter Keay, an analyst at Wolfe Research. “That’s not really something Mr. Munoz is qualified to do, in our view. At least not immediately.”Mr. Munoz had served as president of CSX since February and chief operating officer since 2012. Until then, he had been the company’s chief financial officer since 2003.Before joining CSX, Mr. Munoz served from 2001 to 2003 as chief financial officer and vice president for consumer services at AT&T. He also held positions at Coca-Cola and PepsiCo. In 2001, he was named one of the “100 Most Influential Hispanics” by Hispanic Business magazine. He received a bachelor’s degree in business administration from the University of Southern California in 1982 and an M.B.A. from Pepperdine University in 1986.Mr. Munoz has also been a board member of Continental since 2004 and a director at United since the merger five years ago.“The management change is most welcome and long overdue,” said Vicki Bryan, an analyst at Gimme Credit. “United has sunk to the bottom in most rankings of quality and operating performance and stayed there for years. Hopefully, better days are finally ahead. While the board waited far too long to change horses, in our view, a promising new C.E.O. is now in charge.”The bigger question for him is what impact the investigation will have on United’s financial health, operations and reputation. Newark airport, which is owned by the Port Authority, accounts for 11 percent of the carrier’s flights. United is also the biggest airline there, handling 68 percent of all passengers.United’s general counsel, Brett J. Hart, said in a conference call on Tuesday that the airline did not anticipate any financial fallout from the investigation. “To date, there’s no indication that we have an issue, a financial issue, that is material to the company,” Mr. Hart said.Morgan Stanley analysts estimated that possible penalties for the airline could reach several hundred million dollars if investigators found evidence of wrongdoing.Still, investors seemed to react positively to Tuesday’s news. Many analysts said United’s poor record means it has vast room for improvement and to catch up with its rivals. United shares rose slightly on Wednesday, to close at $57.67, on a day when the broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index declined by more than 1 percent.“While this is unwelcome news, our main thesis on United remains intact: that it is showing signs of financial improvement, and trades at a sizable discount to peers,” said Jim Corridore, an analyst at S&P Capital IQ who has a “strong buy” rating on United shares. “We would expect any fine or penalty related to this issue to not be a meaningful balance sheet hurdle.”Advertisement