By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 9, 2015
A lawyer for Stephen DiCarmine, the former executive director of the once-prominent law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf, told a New York jury on Wednesday not to convict his client based solely on dozens of emails.Prosecutors have said that the emails introduced during the three-month trial indicated that Mr. DiCarmine had an awareness of accounting shenanigans at the law firm, which collapsed in May 2012. But Austin Campriello, the lawyer for Mr. DiCarmine, said the emails could be misinterpreted and “can be easily misconstrued.”Mr. Campriello told the jurors that the emails were untrustworthy without witness testimony to support the incriminating inference that prosecutors wished to draw.In his closing statement on Wednesday, Mr. Campriello noted that none of the seven former Dewey employees who pleaded guilty to lesser criminal charges and testified at the three-month trial had directly linked Mr. DiCarmine to any improper accounting maneuvers.AdvertisementMr. DiCarmine is on trial at New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, along with Steven H. Davis, the firm’s former chairman, and Joel Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer. They are accused of orchestrating a multiyear scheme to manipulate the law firm’s books to deceive the Wall Street banks and institutional investors that provided Dewey with financing in the financial crisis.AdvertisementThe filing of grand larceny and scheme to defraud charges against them represents one of the most prominent white-collar criminal cases pursued by Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney.It was the second day that a defense lawyer in the trial of three former Dewey executives sought to pick apart the prosecution’s case by noting the absence of corroborating testimony from the seven former Dewey employees, all of whom pleaded guilty in the hopes of either avoiding prison time or serving a reduced sentence.On Tuesday, Elkan Abramowitz, the lawyer for Mr. Davis, the firm’s former chairman, noted that the prosecution’s star witness, Frank Canellas, Dewey’s former finance director, had testified that he never told Mr. Davis about any improper accounting adjustments used to make the law firm’s financial situation appear better than it was.So far, the strategy of the defense lawyers in their closing statements in the closely watched criminal trial has been to point out to the jurors that most of the employees who pleaded guilty and agreed to testify never thought they were doing anything wrong when they made year-end adjustments to the firm’s financial books.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“They did not think what they were doing was criminal,” said Mr. Campriello, who added that, at worst, what the Dewey employees did was “aggressive accounting.”He said most of the former Dewey employees from the finance department who pleaded guilty came to believe they had done something wrong only after being interviewed by prosecutors working for Mr. Vance.The defense strategy may get more complicated for Mr. Sanders on Thursday, when his lawyer, Andrew Frisch, is expected to deliver his closing statement.While Mr. Frisch is likely to point to the same unreliability of the email evidence, the lawyer will have to wrestle more with Mr. Canellas’s testimony, which more closely tied Mr. Sanders to the alleged accounting manipulation.AdvertisementTestifying in July, Mr. Canellas said that he, Mr. Sanders and another former Dewey employee held a late-night meeting in December 2008 to discuss ways to overcome a shortfall of more than $50 million in the firm’s net income. The meeting took place after a dinner at Del Frisco’s in Midtown Manhattan.The other former employee at that meeting, Zachary Warren, is scheduled to be tried after this case is concluded.The prosecution is not expected to deliver its closing statement until Thursday afternoon at the earliest. The expectation is for the trial to go to the jury by the middle of next week, as court will not meet on Monday and Tuesday.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Lawyer for Ex-Dewey Executive Seeks to Sow Doubt on Evidence Against Him .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.