AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThe room he was in was a bit too cold. The operator on the conference call introduced him by the wrong name. And William A. Ackman, the billionaire investor, seemed frustrated and a little off his game.But none of that deterred Mr. Ackman from holding a marathon conference call and webcast Friday morning to defend his hedge fund’s big investment in Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, the embattled drug company whose stock price has slid more than 40 percent in the last two weeks.The plunge in Valeant’s stock price is one reason the main portfolio of Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, is down nearly 16 percent this year. The stock closed Friday at just under $94 a share.Valeant is facing a federal investigation into some of its pricing practices and the recent discovery of its relationship with a little-known specialty pharmacy firm. Friday morning, just hours before Mr. Ackman’s conference, Valeant said it had severed ties with that small pharmacy, Philidor Rx Services, because of accusations that the firm was using improper strategies to bolster the sales of some of Valeant’s costlier products.Days earlier, Valeant defended its relationship with the pharmacy in its own conference call, which did little to quiet critics and soothe the nerves of anxious investors.Mr. Ackman’s conference call, scheduled earlier in the week, was billed as an effort by the money manager to defend his firm’s 22-million-share stake in Valeant, one of the company’s largest holdings. To some degree, Mr. Ackman has no choice but to defend his firm’s position in Valeant given its outsize position, which makes it difficult to sell down millions of shares, especially at a time when the stock is dropping precipitously.Yet as defenses go, it was an odd one for Mr. Ackman, who said he essentially expected Valeant to be investigated by regulators and prosecutors for years and probably pay a fine for its involvement with Philidor Rx Services. But Mr. Ackman said his company’s investment in Valeant still made sense if you considered the company’s long-term prospects — even if you had to look four years down the road.“We don’t think the business model is broken,” Mr. Ackman said. “But it will take some time for the stock to recover.”One of the more curious segments of the presentation was when Mr. Ackman and one of his lawyers went into a discussion of a federal lawsuit charging Novartis with using specialty pharmacies to illegally increase sales of its drug products in the United States. Just this week, Novartis, based in Switzerland, said it had reached a deal with federal prosecutors in New York to pay a $390 million penalty to settle the litigation. Mr. Ackman all but suggested he expected Valeant’s involvement with Philidor to result in a similar kind of lawsuit and settlement.“Life will go on for Valeant,” said Mr. Ackman, but in the short term he conceded that this is a “very damaging” moment for the company.Mr. Ackman, who is not one to shy away from a battle, came to the conference armed with a lengthy slide show presentation and was joined by others from his management team, whom he asked to speak from time to time. Mr. Ackman has followed a similar approach in pressing his bearish thesis that the nutritional supplements company Herbalife is an illegal pyramid scheme.Mr. Ackman and his company have wagered about $1 billion that shares of Herbalife will collapse, something that has yet to happen.Tweaking its long-term adversary, an Herbalife spokesman issued a statement this morning saying that he hoped Pershing Square’s due diligence on Valeant had been better than the due diligence it did on Herbalife.In the case of Herbalife, Mr. Ackman has given a number of equally long presentations — including one at a rented conference hall. It’s not clear that Friday’s call on Valeant was supposed to run so long. The webcast was scheduled to last 90 minutes, but Mr. Ackman said his company had received “hundreds of questions” that were submitted by email this week, and he seemed bent on responding to many of them.Despite all the preparation for the event, it does appear Mr. Ackman was caught off guard by Valeant’s announcement early Friday morning that it was cutting ties with Philidor, a company it had paid $100 million to acquire outright at some point down the road. Many of the slides outlined the relationship between Philidor and Valeant and Philidor’s dispute with another small pharmacy company that was selling Valeant products in California.“A lot of this stuff becomes less relevant in light of today’s announcement,” he said.Mr. Ackman also appeared surprised by the recent furor over Philidor. Mr. Ackman said he knew that Valeant used specialty pharmacy firms to sell some of its products, but he thought it was a small contribution to the company’s bottom line. He also faulted Valeant for not disclosing its dealings with Philidor earlier and said Valeant’s conference call with investors should have been more candid about that relationship.He said complex companies like Valeant, which specializes in buying up businesses, needed to be operated with “high integrity” and “complete transparency.” And while Mr. Ackman said he remained confident in Valeant’s management team, he added that it needed to have a more responsive investor relations department and to move faster to deal with negative news.Advertisement