AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryPuerto Rico issued a five-year plan on Wednesday to restructure about $47 billion of its $72 billion in bond debt and carry out an economic overhaul under an independent financial control board.The plan is likely to open a turbulent new chapter in the island’s efforts to rekindle economic growth and avoid an unprecedented collapse.If I don’t live in Puerto Rico, why should I care about its budget problems?Puerto Rico lies more than 1,000 miles from the coast of Florida, but its fiscal problems could have wide-ranging implications for the United States’ municipal debt market, which cities and states rely on to finance their most basic functions.Puerto Rico’s proposal to restructure much of its $72 billion debt, including its general obligation bonds, is challenging decades of precedent and investor expectations of the municipal bond market. General obligation debt typically carries a government’s highest pledge to repay investors. (In Puerto Rico, the general obligation pledge was considered even more ironclad because the payments are guaranteed by the island’s constitution).With its restructuring proposal, Puerto Rico is demonstrating that when a local government is stretched to the fiscal breaking point, no pledge is sacrosanct.At the moment, the vast majority of cities and states in the United States are in stable fiscal condition and have ready access to the municipal debt market. But if the economy soured and struggling municipalities encountered severe budget problems, investors might reconsider lending them money in light of the way Puerto Rico has treated them.A photographer and writer return to the island to find both resentment and resilience among the middle class.How did Puerto Rico get so deeply in debt? What’s costing so much?For years, the commonwealth borrowed too much money, trying to paper over declining government revenue and prevent deep cuts in services and layoffs of public workers. Puerto Rico easily found lenders willing to extend it more debt.The bonds made for hot investments across the mainland United States because the interest is often “triple tax-exempt,” meaning the holder does not pay state, federal or city income taxes.But all that debt, which has increased 64 percent since the 2006 fiscal year, couldn’t solve the structural problems in Puerto Rico’s economy: high labor costs and shipping costs, an exodus of educated people to the mainland United States and the expiration of a special federal tax credit meant to attract big corporations to the island and keep them there.Debt payments alone are now threatening to drain the government’s coffers dry. The government projects that by the end of December, the Government Development Bank, which acts as the island’s fiscal agent, will have run out of cash. In the past, the government would simply have borrowed more money to pay off the debt coming due. But in order to borrow in the bond market today, the government would need to pay very high interest rates, which would only exacerbate its cash problems.What are the most significant steps the island is taking to get out of the fix it’s in?Puerto Rico has taken a number of aggressive steps trying to control costs. The government has reduced its work force by 27 percent since 2008, increased taxes on an island population that is already struggling economically, and required government workers to pay significantly more toward their pensions.The government working group’s plan, released on Wednesday, is now calling for a set of more dramatic moves that would both reduce costs and try to revive the economy. On the expense side, the government proposes measures like consolidating underutilized public schools and airports. The plan also calls for a hiring freeze on government workers, but does not call for layoffs, which would be politically untenable. The government also has delayed tax refunds to local residents.As part of an economic stimulus, the government has floated some fairly typical ideas like more tax incentives for business. But it is also proposing unusual ideas like a federal exemption from future minimum wage increases for persons 25 or younger in order to entice local businesses to do more hiring. Of course, the most controversial measure among bond investors is a call to restructure $47 billion of the island’s $72 billion of debt. As part of that plan, the government is asking creditors to exchange their existing bonds voluntarily for new debt with more favorable terms to Puerto Rico.How is Puerto Rico like Greece?The two places have little in common when it comes to the way their fiscal problems are likely to play out.Greece’s financial crisis poses a serious threat to Europe. The European Union and the International Monetary Fund have lent the country hundreds of billions of euros. And the prospect that Greece may exit the eurozone has persistently threatened to destabilize Europe’s economy and the euro currency, driving down global stock markets and sending world leaders scrambling for a solution.Puerto Rico’s fiscal problems, while painful to the island’s 3.5 million residents, do not threaten to spill over as broadly. Even as Puerto Rico’s bonds have lost value after the restructuring was announced , the larger United States municipal debt market has barely flinched, allowing cities and states on the mainland to keep borrowing. That stability may explain why the federal government, despite providing some technical support and advice to officials in Puerto Rico, has largely stayed on the sidelines of the island’s debt crisis.Another big difference is in the comparative safety nets for these economies. Despite some cutbacks, the United States government continues to pump tens of billions of dollars into Puerto Rico to support health care, subsidized housing and policing. Puerto Rico’s banks are backed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Bureau of Investigation plays an outsize role in local law-enforcement duties.Greece, by contrast, has been falling with much less of a net. While European leaders have been willing to bail out Greece, their support pales next to the oversight and influence Washington exerts over San Juan. Despite its fiscal problems, the island will continue to benefit from the financial help and other forms of assistance of the United States, which should soften some of the fallout from a default.It’s a United States territory and a commonwealth. Doesn’t that mean the federal government should help in some way? Puerto Rico’s relationship with the United States is complicated. The question of whether the island should become a state, remain a territory or break away into an independent nation has dominated the political discussion for decades. The fiscal crisis has brought that debate into sharp relief.Many investors have called for the federal government essentially to take over Puerto Rico’s financial affairs to prevent a catastrophe (and protect their bond investments). But on the island, there is great reluctance to give the federal government too much power and sway over its affairs. The island ’s working group, however, has come up with a list of measures that the federal government can take to ease some of the pressure, including raising Medicaid reimbursements and exempting the island from the Jones Act, a law that increases shipping costs by requiring that all ships transporting goods between United States ports be built, sailed and serviced by American crews.While the Obama administration and a smattering of members of Congress have professed support for a law that would give Puerto Rico access to Chapter 9 municipal bankruptcy, the federal government cannot be seen as bailing out the island. For one, this could create moral hazard, with other struggling states and cities expecting that Washington might also backstop their obligations.Advertisement