By MICHAEL CIEPLY and BROOKS BARNESSEPT. 9, 2015
LOS ANGELES — David Glasser, who in August announced his departure as president of the Weinstein Company, said on Wednesday that his replacement at the independent film and television company would be: David Glasser.Mr. Glasser, joined on a phone call by Bob Weinstein, who is co-chairman of the studio with his brother, Harvey, said he planned to remain in place under a new three-year contract. The deal means that Mr. Glasser will be working with both brothers to expand the studio’s television business.“When I sat down with a hedge fund manager or another studio, they all said the same thing: ‘We want you to build what the Weinstein Company has,’” Mr. Glasser said. Mr. Glasser declined to say what other opportunities he had been pursuing; it was widely known in Hollywood that he had spoken to companies like DreamWorks Animation and Netflix.Bob Weinstein led the effort to retain Mr. Glasser, who will again hold the titles of president and chief operating officer. Bob Weinstein called Mr. Glasser with an offer on Friday; Mr. Glasser was in Mexico celebrating his 20th wedding anniversary, but ended up — in classic Weinstein style — spending a good portion of his vacation on the phone with the brothers, finishing the deal details at 3 a.m. on Monday.Advertisement“I don’t know whether any Weinstein is known for charm offensives,” Bob Weinstein said. “But I used whatever charm I have.”Harvey Weinstein said in an email, “I couldn’t imagine continuing this journey without David. He knows the company has huge assets that, if managed properly, will generate long and powerful financial success.”He also seemed to indicate that a bid for Miramax could be in the works; the investor group that controls Miramax, the film company once owned by the Weinstein brothers, recently began exploring a sale.Advertisement“This is starting to feel like Miramax 2.0,” Mr. Weinstein’s email said. “With David back that could be a reality.”A Weinstein spokeswoman declined to elaborate.The turnabout could provide renewed stability at a company that has been troubled in recent months by a sudden round of executive departures. Among those announcing exits were Jason Janego and Tom Quinn, the highly regarded heads of the Radius-TWC unit at the studio, which won Oscars for the documentaries “Citizenfour” and “20 Feet From Stardom.” Senior finance executives have contracts that expire soon.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But some of the executives who had planned departures of their own will most likely remain now that Mr. Glasser has decided to stay. “Our senior management is going to stay in place,” Mr. Glasser said.Mr. Glasser, who has worked at Weinstein since 2008, has often been a buffer between the sometimes volatile brothers and their business peers. Before declaring that he would leave, he had been deeply engaged in an effort to sell all or part of a growing television unit in a transaction that might give the studio significant capital for a next wave of films and shows.Expanding that television unit — shows include “Project Runway” and the MTV drama “Scream” — will be a priority. There are plans for a major animated series, for instance.The studio is also preparing for its annual onslaught on the Oscars. This time around, its likely contenders include Todd Haynes’s “Carol,” which stars Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara as lovers in 1950s-era New York, and the Quentin Tarantino film “The Hateful Eight,” a Western set for release late in the year.Bob Weinstein attributed Mr. Glasser’s turnaround in part to a personal friendship between Mr. Glasser and the brothers. Over the years, Mr. Weinstein said, employees of the studio have characterized themselves as being a “third brother,” but Mr. Glasser, he said, was actually entitled to the term.“Harvey and I sometimes don’t even want to be brothers,” Bob Weinstein said. “I don’t know why anyone would want to be another brother.”But Mr. Glasser, ”should he want it,’’ Bob Weinstein said, “has become the third brother.”A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: President of Weinstein Co. to Remain in Post, After All.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.