By ALEXANDRA ALTERSEPT. 9, 2015
It was only Ronald Boire’s second day on the job as Barnes & Noble’s new chief executive, and a rough initiation awaited him on Wednesday as the company posted disappointing results for its most recent quarter.Mr. Boire, the former top executive at Sears Canada, struck an optimistic note on a call with investors, saying he saw opportunities to increase foot traffic to stores with special events and to increase sales by integrating its stores, website and Nook device content to give the company a “strong omni-channel presence.”Still, he is taking the helm of the country’s largest bookstore chain at a challenging moment. Barnes & Noble has been battered in recent years by steep losses from its Nook digital unit, by store closings and by relentless competition from the online retailer Amazon, which accounts for roughly 40 percent of the book market, according to the Codex Group, a company that collects data on book publishing.For its first fiscal quarter of 2016, which ended on Aug. 1, Barnes & Noble reported that revenue at its retail stores and website fell to $939 million, a drop of 1.7 percent compared with the period the previous year. Earnings before interest, depreciation and amortization at its retail business fell $21 million, to $45 million, compared with last year.AdvertisementThe company posted a net loss of $34.9 million, or 68 cents a share, compared with losses of $28.4 million, or 56 cents a share, the previous year.AdvertisementBy the end of the day investors had battered the company’s stock, and shares closed down more than 27 percent, at $11.80.Comparable store sales provided a small bright spot, with growth of 1.1 percent. In its earnings call with investors, the company cited strong sales for titles like Harper Lee’s “Go Set a Watchman” and E. L. James’s “Grey,” as well as a boom in adult coloring books. But the company said store closings would most likely continue. Barnes & Noble has 647 retail stores after shuttering 13 stores last year.The bookstore chain has taken steps to stem its losses recently. It teamed with Samsung to manufacture its Nook devices. It recently separated its education division, which includes 736 college bookstores and its digital education platform, from its retail arm.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company’s Nook business has continued to show steep declines as consumers rely on smartphones and turn to more popular devices from Amazon and Apple. Revenue at the Nook segment fell 22.4 percent to $54 million, and digital content sales fell 28 percent.“The Nook was the big attempt to say, ‘We can go beyond the physical retail boundaries of this business,’ ” said James McQuivey, an analyst with Forrester Research. “It didn’t work.”In July, Barnes & Noble announced that it had hired Mr. Boire, a retail veteran who had also worked at Brookstone, Toys “R” Us and Best Buy. Analysts viewed his appointment as a sign that the company would continue to experiment with selling toys, electronics and gifts, which have become a rare growth area for the retail segment. Toy and games sales grew 17.5 percent in the first fiscal quarter.In an interview, Mr. Boire said he saw toys, games and other merchandise as an integral piece of the company’s business and added that he aimed to transform the stores into even more attractive destinations and community hubs.“We’re thinking a lot about what the Barnes & Noble of the future might look like,” he said. “We need to be where our customers want us to be, digitally and physically.”Mr. Boire succeeded Michael P. Huseby, who moved to Barnes & Noble Education as executive chairman. The education arm became a separate company on Aug. 2 and has showed signs of growth in the most recent quarter, opening 21 new stores on college campuses. Revenue grew nearly 6 percent compared with the same period last year.AdvertisementMax J. Roberts, the chief executive of Barnes & Noble Education, said the company saw opportunities to expand further on college campuses, noting that 52 percent of colleges operated their own bookstores.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Barnes & Noble Chief, Old Earnings Woes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.