AdvertisementSupported byBy Alina TugendWhen friends heard that James Higgins, 31, his wife, Trish, 29, and his brother Palmer, 27, left their traditional jobs in finance and sold their charming Greenwich, Conn., townhouse, they assumed it was for an exciting opportunity elsewhere.They did not imagine that would turn out to be a snow removal and landscaping company in southern Maine.But the Higginses are part of a growing trend: people with an entrepreneurial bent who are not inclined to start their own businesses. Rather, these people look to buy small to midsize companies — often family-owned firms that are being sold by the founder — and help them prosper.Interest in this area is growing, experts say, for a number of reasons. First, baby boomers who started their own businesses — and who do not have children or successors — are ready to sell and retire. Additionally, money is easier to borrow than it has been in the last several years.And “it offers a third way,” said Royce Yudkoff, a professor at Harvard Business School, who with his colleague Richard Ruback teaches a course on the financial management of smaller firms. While it is not as risky as a start-up, it is not as safe as going the corporate path.The option appeals to people who “want to be their own boss, help build an organization and be part of a community,” Professor Yudkoff said. And unlike working in a corporation, he says, it draws those who want to deal on a daily basis with people who are quite different from themselves.Those are the reasons the Higginses chose this path.“I feel like I’ve spent a huge amount of my career analyzing and very little actually doing something,” Ms. Higgins said. “I want to go out and get my hands dirty and use my education to contribute and be a business leader in a community.”Ms. Higgins left her job a few months ago as a strategy associate for AQR Capital Management. James Higgins has converted Chenmark Capital Management, a hedge fund he founded five years ago — and which his brother joined a year ago — into a firm that invests in small businesses.The three started their search in the most elementary of ways: with Google.“We searched, ‘how to buy a small business,’ and found out there’s a whole world out there,” James Higgins said.That world works much as the residential real estate market does. Sites like BizBuySell.com and BizQuest.com advertise companies for sale, usually with a broker’s name included in the listing.Sales of small businesses grew by 58 percent from 2012 to 2014, the latest year numbers are available on BizBuySell.com, said Bob House, the general manager of BizBuySell.com and BizQuest.com, part of the CoStar Group.BizBuySell.com is one of the largest such sites in North America; Mr. House said it had 47,000 active listings. The companies’ prices can range from millions to less than $100,000, with a median sale price of $200,000. The largest categories are restaurants and retail businesses.As with buying a house, the broker represents the seller, Mr. House said. The commission varies, depending on geography and the size of the business, but averages about 10 percent, he said.The Higginses set out a few parameters. They wanted a company not too big and not too small, so they decided to look for one with a purchase price of $3 million to $10 million, and they would use their own money and investments from family. It could be anywhere in the country, and offer just about any service.“We created a superwide funnel,” James Higgins said.As they searched, they started narrowing that funnel. They realized the best bet was a company that carried out a niche service, where there might not be a lot of growth potential, but there also was not much competition, and the company could perform well over time.“We wanted to make sure no one in China or no one in San Francisco could compete our jobs away,” James Higgins said.The process was straightforward: They would contact the broker representing the business, who would vet them to make sure they were serious buyers.The Higginses looked over about 1,000 businesses, had 75 conference calls and visited 10 businesses, stretching from Nevada to Cape Cod, and as varied as conveyor belt maintenance and event planning.They found that the sellers typically were in one of two groups: owners looking to retire who had no succession plan in place, or those in their mid-40s or so, who had a lot of professional experience in their particular field but did not have the management and financial expertise of people like the Higginses.The second type of sellers “were eager to take their company to the next level, but wanted someone to partner with,” James Higgins said.Mr. House said a survey of business brokers found that 75 percent of buyers last year were 30 to 49 years old, and 24 percent were 50 to 64. Although older buyers tended to be white, the survey found that just over half of the buyers in the 18-to-29 age group were Asian, Hispanic or African-American.Because not everyone can afford to look for and buy a small business, an option that has grown in popularity is the use of search funds. These are funds supplied by a group of investors to an entrepreneur to search and acquire a small business.Buyers can also find ways to get creative with the financing, as did Devin Mackoff, 29, who this year bought a landscaping business, with revenue of $250,000 to $500,000 annually, on Cape Cod.He put down around $150,000 as a down payment for the business, including equipment and assets, and guaranteed the sellers about 10 percent of the revenue over the next three years. Mr. Mackoff’s father was also was willing to invest in the company as a minority shareholder.Mr. Mackoff had worked as a management consultant in Boston since graduating from college, but “from a young age, I thought I wanted my own business, but never had the financial resources.”Unlike the Higginses, he was looking in a narrow geographical area and wanted to stay close to Boston. He had also worked summers as a landscaper, so he knew he could do it.When Landscape Cod came up for sale by a husband-and-wife team who owned three other businesses and felt they were stretched too thin, Mr. Mackoff was ready. He took over the company at the start of the busy season, and it has been busy ever since, he said, adding that his father was a critical part of his team.“I’ve learned a lot about myself over the past three to four months,” he said. “I’ve always been good dealing with customers, but it’s finding and keeping good employees that’s a challenge — and that’s true across the whole industry.” He serves 50 customers with five to six employees.“This morning I got a text message from an employee saying he’s no longer working for us,” he said, “so I was out in the field all day instead of doing what I was planning to do — managing the company.”Craig Campbell, who served as the broker on Mr. Mackoff’s deal, said he now had 15 to 20 businesses for sale.“If the business is priced right and it has a track record of earning, it typically takes three to six months to complete a deal,” he said.Some days Mr. Mackoff wonders why he chose this difficult path, but “I know I would have a huge regret in my life if I didn’t do it,” he said. “I get to say I own a business and I don’t know a lot of 29-year-olds who can say that.”That’s all to come for the Higginses. The owners of the Maine company, who are eager to expand, will stay on as partners of the business — something the Higginses are grateful for. Confident the deal would go through, they bought a condominium in Maine and moved there last month.Final negotiations have dragged on longer than expected, but in the last week, things have started to look more positive.“There have been a number of sleepless nights lately, but recently we’ve been able to resolve some of the issues and we’re looking forward to completing the purchase and forming a long-term partnership with the sellers,” James Higgins said.But just in case the plan goes awry, they have checked out two other options in the last month — a specialized advertising and publishing company in Atlanta and a food manufacturer in British Columbia.Advertisement