By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and CHAD BRAYSEPT. 9, 2015
The private equity giant Kohlberg Kravis Roberts is making its biggest push yet into hedge funds, announcing on Wednesday that it is taking a minority stake in the London firm Marshall Wace.Under the agreement, Kohlberg Kravis is buying a 24.9 percent stake in Marshall Wace and will have the option to increase its stake in the firm to as much as 39.9 percent. While the private equity firm did not disclose how much it is paying for the stake, the payment includes 7.4 million shares and cash, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.Most of the cash generated by the transaction must be invested back into funds managed by Marshall Wace for three years, Kohlberg Kravis said.“We believe Marshall Wace has built a premier franchise within the liquid alternatives space,” Scott C. Nuttall, head of K.K.R.’s global capital and asset management group, said in a statement. “The firm has an entrepreneurial DNA and a culture that is similar to K.K.R.’s.”AdvertisementThe acquisition is part of a broader effort by the private equity firm to branch out from its core buyout business. By buying a stake in a hedge fund, K.K.R. receives a cut of the often hefty fees that investors in the fund pay to the managers. Other publicly listed private equity firms like Carlyle and Blackstone have also bought stakes in hedge funds in recent years as they, too, have expanded their businesses and looked for more consistent returns for their investors.AdvertisementKohlberg Kravis has experienced both success and stumbles with its investments in hedge funds over the years. Last year, it closed its homegrown hedge fund called KES, which at the time was managing $510 million, after it said it had failed to gain enough scale. K.K.R. created the fund after recruiting a trading team from Goldman Sachs.Since then it has focused on buying minority stakes in hedge funds and investing in new funds through its fund of hedge funds business called Prisma. It also has a minority stake in Nephila Capital, an investment firm focused on investing in natural catastrophe and weather risk. And last year it bought a minority stake in BlackGold Capital Management, an energy-focused hedge fund.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But its investment in Marshall Wace is by far its biggest yet. The hedge fund was founded in 1997 by Paul Marshall and Ian Wace. It manages more than $22 billion in client money, as of Aug. 1, and has offices in London, New York and Hong Kong.Its two flagship funds are TOPS, which uses systematic trading, and Eureka, a $6.7 billion fund that is managed by Mr. Marshall. Eureka has generated annualized compounded returns of 13.5 percent since it was created in 1998, according to a person briefed on the firm’s performance.“Over the last few years, we have been approached by several firms looking to invest in our business, but K.K.R. offered something different: a true, long-term partnership,” Mr. Wace, Marshall Wace’s chief executive, said in a statement.Marshall Wace said that its existing management team would continue to run the business independently after the transaction, and that the company did not plan to change its investment strategies.The transaction is subject to regulatory approval, and it is expected to close this year.A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: K.K.R. Continues Branching-Out Plan, Buying Stake in a London Hedge Fund .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.