By CLIFFORD KRAUSSOCT. 30, 2015
HOUSTON —  Exxon Mobil and Chevron reported plunging revenue and profits on Friday, but their fortunes would have been even worse had it not been for a boom in their refining and chemical businesses. Still, those gains were not enough to stanch further job losses at Chevron, which said it planned to cut up to 10 percent of its work force.Exxon Mobil, the largest American oil company, reported a profit for the third quarter of $4.2 billion compared with $8.1 billion a year earlier. The plunge came with a 37 percent drop in revenue, in large part because of a 3 percent decline in United States production, including a 9 percent drop in natural gas output.Chevron’s performance was even more disappointing, with net income of $2 billion compared with $5.6 billion last year, although it was the best quarter so far in what has been the toughest year for the American oil business in more than a decade.The poor results came as no surprise given that oil prices have plummeted to under $50 a barrel from levels of more than $100 in the summer of 2014.AdvertisementNatural gas prices have also slumped, although their drop has helped lower costs in the refining and chemical businesses that depend on the fuel for power and as a vital raw material. Stronger margins enabled Exxon Mobil to double the earnings of its refining and chemical businesses.Advertisement“Despite the challenging environment, the corporation continues to deliver on its investment and operating commitments,” Jeff Woodbury, Exxon Mobil’s vice president for investor relations, said in a conference call. “Third-quarter results reflect cyclical strength in our downstream and chemical segments and highlight the resilience of our integrated business model.”Brian Youngberg, an Edward Jones analyst, said Exxon Mobil had a good quarter, but he added, “We believe earnings were better than anticipated at least partially due to a lower effective tax rate given its higher reliance on international results given the U.S. operations were collectively barely profitable overall.”Chevron also reported big losses in the United States, and it announced on Friday that it intended to cut up to 7,000 jobs, or roughly 10 percent of its work force, in the coming months. That number includes a reduction of 1,500 employees announced earlier in the year.The downturn in oil and gas prices is causing rising pains across the oil patch, especially for those companies that do not have refinery businesses. Oil companies are slashing payrolls, investments in exploration and payments to service companies. Most of the big companies say they are doing all they can to protect their dividends, though Marathon Oil cut its quarterly dividend this week to 5 cents a share from 21 cents a share.Occidental Petroleum said this week that it was selling off its assets in North Dakota’s Bakken shale field, a crown jewel of the hydraulic fracturing revolution only two years ago, for $600 million. ConocoPhillips announced that it would stop exploration in deepwater offshore fields by 2017 because of the high costs of such operations, while it sells offshore leases, to free $800 million in capital. ConocoPhillips, which is based in Houston, reported a loss for the quarter of $1.1 billion compared with its profit of $2.7 billion in the quarter a year ago.“Growth will not be rewarded in this environment,” Al Walker, Anadarko Petroleum’s chief executive, said this week during a conference call. The company has already sold $2 billion in assets since the oil slump began and written off $2.6 billion on the value of its oil assets.Several top oil executives in recent days expressed little hope that the price of oil and their businesses would rebound briskly any time soon. “We’ve taken aggressive action for a downturn that could last longer than many market participants expect,” said Stephen Chazen, Occidental’s chief executive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The biggest fear among energy experts is that a global recession in 2016 could prolong the current glut.AdvertisementThere are other analysts, however, who see a stabilization and rise in oil prices by the end of 2016, even though many concede that prices could still drop further over the next few months. The Pira Energy Group, a consultancy based in New York, released a report this week predicting a growing demand on global petroleum inventories that could ease the glut.“Global oil demand growth is strong, especially in China, India and the industrialized countries, and will remain so in 2016,” Pira said. Reporting that production capacity constraints are limiting OPEC output and that production in major producing countries outside the cartel is also declining, the report concluded, “Supply growth is quickly eroding.”There is much anticipation that the Iran nuclear deal will bring an additional 500,000 barrels or more to the 94-million-barrel-a-day market by late 2016. But at the same time, exports from Libya remain constrained, and violence in Iraq and elsewhere across the Middle East and North Africa is threatening production.Most significant, perhaps, are signs that Saudi Arabian exports are beginning to ease after a year in which the country has been producing at full tilt to defend its market share in Asia. With refineries increasing production to meet rising domestic needs, Saudi crude exports appear to have peaked in August, oil experts say, and there is little or no more spare capacity to produce more.There are persistent reports in energy circles that Saudi Arabia would like to come to some agreement with Russia and other major producers to bring the global market into balance — as long as it does not mean that Saudi Arabia alone cuts production, as happened with disastrous economic results in the 1980s.“If Russia and OPEC can arrive at an understanding in regards to oil production,” said Sadad al-Husseini, a former senior executive with Saudi Aramco, “it might attract a broader dialogue with others such as Brazil and Mexico and help U.S. and other O.E.C.D. producers,” referring to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Profits Slide for Exxon and Chevron in a Brutal Year for the U.S. Oil Industry .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.