AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesJoy Golden, an advertising executive who wrote copy for Maidenform bras and Talon zippers during the “Mad Men” era but found her true calling in the 1980s when she created the humorous radio spots for Laughing Cow cheese, died on Aug. 29 in Manhattan. She was 85.The cause was complications of pneumonia, her daughter Suzanne Golden said.Ms. Golden started out in the steno pool at the powerhouse agency BBDO in the early 1950s and rose through the ranks at a half-dozen agencies. Most of her promotional copy sold perfumes, clothing and cosmetics, but she also wrote ad copy for Fleer Dubble Bubble chewing gum and the Maine sardine industry.Later, as a creative director for ad agencies including NCK (Norman, Craig & Kummel) and Scali, McCabe, Sloves, she oversaw campaigns for Chanel No. 5 (with Catherine Deneuve), Playtex, Clairol, Van Heusen and Singer sewing machines.Inside her, though, a comedian was struggling to break loose. “The cosmetics industry is very serious; it’s like NASA,” she told The New York Times in 1985.Opportunity knocked after Wells Rich Greene, where she was a senior vice president and group director, fired her in 1980 for refusing to leave New York and open a branch in Dallas.Working independently, she created ads for Eagle Snacks, a division of Anheuser-Busch, which wanted a radio campaign for its Hawaiian Kettle potato chips. Ms. Golden, who had never worked in radio but grew up listening to “The Jack Benny Program,” instinctively opted for humor.“See, Fred, Hawaii isn’t all pineapples and coconuts,” Doris, a fan of Hawaiian potato chips, tells her husband in one of the Eagle Snacks ads. “I know it’s not Rockaway, but let’s go there sometime.” The phlegmatic Fred resists, but Doris persists. “What about the glamour, the weather, the lei you get when you land?” Fred: “The what?”The formula clicked into place when the ad agency TBWA asked her to develop a radio campaign for Laughing Cow’s miniature wax-covered cheeses sold in a mesh bag.Ms. Golden came up with 60 ads in which a variety of characters, most memorably Enid, a raspy-voiced New York matron, and Galaxy, a California Valley Girl, acted out mini-dramas about mini-cheeses.“Last night my husband woke me and said he had a little craving,” Enid breathlessly tells a friend. “I said, ‘I’ll go to the all-night supermarket and get you a little round Laughing Cow in a red net bag.’ He said, ‘I don’t care if she’s in lace with high heels — it isn’t what I had in mind.’ ”Sales of Laughing Cow jumped 60 percent in the New York area in the first year, a figure matched or exceeded in other markets where the ads were broadcast. Ms. Golden went on to create hundreds of snappy radio spots for Evian, Hebrew National and other clients.The Laughing Cow campaign, which ran from 1984 to 1988, earned Ms. Golden five Clio Awards. When the Museum of Television and Radio (now the Paley Center for Media) added several of the Laughing Cow ads to its permanent collection, Ms. Golden experienced sweet vindication.“I’ve finally been institutionalized, though not in a rubber room,” she told The Times in 1993. “Being in that museum is better than all the awards I’ve won. The induction ceremony was the most fun I’ve had since my second divorce.”Joy Rena Man was born on June 13, 1930, in Manhattan and grew up in Forest Hills, Queens. She graduated with an English degree from the University of Connecticut in 1952.That year she married Stanley L. Golden, a tax lawyer. The marriage ended in divorce, as did her second marriage. In addition to Suzanne, she is survived by a daughter from her first marriage, Lisbeth Golden McKinley.Lured by the bright lights of Madison Avenue, Ms. Golden started working at BBDO straight out of school.“Everybody who graduated from college wanted to be in advertising,” she told the producers of “Mad Men,” who interviewed her for a promotional video for the television series. “It was fabulous. There was no other world for us except that.”At BBDO she distinguished herself in the steno pool by rewriting the copy she was supposed to type and showing it to the firm’s head writer, who promoted her to junior copywriter.For the next three decades she worked at a long list of firms, large and small, on products as varied as Herculon carpet fibers, Brylcreem hair pomade, Mennen deodorant, Colonial Penn insurance, Vagisec douches and Plumrose ham. In the mid-1970s, she won a Clio for her print campaign for Eve cigarettes, which showed a stylishly modern woman with the slogan “There’s a little Eve in every woman.”Ms. Golden insisted that her radio ads, although funny, were still ads. “There’s a big difference between writing jokes and writing to sell,” she told The Times in 1993. “If a listener laughs through a commercial and then when it’s over can’t remember what the product was, the commercial didn’t work. It works when it’s a good selling vehicle, when there’s been an integration of comedy and product.”Ms. Golden ran her company, Joy Radio, from her apartment on West 57th Street in Manhattan, as a one-woman laugh factory. She cast her own commercials, turning to a stable of actors that included Susie Essman. On one occasion she stepped up to the microphone herself, taking on the role of Adele Shaminsky, Broadway superfan, in ads for the original production of “La Cage aux Folles.”In one ad, reading a letter to the composer Jerry Herman, she intoned, in a heavy New York accent, “Jah-ree, I want to see ‘La Cage aux Folles’ again because it touched my essence so deep-uh-ly.”For Margo Berman’s book “The Copywriter’s Toolkit” (2012), Ms. Golden revealed 10 secrets for creating a successful comedy commercial. In the top five: “You must have worked for at least 147 agencies, none of which let you be funny.” And “You must have spent 38 years writing small-space black-and-white douche ads.”Advertisement