AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberMerv Adelson, a real estate and resort developer who pivoted to become one of television’s most successful producers in a roller-coaster life involving the mob, the Teamsters’ pension fund, a marriage to Barbara Walters and a huge fortune made and lost, died on Tuesday in Los Angeles. He was 85.The cause was complications of cancer, said Melanie Sese, a spokeswoman for Irwin Molasky, Mr. Adelson’s former business partner.Mr. Adelson, a co-founder and former chairman of Lorimar, the once-prolific independent producer of television and movies, was known as a personable, big-thinking risk-taker, and a world-class schmoozer who knew just about everybody. His death elicited encomiums from many of the entertainment industry’s most powerful executives, among them Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS and a former Lorimar president. Mr. Moonves told The Hollywood Reporter that Mr. Adelson was “a wonderful boss and mentor” and “a very classy guy who I looked up to.”Lorimar created some of television’s biggest hits of the 1970s and ’80s, including the warmhearted family drama “The Waltons” and the family comedy “Eight Is Enough,” as well as the prime-time soap operas “Knots Landing” and “Dallas.” Mr. Adelson co-founded the company in 1969, seeking to distance himself from a career as a developer and, as he admitted long afterward, from his ties to gangsters that began during his years in Las Vegas.There, in the early 1950s, when he was still in his 20s, Mr. Adelson built the city’s first 24-hour supermarkets. Later, with Mr. Molasky, he built hundreds of homes, a shopping mall, a country club and a hospital, among other buildings. He also became a friend and something of a protégé of the mobster Moe Dalitz, who helped Mr. Adelson and Mr. Molasky secure financing for the hospital, which opened in the late 1950s and is now called Sunrise Hospital and Medical Center.The money — some of it, at least — came from the pension fund of the Teamsters union, and Mr. Dalitz, who died in 1989, tapped the same source to help finance Rancho La Costa, a luxury resort in Carlsbad, Calif. (now Omni La Costa Resort & Spa). Mr. Adelson and Mr. Molasky opened Rancho La Costa in 1965.The resort became a hangout for Hollywood stars, athletes and Mafiosi; its connection to organized crime and Mr. Dalitz, not exactly a secret, was made explicitly public in an article in Penthouse magazine in 1975. Mr. Adelson sued, and the litigation went on for a decade before ending essentially in a draw, with each side paying its own legal fees. In a joint letter settling the case, Penthouse said it “did not mean to imply nor did it intend for its readers to believe that Messrs. Adelson and Molasky are or were members of organized crime or criminals.”In a lengthy article in Vanity Fair in 2013, Mr. Adelson said his relationship with Mr. Dalitz was “very, very close” but hard to explain.“Well, we did a deal once,” Mr. Adelson said. “We shook hands and he said, ‘I want you to remember something. You just signed a contract when you shook my hand. I want you to remember that the rest of your life: That handshake is better than any contract a lawyer will have you sign.’ So I know you’re thinking, ‘How do you account, Merv, for the fact that Moe Dalitz was a Mob boss?’ All I can say is, in all the years I knew Moe, we never discussed anything criminal or illegal.”He added that he had never asked about Dalitz’s criminal life. “I didn’t want to know the answer,” he said. “There was a line I never wanted to cross, and I didn’t.”Mervyn Lee Adelson was born in Los Angeles on Oct. 23, 1929. (The 1930 census spelled his first name Mervin; in 1940, it was Mervyn, and so it appears in later references.) Though he told Vanity Fair that his father was a Russian immigrant, census records say that both his father, Nathan, and his mother, the former Pearl Swartz, were born in Nebraska and that their parents were from Russia.Young Merv worked in the family grocery as a boy, and, as the business expanded, he made deliveries into neighborhoods where the stars lived. He pursued girls as a teenager with his friend Robert Wagner, who later became a successful actor, and played baseball in high school.It was in the late 1940s that he began visiting Las Vegas, which was then rising from the desert, with his father, who loved the place. As the writer Bryan Burrough reported in Vanity Fair, the younger Mr. Adelson noticed that the city was open all night long but that there was no place to buy groceries.Lorimar produced a handful of films in the early 1970s, and as Mr. Adelson sought to expand the company, it began investing heavily in film production and distribution in the latter part of the decade. At the start of the 1980s, Lorimar was the largest independent studio in Hollywood, and Mr. Adelson took the company public in 1981.Lorimar produced some successful films, including “Being There” — the 1979 adaptation of Jerzy Kosinski’s deadpan satire about a dimwitted gardener, played by Peter Sellers, who becomes an adviser to the president — and “An Officer and a Gentleman,” the 1982 romantic drama starring Richard Gere as a Navy aviator candidate and Debra Winger as his girlfriend. But there were many more failures, and the movie side of the business foundered. Mr. Adelson sold it in 1989 to Warner Communications, which was about to merge with Time Inc., and he became vice chairman of the new company, Time Warner. He and Mr. Molasky also sold Rancho La Costa.Mr. Adelson was married and divorced four times. Ms. Walters, the celebrity television journalist, whom he married in 1986 and divorced in 1992, was his third wife. Though news reports have said that the two remarried later in the 1990s before divorcing again, Ms. Walters said in an email message on Thursday that they were married just once.“Merv was a kind and gentle man with a great sense of humor,” she said. “We stayed friends long after our marriage.”Information about his survivors was not immediately available.In the early 1990s, Vanity Fair reported, Mr. Adelson was worth nearly $300 million. He invested in several emerging Internet companies and lost most of his fortune after the dot-com bubble burst in 2000 and Time Warner merged with AOL, which sent the stock plummeting. He declared bankruptcy in 2003. Some 10 years later, Vanity Fair interviewed Mr. Adelson in his Santa Monica, Calif., home, a 500-square-foot apartment with a kitchenette and a futon.“You know, there was a time I could pick up the phone here, call my pilot, and I could be in Paris the next morning,” he said. “But not anymore. I won’t be namby-pamby about it and say I don’t miss all that money. I do. But I’ve learned to do so much on my own.“I made my first million at age 24. Since then I’ve always had people do things for me. Now I pay my own bills. The other day I changed to online banking. It’s so great! And easy!”Alain Delaqueriere contributed research.Advertisement