By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 10, 2015
For more than two days, lawyers for three former Dewey & LeBoeuf executives on trial for cooking the law firm’s books picked holes in the prosecution’s case by pointing out the unreliability of email evidence and the paucity of accounting experts called to testify during the lengthy trial.On Thursday, the prosecution began to punch back with an appeal for jurors to use their common sense in weighing the evidence and testimony from more than 40 witnesses.In what is expected to be a multiday closing argument, a prosecutor began by reminding the jurors that the men were not on trial for the collapse of Dewey in May 2012, but on charges that they engineered a broad scheme to mislead lenders and creditors by concealing the once-prominent law firm’s ailing financial situation during the financial crisis.Peirce Moser, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, said the defendants — Steven Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders — treated Dewey like an A.T.M. and kept the firm, which once employed 1,200 lawyers, propped up so they could continue to pay themselves multimillion-dollar salaries.AdvertisementHe even told the jurors sitting in a courtroom in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan to disregard testimony from some witnesses who said on cross-examination they liked the defendants and found them hard-working. Mr. Moser said Mr. DiCarmine, the law firm’s former executive director, might even be an “awesome” person, as one witness called him, but that did not matter in terms of considering whether he broke the law.“Awesome people commit crimes, too,” said Mr. Moser.In speaking to the jury, Mr. Moser sought to counter strong closing arguments made this week by the lawyers for the three defendants, who rested their case without calling any witnesses. The defense lawyers pointed out that most of the seven former Dewey employees who pleaded guilty to lesser crimes and testified at trial initially told prosecutors they did not think they had done anything wrong in backdating checks and reclassifying some year-end accounting ledgers. The defense lawyers also noted that prosecutors did not call any accounting experts to the stand and did not even call the firm’s lead auditor at Ernst & Young as a witness.Mr. Moser sought to focus the jury’s attention on the fact that potentially incriminating emails from the three defendants were supported by the guilty pleas from those former Dewey employees. The former employees agreed to cooperate with the prosecution in hopes of receiving a light sentence.AdvertisementMr. Moser repeatedly said the defense lawyers were wrong for suggesting that the employee testimony was unreliable and that they pleaded guilty after being bullied to do so by either him or others working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney.“They told you the truth from the witness stand,” said Mr. Moser.The trial, which began in late May, is one of the most high-profile white-collar cases Mr. Vance’s office has pursued, and it is a case that is being closely watched by many in the legal profession. Dewey once was one of the most prominent law firms, but the merger of Dewey Ballantine and LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae in 2007 was ill fated, coming just before the height of the financial crisis. A firm that once brought in nearly $1 billion in revenue saw a big drop as advising on corporate deals evaporated. Yet the firm was still obligated to pay big salaries to its star partners.Mr. Vance contended that in late 2008, Mr. Davis, Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders spearheaded an illegal scheme to make sure the firm could keep paying its bills — especially interest payments to its bankers — to keep the firm afloat. The core of Mr. Vance’s case rests on dozens of emails that his prosecutors have argued show the three men were complicit in the accounting misdeeds.Mr. Moser said when Mr. Davis is said to have told another Dewey employee to prevent the law firm from breaching its loan terms with several big banks, that was tantamount to telling employees to do everything necessary and commit fraud. And in an email, in which Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, told Mr. DiCarmine “you don’t want to know” what was done to prevent the firm from breaching those loan covenants, Mr. Moser said was an indication of fraud. He said the common sense meaning of that is, “Don’t ask for the details of how we are cooking the books.”But a problem for the prosecution is that none of the former Dewey employees who pleaded guilty testified that they had firsthand knowledge of either Mr. Davis’s or Mr. DiCarmine’s being aware of any accounting manipulations. Not even the prosecution’s star witness, Frank Canellas, the firm’s former finance director, said he told Mr. Davis and Mr. DiCarmine of any improper accounting maneuvers.Mr. Canellas did testify about conversations he had with Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, including a dinner in late December at Del Frisco’s in Manhattan, during which Mr. Canellas said the planning for ways to jigger the firm’s financial books started to take shape.Just before Mr. Moser began his closing statement, a lawyer for Mr. Sanders, Andrew Frisch, completed his closing statement by attacking Mr. Canella’s credibility and telling the jurors he had his own incentive for manipulating the law firm’s finances — if indeed that occurred.“His credibility is very much at issue in this case,” said Mr. Frisch.An article on Friday about the trial of three former leaders of the law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf misstated the source of an assertion that Steven Davis, the firm’s former chairman, told another Dewey employee to prevent the firm from breaching its loan terms with several big banks. That claim came in testimony from a prosecution witness, not from an email from Mr. Davis.A version of this article appears in print on September 11, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosecutor in Dewey Case Appeals to Common Sense.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.