AdvertisementSupported byStrategiesBy Jeff SommerBASEBALL fans have many reasons for bonding with their teams. My case is simple. I was born and raised in Flushing. If I were from Kansas City, I would undoubtedly be rooting for the Royals, but I come from Queens and can’t stop loving the Mets, even when it hurts. And it often does.Even with Friday night’s victory, after thousands of disappointments, I won’t be shocked if they don’t win this World Series, even though I desperately hope that they do. My emotional stake in the team is huge, but I wish all Mets fans were able to hold a financial stake in the team, too, because it would add sweetness to this moment, regardless of how the Series ends up.Major League Baseball franchises are more than just beloved ball clubs that fans blindly adore; they are also financial assets, and from a purely financial standpoint, getting to the World Series is a very big deal. Privately owned baseball teams aren’t traded on the stock market, but if they were, Mets stock would be soaring.When a team like the Mets goes to the playoffs, there is a measurable “postseason effect,” said Vince Gennaro, author of “Diamond Dollars: The Economics of Winning in Baseball” and director of the Master of Science in sports management program at Columbia University. This effect, he said, amounts to a significant increase in revenue and prestige that enhances the value of any team. Part of this is what he calls “the activation of a latent fan base” — the joy felt in Flushing and throughout the battered Mets universe.The effect is most potent for sad-sack teams that haven’t been in contention for years yet are located in major markets — just like the New York Mets. “For the Mets,” he said, “the postseason effect will be very strong.”Conversely, the more frequently a team makes it to the postseason, the less powerful the effect of going to the postseason will be, he continued. “For the Yankees to make the postseason, for example, as they did again this year as a wild-card team, is nice for them, but it’s not unexpected,” he said.“Then there are the Royals,” he said. “They made it to the World Series last year, and that was a huge thing for them. Doing it again is great but not as great as doing it the first time in a long time.”For the Mets — a team that was not only awful on the field but besmirched in the minds of many fans because of its owners’ losses in the Madoff fraud scandal — this postseason should represent a return to financial clover, Mr. Gennaro said. “This is a very big change for them,” he said. It’s a reminder that there is no fundamental reason for the Yankees to outshine the Mets every year — though that has been the case for most of my lifetime. “If the Mets have a good team, and they do, they can outperform the Yankees,” he said. That matters financially.There are short-term and long-term aspects to the postseason effect. The immediate effects are fairly obvious and wonderful for Fred Wilpon and Saul B. Katz, principal owners of the Mets.“It means more cash flow, maybe $20 million a year more, just from all of those extra postseason games,” said Andrew Zimbalist, a prominent sports economist based at Smith College, who has been studying the finances of baseball for decades. Postseason appearances can mean multiples of that amount over the next few years because fans are more inclined to spend money on a team that has become a real contender. That is likely to translate to increased ticket sales at higher prices, more advertising revenue, more beer and soda sold at the ballpark and more money for television rights, baseball hats, uniforms and bobblehead dolls. The team’s entire brand takes on a glow.“The most important thing may be the team’s increased cachet,” he said. Although prestige is less easily measured than other markers of an ascendant reputation, it may matter the most for a team’s market value.“If the world were entirely rational, this wouldn’t matter and getting to the World Series — or winning the World Series — wouldn’t matter in calculating the value of a team like the Mets,” Mr. Zimbalist said. “After all, a baseball franchise is around for years and years. Its cash flow may go up and down a bit — it makes it to the World Series one year, it doesn’t in another year — but this should be roughly measurable and predictable, and it should have a steady long-term value.”That’s where cachet comes in. Valuing financial assets isn’t based entirely on measurable items like cash flow and costs. Especially when you’re talking about a sports franchise, he said, the value of a team is partly emotional. That’s true in the estimation of rank-and-file fans, Mr. Zimbalist said, as well as for the relatively small number of fans with the financial wherewithal to afford a professional baseball team.“The buzz of the postseason is priceless,” he said. But of course, some people put a price on it, using the best numbers that are available. Based partly on comparable sales in recent years, Mr. Zimbalist estimated that the value of the Mets franchise has risen from $1.35 billion in March to somewhere in excess of $2 billion now. If the team were on the market, it might fetch something on the order of the amount paid for the Los Angeles Dodgers, which sold for a cool $2.15 billion in 2012.These estimates are very rough, he said. Baseball teams aren’t bought and sold that often. The Mets, as far as I know, aren’t for sale. And with some exceptions, teams aren’t required to file financial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as companies like Apple and Walmart are.Forbes estimates the prices of baseball teams every year, and Mr. Zimbalist, who is also a consultant to Major League Baseball, said that those estimates were “probably the best you will find in the public domain.” Before the start of the baseball season, Forbes said the Mets were worth about $1.35 billion, compared with $700 million for the small-market Royals and $3.2 billion for the New York Yankees, the most valuable team in baseball. “The Mets,” he said, “have really increased in value.”The turn in the Mets’ fortunes is based on pitching and fielding and hitting but also on the sheer coolness of the team, he said. “It’s the entire postseason, the likelihood of better revenues in future seasons, the prestige of the team, the coolness factor for a potential owner — all of that,” he said.Mets fans can’t easily profit from this directly. They can buy bonds that were sold to help finance the Mets’ stadium, Citi Field — and, in fact, the price of those bonds has already risen. The bonds are rated as junk, however, and buying them might be as risky as counting on the Mets to win.Going regularly to the ballpark can be an expensive proposition, but fans can defray some of their expenses by reselling postseason tickets, which are typically available to regular-season ticket holders. “Those packages are like options to buy postseason tickets,” Mr. Gennaro said. Such regular-season ticket packages are likely to sell more briskly if Mets fans believe the team is likely to make it to the postseason again next year.As much as I hate to say it, that’s not a sure thing, and buying season tickets with the notion of reselling postseason tickets later isn’t a smart way to finance a comfortable retirement.The only dividend for most of us will be emotional, and the emotions aren’t entirely positive. Still, I wish all Mets fans a very happy postseason effect.Advertisement