By BEN PROTESS and MATT APUZZOSEPT. 10, 2015
Banks don’t break the law, bankers do.That populist lament is now a government directive. The Justice Department this week announced new policies for prosecuting corporate employees, responding to criticism that it has secured huge fines from banks but few indictments of bankers.The overhaul, Justice Department officials say, may ease some barriers to prosecuting Wall Street cases and pave the way for executive indictments.But will the changes guarantee a Wall Street “perp walk” — that moment when a top banker is led away in handcuffs? Perhaps not. Recent investigations suggest that the challenges prosecutors face are greater than new rules can solve.In all likelihood, prosecutors today would still struggle to indict Angelo Mozilo, the founder of Countrywide Financial, who embodied the risk-taking in subprime mortgages before the financial crisis. The same goes for Lehman Brothers executives who, like Mr. Mozilo, never faced criminal charges. Prosecutors did conduct investigations of those executives along the lines of the new guidelines, but they say they struggled to prove wrongdoing.Advertisement“Updated guidelines are not a panacea,” said David A. O’Neil, a defense lawyer who until last year was the acting head of the Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington. “White-collar cases are hard to prove, because they’re very complex and if you don’t have direct evidence of fraud, there’s room for argument on both sides.”AdvertisementAnd even if the changes ultimately lead to a new round of indictments, those cases won’t necessarily succeed in the courtroom. In several Wall Street cases that involved individual charges — the indictments of two Bear Stearns hedge fund managers, JPMorgan Chase traders and certain hedge fund portfolio managers, for example — juries and judges have spoiled the government’s efforts to secure convictions and prison sentences.Those outcomes underscore the difficulty of proving criminal wrongdoing, with or without new guidelines, in an increasingly complex and global financial system. Compounding the obstacles, the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s resources these days are dedicated more to fighting terrorism than white-collar crime.The Justice Department acknowledges the limitations of its new guidelines, but it argues that it is nonetheless necessary to put corporations on notice and set the tone for its white-collar investigations. While the Justice Department cannot control whether some companies continue to obfuscate, officials say, the new policies can at least remove some of the internal barriers to prosecuting culpable individuals.“I’m not trying to tell you that this means that tomorrow, all of a sudden, corporate heads are going to be rolling,” Sally Q. Yates, the deputy attorney general and author of the new guidelines, said in an interview. “It’s going to take some time for these changes to take effect. And we don’t have any way of knowing what the actual impact will be in terms of cases that are brought.”In a speech on Thursday at New York University School of Law, Ms. Yates emphasized six “key steps” to such prosecutions, including the refusal to award companies “any” — the word is underlined in a memo that lays out the changes — credit for cooperating without full disclosure of individual wrongdoing.“It’s all or nothing,” Ms. Yates said in her speech. “No more picking and choosing what gets disclosed.”The change places added pressure on companies to name names during investigations. A protracted federal inquiry can cost millions of dollars in legal fees and weaken share prices, giving companies a strong incentive to seek cooperation credit from the government. Lacking such credit, companies could pay billions of dollars in extra fines. It can also mean the difference between a company pleading guilty or taking probation.AdvertisementAnother element of Ms. Yates’s memo instructs civil and criminal investigators to give individual employees priority from the onset of an investigation, rather than making them an afterthought. Ms. Yates also instructed civil and criminal prosecutors to better coordinate their investigations, which will probably streamline cases so that actions against companies and individuals are announced in unison.“The main reason you bring these cases is to send messages to the business community,” Matthew L. Schwartz, a former prosecutor at the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan who is now a partner at Boies, Schiller & Flexner. “The more that you can bring every part of a case together, it paints a more complete picture of who is responsible and what conduct won’t be tolerated.”Ross H. Garber, a Connecticut lawyer who both conducts internal investigations and represents employees, said the new memo would become required reading inside companies but might also cause them to think twice before settling. “What they’ll do is actually defend themselves,” he said.Much of Ms. Yates’s memo codifies practices that were already in place in Washington and in United States attorneys’ offices that are accustomed to handling big corporate cases, like those in Manhattan and Brooklyn. The memo mandates that other offices, which increasingly handle white-collar cases, adopt those practices.“Prosecutors have been acting as if this was the guidance for some time,” said Mr. O’Neil, who was a prosecutor in New York and Washington and is now a partner at the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton.When working at the Justice Department, Mr. O’Neil helped oversee the case against BNP Paribas, France’s biggest bank, which was blamed for withholding records from prosecutors until after a legal deadline for filing individual charges. The bank paid $8.9 billion and pleaded guilty, but its employees never faced charges.In other cases, the complexity of evidence and high legal standards stymied prosecutors, who must prove that executives intended to break the law and that their actions “materially” affected the markets or investors. Those standards create a high hurdle to prosecution, given that most executives are insulated from lower-level misconduct.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the cases of Mr. Mozilo and the Lehman executives, they had no company to protect them. Countrywide was scooped up by Bank of America and Lehman collapsed.And yet they still avoided charges.In the Lehman investigation, the prospect of criminal charges seemed remote, since executives never even faced civil charges from the Securities and Exchange Commission, which has a lower burden of proof than the Justice Department. Mr. Mozilo did settle with the S.E.C., but federal prosecutors struggled to even make a civil case against him.AdvertisementMr. Mozilo and the Lehman executives have long denied wrongdoing. In a statement last year, a lawyer for Mr. Mozilo remarked that his client “stands virtually alone among banking and mortgage executives to actually have been pursued by this government.”More broadly, one major obstacle to building white-collar cases is that the F.B.I. has shifted its focus toward investigating terrorism, espionage and computer crimes. Justice Department and F.B.I. officials acknowledge that the shift has come at the expense of white-collar cases. The Justice Department’s inspector general issued a scathing report last year saying that the F.B.I. did not consider investigating mortgage fraud a top priority, despite public statements to the contrary.In part because of the shift in focus, the Justice Department will face significant challenges in focusing on individuals. Corporate cases are often built from internal investigations conducted by private lawyers hired by the companies themselves.“We are seldom lucky enough to have a smoking gun that identifies who the bad guy is,” Ms. Yates said in the interview.Even those cases that make it to court do not necessarily succeed. When federal prosecutors in Brooklyn charged two Bear Stearns hedge fund managers with lying to investors in the time leading up to the crisis, the case seemed to portend a wave of white-collar cases. Instead, a jury acquitted both men in 2009, a setback that loomed over the remaining crisis investigations.A few years later, prosecutors in Manhattan charged two JPMorgan traders for their role in a $6 billion trading loss at the bank. But the traders, who were based overseas, were never extradited to New York.Judges present another obstacle to prosecutors. In June, for example, a federal judge tossed out one charge against a former BP employee linked to the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill.And after federal prosecutors in Manhattan obtained 80 insider trading convictions in recent years, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned two of the signature convictions in December, imposing new limits on prosecutors and threatening many more of their convictions.AdvertisementAlthough a wide-ranging investigation into Wall Street bond trading practices produced criminal charges this week against three former employees of the Japanese financial firm Nomura, the Second Circuit has already signaled that it might toss out a similar case.“The fact that this policy may lead to more indictments, and I underscore ‘may,’ doesn’t mean it leads to more convictions or jail time,” said Mr. Schwartz, who helped lead the JPMorgan investigation.In the interview, Ms. Yates said she recognized the remaining challenges and signaled that her memo might lay the groundwork for additional changes.“I’m not saying our work is done here,” she said. “This is the first step.”A version of this article appears in print on September 11, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Justice Dept. Vow to Go After Bankers May Prove a Promise Hard to Keep .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.