By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 10, 2015
Four years ago, the Chinese search giant Baidu bought a majority stake in one of China’s biggest travel booking sites. Now it is gaining a bigger presence on the company’s board.The travel company, Qunar, plans to announce on Thursday that it will give Baidu five director seats, up from three, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter.As part of its plans, Qunar will expand its board to nine seats from seven. And one of its most important board committees, the audit committee, will be stocked entirely with independent directors, the people said.The move is meant to strengthen the relationship between the two Internet companies. Qunar, which means “where to go” in Chinese, will eventually have access to services beyond the booking of hotels and flights by becoming more tightly integrated with Baidu, which, along with the Alibaba Group and Tencent, is one of China’s Internet titans.AdvertisementQunar has been successful in building out its mobile offerings, an important goal for many Chinese Internet companies, including Baidu.AdvertisementThe two are making their move amid growing competition in the travel market in China. The Alibaba Group, the e-commerce behemoth, recently revamped one of its travel offerings, and the Priceline Group has grown its stake in Ctrip, one of Qunar’s main rivals.Though investors have fretted about a slowdown of China’s economy, the Chinese government and analysts have contended that the travel industry has suffered no such drop. Chinese travelers booked about two billion trips in the first half of the year, up 10 percent from the same time a year ago, according to figures from the government.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.People close to Qunar said that the company had experienced little decline in leisure travel by Chinese passengers, the service’s main focus, this past summer.The two companies have been linked financially since Baidu paid about $306 million for just over 50 percent of Qunar’s stock in 2011.The travel booking service has drawn interest from other companies since the Baidu investment. It held talks to merge with Ctrip, though those discussions broke off in June.Instead, Qunar chose to take in a $500 million round of capital financing that was led by Silver Lake, the investment firm that has profited from its early bet on Alibaba.Separately, Qunar plans to announce that it has extended the employment agreements of its chief executive, Chenchao Zhuang, and its chief financial officer, Yilu Zhao, by an additional four years, the people with direct knowledge of the matter said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.