
Breakingviews By                     
ROB COX

SEPT. 11, 2015
It has taken 14 years, but Jeffrey R. Immelt has finally been emancipated – by the French.Mr. Immelt, the General Electric chairman and chief executive, has spent the bulk of his tenure defending, bailing out and now jettisoning his predecessor’s experiment in finance. The takeover of the energy infrastructure business of a French rival, Alstom, offers an exit opportunity from that long shareholder nightmare.If the revised arithmetic on the Alstom deal, which European regulators approved this week, is to be believed, General Electric will be getting the company for a song. Though relatively small in the context of a global conglomerate with $125 billion in sales, the transaction will help determine Mr. Immelt’s legacy and position his replacement for success in ways that Jack Welch failed to do for him.The investing masses haven’t been kind to Mr. Immelt. When he took over in 2001, G.E. shares traded at just over $39 apiece, giving the company a market capitalization of about $390 billion. They now fetch less than $25, valuing G.E. at $250 billion. To fully understand the $140 billion lost under Mr. Immelt’s watch requires the same kind of dissection the boss is now performing on the company.In the year before he officially occupied Mr. Welch’s office at the company’s Connecticut headquarters, G.E. earned about $13 billion, which fund managers valued at a multiple of about 30 times. At today’s prices, it is more like 17 times the modestly higher $15 billion in net income.AdvertisementThere’s good reason for this less sanguine perspective. The 2008 financial crisis exposed flaws in the financial edifice that Jack built. In hindsight, of course, it’s easy to say that Mr. Immelt should have separated GE Capital from its industrial businesses before the collapse of Lehman Brothers. But investors, who were dancing to the same tune as Citigroup’s chief, Charles O. Prince III, would have vilified him at the time.AdvertisementFor the last six years, Mr. Immelt has had to fight to keep the company from being pulled down the drain by GE Capital, contend with the consequences of depending on government assistance in those efforts, nurse it back to health and now auction off its parts to the highest bidders. The results of that process will be another important facet of how his tenure will be remembered.What it means, however, is that Mr. Immelt has been a seller of assets more than an acquirer. In addition to the auction of GE Capital, he unloaded NBC Universal, plastics and – trustbusters permitting – G.E.’s appliances business.Alstom, by contrast, stands as the shining example of G.E.’s shrewd move to refocus on industry over finance and a major test of the company’s acumen as a buyer. On paper and for now, at least, it stacks up flatteringly for Mr. Immelt.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When General Electric began the offer in April 2014, it proposed paying $13.5 billion for Alstom’s power and grid businesses. G.E. projected that these assets would generate earnings before income and tax of about $1.3 billion. In addition, the company said it would be able to cut costs by $1.2 billion within five years. On that basis, the deal looked capable of generating a return on capital of nearly 14 percent, nicely above G.E.’s 9 percent cost of capital.Since then, the deal has been significantly altered in ways that should lift G.E.’s potential returns. First, the purchase price has come down to about $9.4 billion. This largely reflects investments of around $2.8 billion that Alstom made in three joint ventures, which it will retain. Alstom can, however, put these back to G.E. Any promised synergies are not, however, dependent on that happening.Most important, Mr. Immelt raised his cost savings target by a huge $1.8 billion to a total of $3 billion within five years. The net present value of these – assuming a G.E. tax rate of 25 percent after divesting most of its financial arm and a 5 percent discount rate over five years – would be $17 billion. That would leave almost enough left over to buy another Alstom. Even if G.E. has to repurchase the joint ventures and assume the French company’s pension liabilities, the return on capital adds up to a remarkably robust 20 percent.It almost sounds too good to be true. Joe Ritchie, who covers G.E. for Goldman Sachs, questioned the optimism in a recent report. “Even allowing for greater product overlap/margin improvement,” he wrote, “the synergy targets could prove aggressive given they represent more than [twice] those realized in recent industrial deals.”Alstom’s energy business reported sales for the year ended in March of about $15 billion. Even though the savings will accrue by uniting with G.E.’s own related activities, to hack out a $3 billion slug of costs will require uncharacteristic ruthlessness from Mr. Immelt.With his long professional record practically on the line with the Alstom deal, though, he has more than enough incentive to get it done.Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »