
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

SEPT. 11, 2015
It took only 16 years, but the Justice Department’s horribly misguided “Holder Doctrine” has finally been relegated to the dustbin of history where it belongs.The Holder Doctrine was the name given to a June 1999 memorandum written by Eric H. Holder Jr., then the deputy attorney general of the United States, whom President Obama nominated in 2009 to become attorney general, a position he held until his retirement this year.Mr. Holder’s argument essentially was that big financial institutions are “too big to jail” because the potential for “collateral consequences” from prosecutions — including corporate instability or collapse — had to be considered when deciding whether to bring a case against them, or apparently, against anyone who worked there and engaged in bad behavior.Lanny A. Breuer, then the head of the Justice Department’s criminal division, reiterated that sentiment as recently as 2012 in a speech at the New York City Bar Association, where he said that it was his duty to consider the health of the company, the industry and the markets in deciding whether to file charges.AdvertisementThe Holder Doctrine, and its acolytes within the Justice Department, is most likely the reason there have been no criminal prosecutions of any of the Wall Street companies that brought us the 2008 financial crisis. It is also why not a single individual at a Wall Street company, or other financial institution, who engaged in fraudulent behavior in the years leading up the financial crisis has been prosecuted successfully.AdvertisementTo be fair, the United States attorney in Brooklyn tried — and failed — to get a jury to convict two Bear Stearns hedge fund managers, Ralph Cioffi and Matthew Tannin, who presided over the demise of their two funds, costing investors around $1.5 billion. And it is also true that Kareem Serageldin, a former senior trader at Credit Suisse, is serving a 30-month sentence for inflating the value of mortgage bonds in his trading portfolio, effectively hiding his losses.Still, instead of prosecuting companies and individuals for their wrongdoing, Mr. Holder’s Justice Department was fixated on extracting huge fines from Wall Street companies, and then crowing about it. This was a form of extortion. It turns out Mr. Holder was very good at it. Since 2009, according to an analysis by Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, 49 financial institutions have paid around $190 billion in fines to federal and state governments and agencies.In exchange for paying these fines – with their shareholders’ money – Wall Street companies got the government to agree to keep what they really did wrong under wraps forever.We may never know the extent of what individuals on Wall Street did to deceive their clients, their investors and their customers. That’s not a legacy of which to be proud, nor is it nearly the same as holding individuals accountable for their bad behavior.That’s probably why Mr. Holder’s successor, Loretta E. Lynch, decided to change course. This week, Sally Quillian Yates, Ms. Lynch’s deputy, effectively laid the Holder Doctrine to rest. Her seven-page memo, directed to every United States attorney as well as the senior management of the Justice Department, emphasized that pending and future investigations of corporate wrongdoing would no longer be concluded without holding responsible those individuals who misbehaved. No longer will it be possible — theoretically — for Wall Street companies to cut deals with the Justice Department that allow individual wrongdoing to be swept under the rug of a financial settlement.After stating that fighting white-collar crime remains a priority for the Justice Department, Ms. Yates wrote in her memo that “one of the most effective ways to combat corporate misconduct is by seeking accountability from the individuals who perpetrated the wrongdoing. Such accountability is important for several reasons: It deters future illegal activity, it incentivizes changes in corporate behavior, it ensures the proper parties are held responsible for their actions, and it promotes the public’s confidence in our justice system.”She elaborated in an interview with The New York Times: “Corporations can only commit crimes through flesh-and-blood people. It’s only fair that the people who are responsible for committing those crimes be held accountable. The public needs to have confidence that there is one system of justice and it applies equally regardless of whether that crime occurs on a street corner or in a boardroom.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although it is more than a little incredible that a senior official of the Justice Department of the United States of America needed to write such a memorandum at all, the Yates Doctrine, shall we call it, is far preferable to the Holder Doctrine it replaces.AdvertisementTo understand better what was lost by Mr. Holder’s failure to hold the white-collar criminals on Wall Street accountable for their abysmal behavior in the years leading up to and after the financial crisis, I turned to William K. Black, an associate professor of economics and law at the University of Missouri, in Kansas City, and a former federal regulator during the savings-and-loan crisis of the 1980s. He said that with Ms. Yates’s memo, the Justice Department “is tacitly admitting that its experiment in refusing to prosecute the senior bankers that led to the fraud epidemics that caused our economic crisis failed,” with the result of that failure being “the death of accountability, of justice and of deterrence.”The consequence of that failure was, Mr. Black said, “a wave of recidivism in which elite bankers continued to defraud the public after promising to cease their crimes.” He remains aghast that Mr. Holder could have let this happen.“We have known for decades that repealing the rule of law for elite white-collar criminals and relying on corporate fines always produces abject failure and massive corporate fraud,” he said. “We have known for millennia that allowing elites to commit crimes with impunity leads to endemic fraud and corruption.”If Ms. Lynch is truly serious about prosecuting white-collar crime, Mr. Black continued, he will offer his services to her free to help with anti-fraud training, to help restore the criminal referral process and to help “embrace” the scores of whistle-blowers who have tried for years to inform Mr. Holder’s Justice Department, so far without much satisfaction, about the bad behavior they witnessed while working on Wall Street.“We have known for over 30 years the steps we need to take to succeed against elite white-collar criminals through vigorous regulators and prosecutors,” Mr. Black said.Sounds to me as if Ms. Lynch should give him a call.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »