
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
SEPT. 12, 2015
This interview with Patty Stonesifer, chief executive of Martha’s Table, a provider of food and clothing for low-income people, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I’m the sixth of nine children. The most notable things about my family were that my parents had to achieve order at scale, and they were extremely community-oriented.My dad was a sales manager for an auto dealership, and yet he found time on the way home to pick up excess food from the local grocery markets and repurpose it for those who needed food. We participated in the soup kitchen. He drove a bus for the deaf children who were coming to Sunday Mass. This idea of being part of a team really defined my childhood.Any thoughts on how your birth order shaped you?Being in the middle taught me to use my voice. I was a talkative child, I had a lot to say, and I knew how to get my points across at an early age because there were a lot of people with a lot to say at the table.AdvertisementBeing right in the middle also teaches you that it’s not about you. Some of my first memories were folding diapers for my younger siblings or taking somebody’s hand to go to school. It was always about making sure that the whole came together.You moved up the ranks pretty quickly at Microsoft early in your career. What were some inflection points?This was back when Microsoft was really small. They had an annual managers’ retreat, and each vice president picked a new leader to bring along, and I was chosen. There were only two women.When we were discussing an issue, I started questioning where the group was heading. The executive team, especially Bill [Gates], decided after that I was somebody they should move around so that I had opportunities to use those skills. I literally was packing my bags within a few weeks after the retreat to run our operations in Canada.You obviously made an impression on the boss. You became the founding C.E.O. of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.AdvertisementThe thing about growing up at a big dinner table is that people are going to disagree and people are going to have points of view, and for me, that was very comfortable. I’m really comfortable with a fair amount of conflict and disagreement. As long as people are nice and not mean about it, those conflicts can be really productive.Tell me about your leadership style today.I often tell my staff, “I’m adamant but not certain.” One of my mentors early on talked about the need for a leader to be a “certain trumpet.” It comes from Corinthians, and it’s a very good visualization — if the trumpet isn’t clear, who’s going to follow you? If you want people to go fiercely after something, you have to be certain.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I have a tendency to be a certain trumpet — perhaps too often — and that’s why I use the line “I’m adamant but not certain.” I want you to come back to me if you think there is something I’m missing.How do you hire?One of the things I really look for, directly or indirectly, is whether the candidate feels lucky. Do they realize that they’re fortunate to be where they are? I really want people around me who recognize that not everything is perfect and we can keep moving forward. There are opportunities here that we were given, and that the organization was given, and we’re lucky to have those opportunities. Let’s use them. In some ways, that embodies the sense that it’s not about you.And I want to understand how fierce they are. “Tell me about a time you failed and what you did about it. Tell me about a situation where the problem seemed unsolvable. How did you go around it? What did you do?” I want to understand their resiliency and their fierceness in the face of obstacles.At Martha’s Table, I also can get a really good sense of whether I want to be working with somebody when I walk them through the place. It is a busy, crazy place with lots of programs going on to make sure there’s food for the hungry. I watch how the person reacts to the environment. Because if they’re not curious about the work, and it’s just a job, then I don’t want to work with them.I’ll stop and introduce them to a half-dozen people, and see if it’s just a handshake or whether there’s some curiosity and interest. We talk a lot about dignity at Martha’s Table, and dignity comes first from, “I see you, I hear you, I know you.” The ultimate dignity is whether you’re really present for other people.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?A lot of young people will ask, “Do I go broad or do I go deep?” I think it’s often great to go broad before you go deep. It’s like going to school. You get a broad view of the world but then you do have to own something. You have to know what the quality of your work is and get feedback on it and understand it.I also think zigzagging is a better approach than pursuing the idea of a fixed career ladder. Some of the roles I’ve taken looked like they were significantly less important than other roles, but they all led me to new knowledge and new skills that allowed me to keep zigzagging more or less on an upward trajectory. Don’t look to take a job just because it’s up the ladder. Maybe go for a lateral move to learn a whole other area.And people are often taught that the boss will make the difference in their career, and I think maybe the first time you get chosen for a promotion, it is because of the boss. But by the second or third or fourth time, it’s about the people around you deciding that when you win, they win.AdvertisementIf you create a situation where other people win when you win, your opportunities to lead are going to come faster than you ever dreamed. If you can make it less about you and more about the team, you will go further.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on September 13, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Zigzag Your Way to the Top.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »