By JACKIE CALMESOCT. 3, 2015
ATLANTA —  Agreement on a far-reaching trade accord eluded negotiators for a dozen Pacific Rim nations on Saturday as the United States and Australia remained divided over commercial protections for drug companies, leaving tired and testy trade ministers to agree to a last round of talks on Sunday.The impasse over protections for advanced brand-name drugs prompted negotiators to put off settling a separate dispute over dairy exports. So the two issues, drugs and dairy products, became the final obstacles to concluding the largest regional trade agreement in history, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, after seven years of talks.The long-simmering drug debate concerns so-called biologics, advanced medicines derived from living organisms and believed to hold promise in treating cancer. The United States and the pharmaceutical industry, not typically an Obama administration ally, have fought for companies to have exclusive rights to their research data for an extended period before the information is released and can be used to produce less costly generics. They argue that such protection is needed to give companies a financial incentive to innovate and produce new drugs.The United States reduced its demand to eight years of exclusive data rights from the level in federal law, which is 12 years. But that was still too long for Australia and its allies, including Chile, New Zealand, Peru and Malaysia. Those nations’ laws allow zero to five years of monopoly protection.AdvertisementOn their side are the generics drug industry and some nonprofit organizations that support speeding affordable drugs to the market as quickly as possible.AdvertisementRepresentatives for Doctors Without Borders, which has medical operations in up to 70 mostly poor nations, worked the halls at the hotel here where negotiators have been meeting behind closed doors since Wednesday. “The main goal of the industry,” said one, Judit Rius Sanjuan, is “to deny generic competition and make prices higher.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the dairy issue, Canada, in particular, was pitted against the United States and New Zealand, among others. The matter is especially sensitive for Canada because it holds federal elections in less than two weeks. Its agriculture industry and farmers are already angry about competition from Europe in the wake of a separate trade agreement between their country and the European Union. Canada and other dairy-exporting nations, including the United States, were not eager to agree to provisions opening their markets without reassurance that a comprehensive deal was at hand.Despite the divisions over politically charged issues, what has kept the trade ministers going is the knowledge of how much they have agreed to tentatively.A final agreement would include 30 chapters covering different trade sectors and subjects, and all but two of those — the ones that would include the terms of market access for dairy exports and intellectual property protections for pharmaceutical drugs — are all but finished. But as trade negotiators like to say, nothing is agreed to until everything is agreed to.Other parties to the talks include Japan, Mexico, Singapore, Vietnam and Brunei. Together, the 12 nations account for two-fifths of the globe’s economic output.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Trade Negotiations Stall Over Drugs and Dairy, Extending Talks Another Day.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.