By MICHAEL CIEPLYSEPT. 13, 2015
TORONTO —  In a hotel suite near the headquarters of the Toronto International Film Festival here, Jeffrey Skoll is drawing three overlapping circles in a Venn diagram that explains his company, Participant Media.In one circle, there are stories that move people emotionally. In another, there are issues that change the world. In the third are all those bothersome details that come with doing business in the entertainment world: financial backing, distribution, finding theaters, filling online platforms.“The ‘Aha!’ came here, on the sustainable business model issues,” said Mr. Skoll, tapping the third circle, like the former tech executive he is.Tightly wound, dressed in black (with hip striped socks; after all, he’s at a film festival), and unusually talkative for an executive who usually lets his associates do the communicating, Mr. Skoll was describing a deal he hopes to conclude between Participant, his 11-year-old activist entertainment company, and Steven Spielberg’s DreamWorks Studios.AdvertisementNothing is settled, stressed Mr. Skoll, who declined to discuss the financial details. But he made clear that a Participant-DreamWorks alliance, which has already led to films like “The Help,” “Lincoln,” and Mr. Spielberg’s coming “Bridge of Spies,” would reach far beyond a simple agreement to keep working together on projects.AdvertisementUnder one possible plan, a new company owned by Participant and Mr. Spielberg would replace DreamWorks, Mr. Skoll said.In a few years, that company is expected to create its own film distribution operation, he added. The expansion would require outside backers and capitalization in the hundreds of millions of dollars, he said, and any interim deal with a major studio would eventually be superseded by the new distribution apparatus.A spokeswoman for DreamWorks said only, “These discussions are fluid and we do not comment on ongoing negotiations.”Over the long haul, Mr. Skoll said, Mr. Spielberg might sometimes make films for other studios; so might Participant. But the two would principally operate through a fresh venture that could well mark a significant step up for both.“We bring our films, and Steven is Steven,” said Mr. Skoll, who spoke in a joint interview with Diane Weyermann, who heads his documentary operation, and Jonathan King, who is in charge of narrative features.Even without the new venture, Participant has been on a bit of a tear.At the festival here, it is showing no fewer than five films. They are David Gordon Green’s political satire “Our Brand Is Crisis,” for release by Warner Bros., with Sandra Bullock and Billy Bob Thornton; Davis Guggenheim’s documentary “He Named Me Malala,” about the rights campaigner Malala Yousafzai, for release by Fox Searchlight Pictures; Cary Fukunaga’s “Beasts of No Nation,” for Netflix, with Idris Elba; Tom McCarthy’s “Spotlight,” about a Boston Globe investigation of a Catholic Church cover-up of child molestation, for Open Road Films; and the documentary “The Music of Strangers: Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Ensemble,” from Morgan Neville, who won an Oscar in 2014 with his “Twenty Feet From Stardom.”Documentaries, Ms. Weyermann noted, may or may not find a place in the contemplated joint venture with Mr. Spielberg. But they remain close to the beating heart of a company that made its mark with Mr. Guggenheim’s “An Inconvenient Truth,” among others, and that remains more intent on changing the world than on turning limitless profit.AdvertisementWhile Mr. Skoll and company will be delighted if “He Named Me Malala” sells tickets with its commercial release on Oct. 2, for instance, they are more closely concerned with what Mr. Skoll described as deals with “hundreds of NGOs” — nongovernmental organizations — to bring hundreds of thousands of girls to theaters for free showings of the film, about a young woman whose spirit rose above the crushing effects of a terror attack in Pakistan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In “Spotlight,” one coup was finding an apt match for the role of Martin Baron, the low-key, bearded editor who was at The Boston Globe when the film’s action took place. Mr. McCarthy landed Liev Schreiber, “a big, imposing guy,” he said, who nonetheless proved a match for the intense, soft-spoken Mr. Baron.Mr. Skoll said his company’s frequent turn toward media issues — it got hurt with a flop about Julian Assange, “The Fifth Estate” — stems from his own past adventures as a college newspaper editor, and, briefly, an executive with Knight Ridder, before going on to become a co-founder of eBay.Somewhere in “Our Brand Is Crisis,” there also lies public purpose, though Mr. King said he was not immediately sure how the film would translate into one of the activist campaigns that are a sine qua non for anything Participant does.A biting mix of comedy and drama, the film, loosely based on Rachel Boynton’s documentary of the same name, follows the exploits of competing American political consultants, played by Ms. Bullock and Mr. Thornton, as they turn Bolivian politics into something as demoralizingly cynical as our own.“Any time you look under the surface of political campaigns, you don’t know whether to laugh or cry,” Mr. King said.Laughs — when they have found their way into Participant’s oh-so-serious output of about 70 feature films — have in fact been good to the company. “The Help,” which mixed humor with lessons about civil rights, and “The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel,” about laughing and loving into old age, were among Participant’s bigger hits.(Mr. Skoll recalled having filled a wall with posters from movies he admired when starting Participant. “A couple of those films were a surprise to people,” he said, noting that some belly-busters figured in the mix. “ ‘Trading Places’ was one.”)Mr. Skoll and company clearly have perceived that in addition to laughter, Mr. Spielberg and his colleagues have become critical to their formula. Participant’s biggest film hits, “Lincoln” and “The Help,” were collaborations with DreamWorks.AdvertisementMr. Skoll said he has been directly involved in negotiating the possible DreamWorks deal and with a close study of his own operation.Now 50 years old, Mr. Skoll — who was born in Montreal and attended college in Toronto — took over as chief executive in April, with the abrupt resignation of then-chief executive, Jim Berk.Mr. Skoll, a methodical type, said he has had a search firm sifting through possibilities for a successor to Mr. Berk.“I hope to have a finalist or two by early October,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on September 14, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Participant Media Delivers Batch of Films and Unfolds DreamWorks Idea.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.