AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesAirbus, the European airplane maker, will formally open a jet assembly plant in Mobile, Ala., on Monday, its first such factory in the United States. The move into the heart of Boeing’s home turf is part of a long-term strategy by Airbus aimed at doubling its share of the American market for 150-seat airplanes, which is currently dominated by Boeing’s top-selling 737. Airbus plans to build as many as 36 of its competing A320 and A321 models a year by 2018 and says the Mobile plant has the capacity to double that production. All of the aircraft produced at the site are destined for delivery to American carriers, which are expected to need as many as 4,700 new single-aisle planes over the next 20 years. —Nicola ClarkContract talks between the United Automobile Workers union and Detroit’s three automakers enter the final stretch this week, as the current four-year agreement expires on Tuesday. The U.A.W. represents more than 140,000 workers in the United States at General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler. On Sunday, Fiat Chrysler confirmed that it had been selected as the primary target for the first settlement. The union is pushing for wage increases and job security, while the automakers are seeking a contract that reduces health care costs and brings overall labor costs down. Workers at all three companies have voted to authorize a strike if negotiations break down. —Bill VlasicOn Tuesday, the Commerce Department will report the latest data on retail sales in August. Spending by consumers drives the economy, so analysts will be closely watching to see if July’s unexpectedly strong 0.6 percentage point jump in retail activity was a one-time blip or if the momentum continued. Wall Street is looking for a 0.3 percentage point increase, but lower gasoline prices in many parts of the country may be spurring shoppers to spend more. Strong auto sales lately could also lift the headline number. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe world’s automakers will converge on Frankfurt on Tuesday for the International Motor Show. The annual event, which alternates between Frankfurt and Paris, comes as car sales have revived in Europe but slowed in China. China had become one of the largest and — until recently — fastest-growing markets for companies like Volkswagen, BMW and Daimler. In addition to the usual splashy new model introductions, industry executives will be talking about the slow but steady growth of battery-powered vehicles, and efforts by tech companies like Apple and Google to take over car dashboards and, perhaps, to someday even build vehicles themselves. The show, known by its German initials I.A.A., opens to the media on Tuesday and to the public on Saturday. —Jack EwingOn Wednesday, the Labor Department will report on consumer prices in August. While some experts believe the Federal Reserve should raise interest rates to head off any threat of inflation down the road, there is not likely to be much hint of higher prices ahead in the report. Economists are looking for a 0.1 percent decline in the Consumer Price Index for August, compared with a 0.1 percent rise in July. The drop in gasoline prices is largely responsible for the downshift. Excluding volatile food and energy costs, the so-called core C.P.I. is expected to rise 0.1 percent. —Nelson D. SchwartzLike many of the older big tech companies, Oracle has been fighting to show its relevance (and profitability) in a world of cloud computing and mobility. A number of acquisitions have given the database giant a revenue stream in the new world, but investors will be looking for growth in the company’s core products when Oracle reports its latest quarterly earnings on Wednesday. Investors will also be seeking evidence that the company built by Larry Ellison, above, can thrive without him at the helm. Mr. Ellison stepped down as chief executive last year, but he still serves as executive chairman and chief technical officer. —Quentin HardyThrough much of the summer it seemed likely that the Federal Reserve would start to raise interest rates at the September meeting of its policy-making committee, on Wednesday and Thursday. But the march toward liftoff has lost some momentum in recent weeks. Inflation remains weak and Fed officials have expressed unease about the volatility of global financial markets. After the decision is announced on Thursday afternoon, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, is to hold a news conference. —Binyamin AppelbaumAfter a long summer of financial and political upheaval, Greeks will vote next Sunday in the second general election this year. The outcome will determine whether Greece returns to stability, after agreeing to terms of the country’s third multibillion-euro international bailout last month, or enters a new period of uncertainty. The snap elections were called last month after the resignation of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who came to power in January on a pledge to stop austerity, but capitulated to creditors’ demands after months of grueling negotiations that destabilized the economy and led to the imposition of capital controls on Greek banks. Mr. Tsipras quit in a bid to consolidate his grip on power following a rebellion by radical leftist lawmakers who oppose austerity and have since formed their own party. Although Greek opinion polls gave Mr. Tsipras and his Syriza party a clear lead over rivals earlier this summer, many new surveys put Syriza virtually neck and neck with its main political opponent, the conservative New Democracy, which led the coalition government that preceded Mr. Tsipras’s administration. —Niki KitsantonisAdvertisement