SEPT. 13, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.03 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.24 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.03 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $195.9 million of turnpike revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Johnson County, Kan., Unified School District No. 229, $162.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementTUESDAYOhio, $250.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKClifton, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $72.4 million of education revenue bonds. Robert W. Baird.AdvertisementColorado Springs, $72 million of utilities system refinancing revenue bonds. Bank of America.Delaware County Authority, Pa., $138 million of Villanova University revenue bonds. Bank of America.Glendale, Calif., Unified School District, $102.9 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Illinois Finance Authority, $368.1 million of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, $271 million of power system revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Mendocino-Lake Community College District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority, Ill., $222 million of McCormick Place expansion project debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Philadelphia, $225 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Public Parking Authority of Pittsburgh, $67.4 million of parking system revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Texas Transportation Commission, $750 million of general obligation mobility fund refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Virginia Polytechnic Institute, $61 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America.A version of this article appears in print on September 14, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.