AdvertisementSupported byDealBookBy Andrew Ross SorkinEarlier this year, Henry R. Kravis, the private equity investor, held a $100,000 a plate fund-raising dinner for Jeb Bush at his Park Avenue apartment in Manhattan. The guest list was a who’s who of private equity and real estate executives, including Jerry I. Speyer, the billionaire New York property owner. The dinner raised more than $4 million.That’s why Mr. Bush’s tax reform plan — unveiled last week and a likely topic of discussion at Wednesday night’s Republican debate — was such a surprise.Mr. Bush’s proposal seems to take a direct shot at the very people who filled the tables that night to support him.In a departure from Republican orthodoxy, his new tax proposal calls for raising taxes — and closing a longtime loophole — on carried interest, which represents investment gains largely from private equity and hedge funds. (In this regard, Mr. Bush was following his Republican rival Donald Trump, who has been criticizing the carried-interest provision for weeks.)Even more worthy of attention is Mr. Bush’s plan to eliminate the ability of companies to deduct the cost of interest payments. In other words, Mr. Bush is seeking to destroy an incentive for American companies to borrow money.His policy could have a profound impact on almost every industry, but would especially affect the private equity and real estate industries, which have long relied on debt — or leverage, in Wall Street parlance — to increase their profits.L.B.O. stands for leveraged buyout, a transaction that has made fortunes for the likes of Stephen A. Schwarzman of the Blackstone Group and David M. Rubenstein of the Carlyle Group. And eliminating the ability to deduct the cost of interest payments would make pursuing a leveraged buyout significantly less attractive.Mr. Bush’s plan could also make big public companies a lot less inclined to borrow money to pursue stock buyback and dividend programs. That would also significantly hamper the tactics of activist hedge fund investors, whose favorite move is to pressure companies to load up on debt to buy back stock.If you believe share buybacks do little more than help chief executives increase their own compensation, or think private equity executives get paid too much, Mr. Bush’s plan has great appeal.With this tax plan, he appears to have bitten the hand that has fed him. It is hard to see how donors like Julian H. Robertson, the prominent hedge fund manager who hosted a fund-raiser for Mr. Bush in the Hamptons over the summer, or the investor John A. Paulson, who attended a breakfast fund-raiser in Manhattan, could be thrilled about those provisions of his tax plan.Mr. Bush’s plan is particularly striking because he briefly sought a career in private equity just two years ago when he helped start a firm called Britton Hill Holdings, which invested in aviation and energy. (His tax proposal to eliminate the deduction of interest has one large exception: banks.)If you’re wondering why industry isn’t howling, there may be good reason: The tax plan also reduces both individual and corporate rates so much that it’s unclear how disadvantaged the wealthy would be. There’s a sound argument that the other parts of the plan are so tilted toward the wealthy that society’s upper crust may view the entire proposal positively.Jared Bernstein, a former chief economist to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and now a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, has described Mr. Bush’s tax policy as “R.R.H.”— Reverse Robin Hood. He called it “a revenue-eating wolf in sheep’s clothing” that “would engender massive, regressive changes to the federal tax code.”Under Mr. Bush’s plan, corporate tax rates would drop to 20 percent, from 35 percent. Moreover, his plan allows companies to deduct new capital investment in the first year, an offset of sorts of eliminating the corporate interest deduction. He’s also moving to a territorial tax system to end any attraction to move abroad. On individual tax rates, the top rate is reduced to 28, with the next rate at 25, and then at 10. He’s also expanding the earned-income tax credit while eliminating the death tax and alternative minimum tax.All in all, Mr. Bush’s plan might sound attractive to some, but there’s one big question mark: It requires some huge assumptions to make the numbers add up. Critics contend that the plan is regressive, meaning that it hits lower-income taxpayers harder.Wealthy people will pay less tax. Catherine Rampell of The Washington Post estimated that Mr. Bush himself would pay $800,000 less based on his 2013 tax return.Still, the most intriguing part of the plan, which is worth more study, is his proposal to eliminate the tax deductibility of interest. In many ways, it could help address many of the big challenges that our debt-fueled economy has created.The International Monetary Fund has long maintained that companies’ bias toward debt “creates significant inequities, complexities, and economic distortions,” as it stated in a 2011 report. At the same time, the I.M.F. has acknowledged that abolishing interest deductibility would be very difficult to carry out, and as a result no country has ever moved to eliminate it. Whether Mr. Bush’s tax plan has a chance — or whether it is too wonky to capture America’s attention at a time when Donald Trump’s one-liners do — it’s nice to see the candidates wading into substantive issues that will have a real impact on the nation’s economy.Advertisement