By CHAD BRAYOCT. 30, 2015
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Friday that its third-quarter profit had risen 6 percent, but its results continued to be dragged down by restructuring and litigation costs as the lender seeks to shrink itself and refocus its business.R.B.S., which is based in Edinburgh, announced plans in February to dismantle its global investment bank and to decrease the number of countries where it operates as it shifts toward being a British-focused retail and corporate bank.The bank also said it had sold its remaining 20.9 percent stake in Citizens Financial Group, completing its withdrawal from an American lender that had been spun off in an initial public offering last year. The R.B.S. stake that was sold was worth about $2.7 billion based on the closing price of Citizens shares on Thursday.R.B.S. recorded restructuring costs of 847 million pounds, or about $1.3 billion, in its third quarter, the bank said in a news release on Friday. The restructuring costs included £637 million related to the reshaping of its corporate and investment bank and £190 million for the planned spinoff of Williams & Glyn, a branch network in Britain.AdvertisementR.B.S., which is about 73 percent owned by the British government after its 2008 bailout, had additional legal costs of £129 million in the quarter, the bulk of which are related to mortgage-backed securities litigation in the United States.AdvertisementThat was an improvement over the £780 million it set aside for settlements and fines in the same period a year earlier.“There are clearly significant conduct and litigation issues on the horizon,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said on a conference call with journalists. “Putting these behind us is a vital part of our plan.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The third quarter also included a separate gain of £1.15 billion related to the Citizens spinoff, tied primarily to the reclassification of reserves.For the three months ended Sept. 30, R.B.S. reported a net profit of £952 million, from £896 million in the period a year earlier.Net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits and other liabilities, declined 8 percent to £2.19 billion, from £2.37 billion in the third quarter of 2014.Operating expenses declined 4 percent to £3.26 billion, from £3.38 billion in the same period a year earlier. The bank said that it had exceeded its original forecast for reductions to its annual costs and now expects to achieve more than £900 million in cost savings by year end.In August, the British government raised about £2.1 billion in its first sale of shares of R.B.S. as it began winding down its stake in the lender.R.B.S. received £45 billion in a government bailout during the financial crisis in 2008. In June, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said it was time for the government to begin its exit from R.B.S., even if it registered losses on some holdings.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.