AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshA group of Hispanic members of Congress called on the Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, to take a more muscular role in Puerto Rico’s debt crisis and prevent what they said could become “an economic catastrophe” on the island.The eight lawmakers, all Democrats, said bankruptcy was the “best hope” both for Puerto Rico and its many creditors on the United States mainland. They urged Mr. Lew to work with Congress to move two pending bankruptcy bills forward, and to intervene in other ways, as Treasury secretaries did during the financial crisis of 2008.“Treasury was instrumental to helping auto manufacturers weather tough times and stabilizing Wall Street during the 2008 crisis,” said Nydia M. Velázquez, a New York Democrat, who wrote the letter. “There’s no reason they can’t play a similar role here.”General Motors and Chrysler were able to restructure their debts under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection because the Treasury provided interim financing at a time when no private lender could be found. The auto restructurings also were handled by a special task force working out of the Treasury Department. Without the Treasury’s help, many experts said at the time, G.M. in particular would have had to liquidate, with devastating effects on jobs and the economy.A spokesman for the Treasury Department said it was reviewing the letter.Financial officials in Puerto Rico have sought to convince the United States government that while the island needs help, they are committed to reforming its economy and restoring its credibility as a borrower. The island’s Treasury Department said on Monday that it collected sales taxes of $191 million in August, which was 13.2 percent higher than expected.Larger tax collections suggest that some of the changes underway may be working — among them efforts to go after the underground economy. Sales taxes are especially important because a big share of that revenue is used to back a certain class of bonds, called Cofina bonds.Over all, Puerto Rico has been struggling with about $72 billion in bond debt and has called for a restructuring that would lower its payments to bondholders by about $13 billion over the next five years. The debts of two big public corporations, which provide electricity and water services on the island, are being handled separately. The electric utility, known as Prepa, recently agreed on the terms of a restructuring with one group of bondholders; on Friday the two banks that finance Prepa’s energy purchases must decide whether they also want to continue restructuring talks.The five-year plan calls for restructuring about $47 billion of Puerto Rico’s $72 billion in bond debt and carrying out economic overhauls under an independent financial control board.Despite bright spots here and there, Puerto Rico continues to warn that its total debt is unpayable and that its inability to obtain protection in the federal bankruptcy courts makes any resolution much more difficult. Bills introduced in both houses of Congress would give Puerto Rico the power to send some parts of its government into Chapter 9 municipal bankruptcy, but Republican lawmakers have shown little enthusiasm.Representative Jeff Duncan, a Republican of South Carolina, said in a letter in June that bankruptcy protection amounted to “a financial bailout of Puerto Rican debt,” which would “provide only temporary benefit.”In July, Secretary Lew said in a letter to Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Republican of Utah, that he was concerned about Puerto Rico’s lack of any legal framework for solving its debt. Without one, he said, the island faced “a protracted and disorderly restructuring process” that would “cause long-term damage to the health, safety and financial well-being of the families living and working in Puerto Rico.”Last week, Puerto Rico’s governor, Alejandro García Padilla, said a team of experts on the island had projected its cash flows over the next five years and determined that the island had the means to pay just $5 billion of the $18 billion it is scheduled to pay its creditors over that time.He called on the investors who hold the bonds to help work out a plan for distributing the resulting $13 billion of losses. But they have so far been unsupportive. “I think they’re trying to play something of a political game,” said Daniel Irvin, chief executive of Capital Security Advisors L.L.C., a fund that holds several types of Puerto Rican debt. He said he thought the governor wanted to look as if his administration were making profound structural changes on the island, when his priority was really to pit different bondholder groups against each other.“It’s a lot less expensive for the commonwealth to have the investors pay for the legal battle” over which bonds have the highest priority, he said. If Puerto Rico defaults on any bonds while the investors are quarreling, he said, the governor will be able to put the blame on them, “the greedy Wall Street vulture capitalists.”In appealing to Mr. Lew for help, the Hispanic members of Congress said, “We believe that the Department of Treasury is uniquely positioned to promote a fair and efficient outcome.” Aside from Ms. Velázquez, the signers represented California, New Jersey, Texas and Arizona.Advertisement