By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONSEPT. 14, 2015
Four of Wall Street’s biggest banks on Monday agreed to cooperate with New York regulators and retain copies of communications sent through the messaging platform known as Symphony.The New York State Department of Financial Services was concerned that the platform would allow traders to delete or encrypt information that could be used to track evidence of rigging schemes among traders at various banks. Messaging in chat rooms is believed to have figured prominently in schemes to manipulate global exchange rates and benchmark interest rates.Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, Credit Suisse and Bank of New York Mellon have agreed to keep copies of all electronic communication sent through the Symphony platform to and from one another for seven years. They have also agreed to store the duplicate copies of decryption keys for messages with independent custodians. The agreement essentially nullifies a feature initially marketed by Symphony that allowed for “guaranteed data deletion.” The system is scheduled to be introduced on Tuesday.“We are pleased that these banks did the right thing by working cooperatively with us to help address our concerns about this new messaging platform,” said Anthony J. Albanese, the acting superintendent of the Department of Financial Services.Advertisement“This is a critical issue since chats and other electronic records have provided key evidence in investigations of wrongdoing on Wall Street,” Mr. Albanese said in a statement. “It is vital that regulators act to ensure that these records do not fall into a digital black hole.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Symphony’s chief executive, David Gurle, said: “The agreement is another positive development on the eve of Symphony’s launch. Symphony’s platform safeguards against cyber threats while strengthening customers’ compliance operations and facilitating their ability to meet their regulatory obligations.”Symphony, a start-up based in California, was created by Goldman Sachs and is backed by a consortium of major banks. It has positioned itself as an alternative to Bloomberg’s chat program used by traders and investors around the world. The four banks that reached agreements with the Department of Financial Services represent the banks within the consortium that the regulator regulates.Advertisement“We are pleased our discussions with the D.F.S. have been constructive and Symphony’s messaging solution addresses their concerns and further enhances our process around security and compliance,” a spokeswoman for Goldman Sachs said in an email.A version of this article appears in print on September 15, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Record Retention.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.