AdvertisementSupported byBy David GellesLast year, George Zimmer was ousted from Men’s Wearhouse, the company he founded. His latest start-up, an online tailoring platform, is not doing so well. But now, Mr. Zimmer is sure he has a winner.On Tuesday, the graybeard ambassador of affordable suits will unveil his newest venture, Generation Tux, a website for tuxedo rentals.Generation Tux is the second company Mr. Zimmer, 66, has started this year. In May, he unveiled zTailors, which he hoped would be an “Uber for tailors.” But in an interview, Mr. Zimmer acknowledged that zTailors had not yet matched the success of Uber, the ride-hailing app valued at $50 billion.“We’re still losing millions of dollars,” he said.After more than three months in operation, zTailors was producing sales of about $200,000 a month, he said, and facilitating about 1,000 monthly matches between tailors and customers. That is not enough for the company to break even, Mr. Zimmer said.Those customers who use zTailors give the service high marks, but Mr. Zimmer said he had not figured out how to generate enough business yet.“We expect to grow a lot larger,” he said. “When we figure out the flywheel to generate demand, we think we have a winner.”When it comes to online tuxedo rentals, however, Mr. Zimmer is confident that given the perennial need for formal wear, and an increasingly tech-using consumer base, there is an enormous untapped market.“Generation Tux is definitely a winner,” he said. “I think it’s the best idea I’ve ever had.”Mr. Zimmer is certainly betting as much. Using mostly his own money, with small investments from friends and other investors, he has already spent more than $6 million to have 30,000 tuxedos made, construct an elaborate website and prepare a big distribution warehouse.Those 30,000 tuxes — along with accompanying shirts, cummerbunds, shoes and cuff links — are sitting in a 200,000-square-foot warehouse in Louisville, Ky., waiting for the online orders to start rolling in. Also in the warehouse: an army of tailors ready to make adjustments, and a dry cleaning business that Mr. Zimmer had constructed to service the inventory.With his foray into the tuxedo rental business, Mr. Zimmer is competing directly with his former company.Men’s Wearhouse rents more tuxedos than any other company, and has found it to be a surprisingly lucrative business. Mr. Zimmer’s former company reported $443 million in revenue in tuxedo rentals last year, up from $406 million in 2012.“Nobody had the idea that it was such a golden egg,” Mr. Zimmer said. “Tux rental is enormously profitable, like Microsoft profitability.”Yet Men’s Wearhouse, which last year merged with its rival Jos. A. Bank, has not yet started an online version of the business, leaving itself exposed to new competition. As a recent BuzzFeed headline put it: “Online Tux Rentals Are the Elephant in the Room for Men’s Wearhouse.”Renting expensive garments over the web isn’t a new idea. Rent the Runway, a successful start-up, has found a profitable niche renting expensive dresses to women who don’t want to spend hundreds — or even thousands — of dollars, for an item they might wear once or twice. And a few other start-ups, including Menguin, the Black Tux and SimpleTux, are already renting tuxedos online.But Mr. Zimmer says he believes that the combination of his investment and his name will allow Generation Tux to dominate the market in short order.“Our website is much more sophisticated than these other websites,” he said.For about $150, customers will receive a tuxedo, shirt, shoes, cuff links and a cummerbund or belt, delivered a week before they are needed. Rather than rent name-brand labels like Hugo Boss or Calvin Klein, Mr. Zimmer worked with designers to create a set of new Generation Tux-branded tuxedo designs, and produce them using luxurious Super 140s wool.When placing the order, customers enter their measurements into the Generation Tux website. Then at the warehouse, tailors will customize each garment before it is mailed out. If additional alterations are needed, men and women from zTailors will be on call to provide last-minute help.Each tuxedo will be embedded with an RFID chip, avoiding the need for any obvious labels that reveal the garment as a rental. That technology will also streamline operations at the warehouse, Mr. Zimmer said.“We don’t even have to open boxes to know what’s inside,” he said.To power the company, Mr. Zimmer has turned to Salesforce.com, a minor investor, and he is announcing Generation Tux at the big tech company’s Dreamforce event in San Francisco.“I don’t think the idea is particularly sophisticated,” Mr. Zimmer said. “I’m taking what had been a national tuxedo rental business and trying to do it online.”Even if the idea is not unique, Mr. Zimmer is going all in — spending millions of dollars of his own money before even registering his first sale — as he tries to build a winner.And if that means taking on Men’s Wearhouse, a company Mr. Zimmer founded, but which eventually spurned him, so be it.“We’re not trying to go after them,” he said. “They happen to be in the way.”Advertisement