By JONATHAN SOBLEOCT. 30, 2015
TOKYO — Japan’s central bank said on Friday that the economic outlook was worsening, but its governor said that the stimulus measures already in place, while slow to take effect, were enough for now.Even with the benchmark interest rate at virtually zero and the bank already buying up trillions of yen of government debt, some economists had expected the bank to ratchet up its efforts in response to a softening Japanese economy. But the Bank of Japan’s rate-setting board voted 8 to 1 to leave its monetary program unchanged.The governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, defended the decision to stand pat, saying the bank was already doing enough to stimulate the economy. But he acknowledged that its efforts were taking longer to bear fruit than he had hoped.“Given that the labor market is tight and corporate profits are high, wages aren’t rising as much as expected,” Mr. Kuroda said at a news conference after the board maintained the pace of debt-buying at 80 trillion yen a year, or about $660 billion. “We want a balanced economy, where prices, wages and profits rise in tandem.”AdvertisementMr. Kuroda said he nonetheless saw a “positive cycle” taking hold in the economy, even if recent data had been less than encouraging. The board’s latest price forecasts implied a further six-month delay in reaching the bank’s inflation target of 2 percent, but “the inflationary trend is rising, without question,” he said.AdvertisementThe board’s meeting on Friday was the most intensely watched by investors in months, although Mr. Kuroda had been playing down the possibility of any policy change.The Nikkei 225 stock average fell briefly after the bank announced its decision but rallied later to end the day 0.8 percent higher. The yen weakened slightly against the dollar.The central bank “sees the inflation glass half-full” and prefers to wait on any new stimulus measures, analysts at Japan Macro Advisors, a research firm, wrote in a report.For nearly three years, central bank stimulus has been the chief weapon in the government’s broader economic rejuvenation campaign, known as Abenomics, after Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. But since Mr. Abe gained the premiership in late 2012, his economic ambitions have proved difficult to realize.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By injecting money into financial markets through the bond-buying program, the central bank has been trying to keep borrowing costs low, encourage spending and promote inflation and growth.Both the Japanese central bank and the United States Federal Reserve are weighing changes to monetary policy, but the changes would take them in opposite directions. The Fed has cut back its own bond-buying program in response to recovery in the American economy, and it is now considering whether to raise its benchmark interest rate from close to zero.The decision by the Bank of Japan to leave the scale of that program unchanged came despite a slowdown in consumer prices that has threatened a return to deflation, or broadly falling prices — the bank’s nemesis for much of the past two decades.Economic output contracted in the second quarter, and some economists believe it fell again in the third in what would be Japan’s second technical recession in two years. The rate of consumer price increases, which had picked up early in the Abenomics effort, has fallen back to about zero, dragged down by the falling cost of oil.AdvertisementOn Friday, the government said core consumer prices — a measure traditionally used by the central bank that leaves out volatile fresh-food prices but includes the cost of energy — had fallen 0.1 percent in September. By other measures, including an index by the University of Tokyo that looks at supermarket prices, inflation remains in positive territory.Mr. Kuroda set the target of “roughly 2 percent” core inflation soon after his appointment as the central bank’s governor in 2013 and said at the time that it would be reached by the spring of this year. That timetable has since receded.The board’s latest forecasts imply that the target will not be reached until late 2016 or early 2017. Members’ median forecast for core consumer price increases in the fiscal year starting next April declined to 1.4 percent from 1.9 percent in their previous forecasts in July. The median forecast for overall economic growth in the same period slipped to 1.4 percent from 1.5 percent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.