AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — Fiat Chrysler Automobiles and the United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative agreement on Tuesday on a new contract that could establish a pattern for labor deals at the other two American carmakers, General Motors and Ford.The deal was reached after marathon bargaining sessions between the two sides that began on Sunday when the union picked Fiat Chrysler as the first company to negotiate with.Previous four-year labor deals with the Detroit automakers expired at midnight on Monday. G.M. and Ford each agreed to extend their U.A.W. contracts while Fiat Chrysler negotiated with the union, and will most likely continue the extensions during their own upcoming talks.The union’s agreement with Fiat Chrysler was announced at a joint news conference on Tuesday night by Dennis Williams, the union’s president, and Sergio Marchionne, the chief executive of Fiat Chrysler.Neither Mr. Marchionne nor Mr. Williams disclosed any details of the tentative agreement, which still needs to be ratified by a vote of 36,000 union workers at Fiat Chrysler.The union had been seeking pay raises for its veteran workers, who earn about $28 an hour, and its entry-level employees, who earn $16 to $19 an hour.“We will not be talking about the details,” Mr. Williams said. He said the deal put Fiat Chrysler “in a competitive place,” but would not share whether the agreement specifically called for wage increases.He also would not address whether the union was successful in putting a cap on the use of lower-paid workers at Fiat Chrysler.More than 40 percent of the union workers at the company are entry-level employees — about double the percentage of lower-paid workers at G.M. and Ford.Mr. Marchionne has been outspoken that the two-tier wage system cannot be sustained in the long term, and suggested that the tentative agreement provided a starting point for the elimination of the tier structure.“It will go away over time,” Mr. Marchionne said, without providing any further details.He said that employees at the company, under the tentative agreement, will have a “trajectory of career development,” which implied that lower-paid workers can move up to higher-wage status over some period of time.Mr. Marchionne also said that cutting health care costs was a key component of the agreement. The U.A.W. had been discussing creating a health care collective covering workers at all three companies for the purpose of saving money on the costs of medical care and prescription drugs.“The cooperative arrangement is embedded in the spirit of this agreement, and I really hope it gets implemented,” Mr. Marchionne said.Mr. Williams said he would present the tentative agreement on Wednesday to union officials from Fiat Chrysler facilities across the country. After that takes place, union members will vote on the pact. He said the vote would probably take place next week.Despite the absence of details, Mr. Williams and Mr. Marchionne expressed confidence that the tentative agreement would benefit workers as well as the company, which was created after the former Chrysler Corporation went bankrupt in 2009 and needed a government bailout to survive.Mr. Marchionne said the negotiations were intense in the final hours. “I’m pleased that this thing has come to an end,” he said.The union will most likely not start final negotiations with either G.M. or Ford until a vote is taken on the Fiat Chrysler deal.Mr. Williams said he expected the deal to set a pattern for talks at G.M. and Ford, but left open the possibility that those companies, which are more profitable, might be asked for better economic terms.“The pattern is unique to each company,” Mr. Williams said.Earlier on Tuesday, workers at Fiat Chrysler’s sport utility vehicle plant in Detroit said they were hopeful that a deal that preserved jobs could be reached.“I’m just hoping I can keep coming back every day so I can provide and build for my family,” said Jeremiah Meyerhoff, an entry-level worker at the plant who was hired three years ago and earns about $19 an hour.Another entry-level worker, Fred Alnajjar, said he hoped the new contract included raises for all union members.“I want any kind of raise,” said Mr. Alnajjar, who has also worked for Fiat Chrysler for three years. “But we know the company needs money to be able to pay us.”Fiat Chrysler is the least profitable of the three Detroit companies and is considerably smaller than G.M. and Ford in terms of vehicle sales and revenues.Besides raises, Mr. Alnajjar said the most important element of a new agreement would be job security.“Hey, if after all this I still have a job, I’m O.K.,” he said. “Everybody wants a full-time job these days, right?”Mary M. Chapman contributed reporting.Advertisement