AdvertisementSupported byBy Eric LiptonWASHINGTON — Representative Kevin McCarthy, Republican of California and majority leader, said on Tuesday that the House was preparing to vote later this month to repeal a 40-year-old ban on the export of crude oil. The plan was immediately celebrated by the oil industry but is already drawing fire from environmental groups.The oil industry has started a major lobbying campaign to generate support in Washington for the repeal of the ban, first imposed during the 1970s oil crisis, a legislative effort that will face tougher opposition in the Senate.“If there was ever a time to lift the oil export ban, it’s now,” Mr. McCarthy said in a copy provided by his office of a speech that was given Tuesday in Houston. “Lifting the oil export ban will not only help our economy, it will also bolster our geopolitical standing.”The American Petroleum Institute has started an advertising campaign pushing the proposed repeal, arguing that allowing oil exports would actually reduce the price of gasoline by creating an incentive for continued new oil production in the United States at a time when the domestic oil glut has sent prices tumbling.Several refiners oppose lifting the ban because they fear the action will raise the price of domestic oil.Mr. McCarthy’s aides predicted a successful House vote — with broad Republican support and at least some Democrats — by the end of September. The bill has 130 co-sponsors, including 14 Democrats.On the Senate side, where at least 60 votes are needed to move most legislation, it remains unclear if supporters of similar legislation that has been introduced separately can attract enough Democrats to pass it. Senator Edward Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, an opponent of the repeal, said he would be working with environmental groups against the repeal effort.Reinstating the export of crude oil, Mr. Markey said, would send the wrong message to political leaders worldwide as the United States pushes them to agree to reduce carbon emissions caused by fossil fuels. He said it would also mean profits for oil companies, perhaps at the cost of higher prices for consumers. The oil industry rejects those arguments.“The industry really wants the ban lifted,” Mr. Markey said in an interview on Tuesday. “But I just think when the public learns we still import five million barrels of oil a day, they are going to be dismayed that this debate over a possible bonanza for the oil industry is even taking place.”The White House made clear on Tuesday that it did not support the House legislation, saying that the administration, through the Commerce Department, already has the authority to make adjustments in the policy. While not an explicit veto threat, the statement may make it more difficult for supporters of the measure to gather Democratic votes.”This is a policy decision that is made over at the Commerce Department, and for that reason, we wouldn’t support legislation like the one that’s been put forward by Republicans,” the White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, said at a briefing.Mr. Earnest then leveled some criticism at Mr. McCarthy, who was giving his speech to a crowd that included oil industry executives, saying that the House leader should instead have used the opportunity to call for cuts in oil industry tax subsidies.“It is pretty clear once again where Republicans in Congress and their political benefactors stand when it comes to their energy policy priorities,” Mr. Earnest said.Advertisement