
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT and


NEIL UNMACK

SEPT. 15, 2015
The credit default swap market is the latest bank activity to encounter Libor-style market abuse shame. Twelve banks on Friday agreed to a $1.9 billion settlement in the United States after investor accusations that they had abused their market-making position in credit default swaps, which enable investors to protect themselves against losses. Even so, the market is mending itself.Abuse in the credit default market is not like the London interbank offered rate or foreign exchange scandals. There, price-setting mechanisms were rigged; here, the entire market structure was said to be tilted toward the banks. A group of investors and hedge funds argued that banks extracted excessive profits by exploiting their dominant position to charge high trading fees. Pricing in over-the-counter sectors like the credit default swaps is more opaque than on transparent exchanges, and banks, investors said, resisted attempts to change the status quo.The settlement, while not proof of guilt, could bring further pain. The European Commission has been trying for years to pin similar charges on the banks. Although European civil lawsuits will have to wait until Brussels finishes its inquiry, those working on the lawsuits will be encouraged, particularly if they think banks are eager to avoid publicity.Still, the market is moving on. Post-crisis regulation like the Dodd-Frank reform act shift a lot of trading through clearing houses and onto electronic platforms, meaning less risk and more transparency. Recent data from the International Swaps and Derivatives Association shows that this year so far, 78 percent of swaps were cleared, and 60 percent were matched through venues called swap execution facilities.The transition remains a work in progress. Most of the trading that has moved onto the facilities and clearing houses is in the commonly traded indexes, not those tied to individual companies. And some investors argue that the modern trading arenas still give banks an edge – investors still have to disclose more and rely more on the banks for pricing than in many other markets.The delays aren’t all the fault of the banks: Regulators have been slow and uneven over clearing and transparency, and not all investors are yet convinced of the benefits of an exchange model for a product like single-name swaps, which may be less easy to trade. But the shift toward clearing houses and electronic arenas should bring in more market participants and reduce the role of the banks. That should make future lawsuits less likely.Dominic Elliott and Neil Unmack are columnists at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »