AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinNina Tassler, the longtime head of entertainment programming at CBS, is stepping down at the end of the year, the network said on Tuesday.She will be succeeded by one of her lieutenants, Glenn Geller, an executive vice president of current programming for the CBS network entertainment group.CBS’s entertainment division has long been a place of strong ratings and relative stability, and her departure came as a surprise. Ms. Tassler took over the entertainment division 11 years ago, which made her the longest serving entertainment chief for any of the four networks.CBS finished the most recent television season with the most viewers by a wide margin, and finished second to NBC in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic.In an interview, Leslie Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, described the move as “an easy and smooth transition, which is what we like here.”But it caught some off guard because last year Ms. Tassler was given a new title, chairwoman, and a contract extension through 2017. In the last several months, however, Ms. Tassler expressed that she was “burnt out,” Mr. Moonves said. “Her intention truly was to do the contract through 2017,” he said. “But we’re close enough where she said, ‘I have a contract, I’ll honor the contract but I’d rather not.’ It happens with people and she’s been doing this a long time.” Ms. Tassler said in an interview that she told Mr. Moonves: “I know I’m done. I don’t have any doubts.” Mr. Moonves said that he wanted to announce the succession plan between the debut of Stephen Colbert, which happened last week, and the beginning of the new television season that kicks off next week.Ms. Tassler, 58, said she was publishing a book next year and would work on theater productions. Ms. Tassler’s run as head of entertainment was a strong one, and she was one of a small number of women television executives in charge of an entertainment division. CBS was the most-viewed network for 12 out of the last 13 years, and delivered several hits, including “The Big Bang Theory,” “How I Met Your Mother” and “The Good Wife.” “Our shows are the distance runners,” she said. “They are these powerhouses that continue to shed dividends across the entire corporation.”But even though ratings remain strong, there have been signs of diminished momentum. Ratings for procedurals like “Elementary” and “Hawaii Five-0” have fallen in the 18-to-49-year-old demographic important to advertisers. “The Big Bang Theory” will begin its ninth season next week and there are no clear comedic successors in the lineup.Still, compared to the other networks, CBS has endured consistent success during a time of transition for the television industry as a whole, as ratings decline, viewing habits continue to evolve with the rise of online services and the number of scripted television programs grows ever larger. An estimated 400 scripted shows are expected to be broadcast by year’s end, nearly double the number from six years ago. Before Ms. Tassler became head of entertainment, she helped develop the “CSI” franchise that has produced several successful shows for CBS. (The original “CSI” will go off the air later this month.) Before joining CBS, Ms. Tassler worked at Warner Brothers Television with Mr. Moonves, where they developed hit shows like “ER.”Mr. Geller, 43, joined CBS in 2001. In his most recent position he oversaw creative affairs for the CBS and CBS Studios combined department. Mr. Geller said he was told of his appointment in late July but was surprised to hear the news about Ms. Tassler. “It’s right up there with some of the biggest shocks ever,” he said. “There’s just never change at CBS, that’s the perception, and in some ways, it’s true.” Of his plans for the network, he said: “It’s important we find our next ‘NCIS’ and our next ‘Big Bang Theory’ and our next ‘Survivor.’ Those are our goals every year but it’s increasingly becoming more and more important. We have a very stable schedule but we need to keep finding new hits.”Advertisement