By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 16, 2015
The jury deliberating whether three former executives of Dewey & LeBoeuf schemed to manipulate the finances of the once-prominent law firm to defraud investors and bank lenders did not take long getting down to work.Less than a half-hour into the deliberations Wednesday afternoon, the jury of seven women and five men sent out its first note seeking information about some of the evidence presented during the more than three-month trial in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan. If the tenor of the note is any indication of what is to come, the deliberations in the trial of Steven H. Davis, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders could be a long one.In the note, the jurors asked for a list of the more than 40 witnesses who testified during the case, summaries of the exhibits presented as evidence, an explanation of some of the criminal charges and a list of the more than 50 specific acts that prosecutors contend the men committed to further the scheme.The trial judge, Justice Robert M. Stolz, told jurors that the prosecutors and defense lawyers needed time to consider the request and would take it up in the morning. Justice Stolz sent the jurors home and told them to plan on resuming their deliberations in the morning.AdvertisementThe three defendants are each charged with dozens of felony counts, including grand larceny and scheme to defraud, that could land them in prison for many years if convicted. In a daring move, the lawyers for Mr. Davis, the firm’s former chairman; Mr. DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer, chose not to call any witnesses to testify, believing the defense had poked enough holes in the prosecution’s case during cross-examination.AdvertisementThe trial of the former Dewey executives is one of the most prominent white-collar cases brought by Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney.Peirce R. Moser, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, concluded his multiday closing statement earlier on Wednesday. Mr. Moser wrapped up his summation by telling jurors the defendants had lied for four years and “they lied until there was no lie left to spin.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawyers for the defendants, in their closing statements last week, stressed that internal law firm emails introduced by the prosecutors were not as incriminating as they might seem and that seven former Dewey employees, who pleaded guilty during the investigation and testified at trial, had initially told prosecutors they did not believe the accounting adjustments they had made had broken any laws.The judge told the jury that just because something is deemed an accounting adjustment does not make it improper and that prosecutors must prove the defendants had a “conscious intent to cheat.” He also said prosecutors had to prove the defendants had the intent to deceive investors in a $150 million private placement in April 2010 about the health of the firm’s finances.Mr. Vance’s office contends that beginning in late 2008, at the height of the financial crisis, the defendants conspired with others at the law firm to make up for a shortfall in revenue by resorting to a series of illegal accounting gimmicks. Prosecutors contend the former leaders of Dewey continued to hide what they were doing from the firm’s lenders and investors right up until Dewey filed for bankruptcy in May 2012.The trial has been closely watched, with one legal newswire, Law360, live blogging the event, while publications have live-tweeted portions of the trial. But the testimony has often been dull and focused on arcane accounting treatments, like when it is proper to apply revenue collected early in a year to the one just concluded.In a sign of declining interest as the trial went on, the large courtroom at 100 Centre Street had a standing-room-only audience when prosecutors gave their opening arguments in late May. By the time Justice Stolz began delivering the jury instructions, fewer than 20 people were in the audience.A version of this article appears in print on September 17, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Dewey & LeBoeuf Accounting Fraud Case Goes to Jury.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.