By JAD MOUAWADOCT. 31, 2015
Two of Europe’s leading airlines said on Saturday that they would avoid flying over Egypt’s Sinai region as a precaution after a Russian commercial jet crashed earlier in the day, killing all 224 people aboard.Lufthansa of Germany and Air France said they would reroute flights over the region until the circumstances of the accident were established, a sign that airlines have become a lot more cautious in recent years about flying over regions involved in conflicts.Many airlines already avoid several countries in the Middle East, including much of Iraq and Syria. But the industry’s perception of risk changed dramatically after a commercial airliner, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, was shot down by a Russian-made missile while cruising over eastern Ukraine last year.Rerouting a flight generally means taking a longer route, which adds flying time, fuel and costs. But the attack on Flight 17 prompted the International Civil Aviation Organization, the United Nations’ aviation body, and the International Air Transport Association, the airline industry trade group, to review policies and look for ways to share information more promptly about conflict zones.AdvertisementFor now, airlines generally run their own risk assessments. After Russia fired missiles from the Caspian Sea into Syria, flying over Iran, several airlines, including Singapore Airlines and Etihad Airways, temporarily avoided Iranian airspace. They eventually resumed flights. Others, including United Airlines, cautioned their pilots to avoid Syrian and Iranian airspace while flying to the Arabian Peninsula or India.AdvertisementOfficials said it was too soon to determine what happened to the Russian charter flight, an Airbus A321-200 with 217 passengers and seven crew members onboard. It was flying to St. Petersburg from the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh.The plane disappeared from radar screens about 25 minutes after it took off.But adding to the immediate confusion, an Islamist group operating in the region for years issued a claim of responsibility several hours after the crash.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An armed insurgency pitting government troops and Islamist forces in Egypt’s Sinai has escalated recently. Early last year, Islamist rebels shot down a government helicopter with a surface-to-air missile. The attack raised concerns about the growing availability of sophisticated weaponry that became available after the chaotic collapse of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime in Libya.These manpads, or man-portable air defense systems, can bring down commercial airliners if they are flying at low altitude, as they do during takeoffs and landings. But their range is limited and they cannot reach an aircraft flying at its cruising altitude. (Those missiles are different than the much more advanced Russian-made Buk missile that took down the Malaysian Boeing 777 last year.)On Saturday, the Russian charter flight was flying at 31,000 feet when it disappeared from radar contact, well beyond the range of the shoulder-fired manpad missile, which can reach about 20,000 feet.Still, the American authorities had become concerned about risks to airlines in the Sinai region. In March, the Federal Aviation Administration said that airlines operating in the Sinai Peninsula were at “potential risk from hazards associated with extremist activities, which pose a significant risk to the safe operation of U.S. civil aviation.”The F.A.A. advised airlines to avoid flying below 26,000 feet in that region, citing the specific risk from manpad systems, as well as small-arms fire, and indirect mortar fire or rockets targeting airports in the region.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Lufthansa and Air France to Avoid Sinai Region Routes Pending Details of Crash .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.