AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinHarlan Levy, a top deputy to Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, is leaving state government to return to the prominent litigation firm where he previously worked.Mr. Levy, who served Mr. Schneiderman as chief deputy attorney general and counsel, will announce on Thursday that he is stepping down after more than four years to rejoin Boies, Schiller & Flexner in New York. Mr. Levy has played a critical role in helping oversee a number of significant investigations by the state attorney general’s office, including one that resulted in banks’ paying $60 billion in fines for selling flawed mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the financial crisis.In a statement, Mr. Schneiderman called Mr. Levy one of his “closest friends” and one of the “best legal minds” in the state.Mr. Levy is the author of “And the Blood Cried Out,” a highly regarded book about the use of DNA evidence in the courtroom.He was one of Mr. Schneiderman’s first hires after the attorney general was elected to office in November 2010.Besides the investigation into the role of Wall Street banks in marketing mortgage-backed securities, Mr. Levy also helped oversee the prosecutions of more than 70 state and local officials and an effort to get smartphone manufacturers to develop technology that renders stolen phones inoperable.Before joining Mr. Schneiderman’s office, Mr. Levy was a litigation partner at Boies Schiller for a decade. At the firm, whose founders include David Boies, Mr. Levy focused on complex civil and criminal matters. He will return to Boies Schiller as a partner.It is not uncommon for lawyers to return to their previous firms after leaving government service. Over the years, some have criticized this so-called revolving door, suggesting it leads to too many potential conflicts of interest.Mr. Boies’s firm represents Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the American International Group, in a long-running civil fraud lawsuit filed by the New York attorney general’s office. Mr. Levy has not been involved in that litigation.Advertisement