By REUTERSSEPT. 16, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Consumer prices in the United States fell unexpectedly in August as gasoline prices resumed their decline and a strong dollar curbed the cost of other goods, complicating the Federal Reserve’s coming decision whether to raise interest rates.The Labor Department said on Wednesday that its Consumer Price Index slipped 0.1 percent, the first decline since January, after edging up 0.1 percent in July. In the 12 months through August, the index rose 0.2 percent, after a similar gain in July.Signs of a disinflationary trend reasserting itself contrast with an otherwise fairly healthy economy and a rapidly tightening labor market. They highlight the quandary that Fed officials face as they contemplate raising interest rates for the first time in nearly a decade.The central bank’s policy-setting committee was scheduled to start a two-day meeting on Wednesday. While solid data on consumer spending, housing and employment have been supportive of a rate increase, the case for higher borrowing costs has been undermined by recent global financial markets turmoil.AdvertisementThe so-called core C.P.I., which strips out food and energy costs, rose 0.1 percent last month after a similar increase in July. The muted gains in the core index reflect the dollar’s impact on the cost of imported goods.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the 12 months through August, the core C.P.I. increased 1.8 percent. It was the fifth time in six months that the 12-month change was 1.8 percent. The Fed tracks the personal consumption expenditures price index, excluding food and energy, which is running well below the core C.P.I.AdvertisementLast month, gasoline prices fell 4.1 percent, the biggest drop since January, after rising 0.9 percent in July. Gasoline prices had risen for three consecutive months. Food prices gained 0.2 percent as the cost of eggs increased 7.7 percent.Egg prices are now up 35.3 percent from a year ago, reflecting the effects of avian flu that struck some parts of the country early in the year. Prices for tobacco and apparel increased. However, airline fares fell 3.1 percent and used-car prices declined for a fourth consecutive month.The rental index increased 0.3 percent last month, matching July’s gain. Demand for rental housing is being driven by rising formation of households as the sturdy labor market encourages young adults to leave their parents’ homes.A version of this article appears in print on September 17, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumer Prices Fall, Aided by Decrease in Gas Prices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.