
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 31, 2015
This interview with Mary A. Laschinger, C.E.O. of the Veritiv Corporation, a distribution services company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences?A. I grew up in a large family — with four brothers and three sisters — on a dairy farm in rural Wisconsin. It wasn’t a big commercial farm. Everybody worked on the farm to support the family.I didn’t appreciate it at the time, but I learned a lot from my father about running a business. Back then, the government got more involved in farming and, in particular, with family farms, because so many small farmers were struggling. There were more and more subsidies out there, and my father was astute enough to take advantage of those opportunities, but in a way that was sustainable. We never had the financial difficulties that many small farms had.Did you have certain jobs on the farm?I was third from the youngest, and the older kids often had to go outside and do a lot of the farm work. I was relegated to doing laundry and cleaning the house. I remember doing laundry for 10 people when I was 10 years old. I cleaned the house and scrubbed floors. My mom didn’t believe in a mop. It was on your hands and knees.AdvertisementWhat about your college years?When I got out of high school, I didn’t go to college right away. I went to tech school, worked for a couple of years and then went to college. I didn’t start college until I was 21.Because?It seemed intimidating at the time. I was a B-average student, and I didn’t have enough self-confidence, or enough direction or guidance, to go to college.So I got a fashion merchandising degree, and then I went into retail and managed a department in a store. I did that well, and that probably built up my confidence. I wanted to do more, and I quit to get my four-year degree. I worked about 30 hours a week to put myself through school.I studied business management, but I didn’t know what I wanted to do after graduation. I think a college adviser suggested, “You should look into logistics.” I said, “What is that?” I was intrigued, and I studied supply chain outside school and was fortunate to be picked up by Kimberly-Clark.As part of the interview process, they took me into a 100-year-old paper mill. They were taking trees, debarking them, making chips, making pulp. It was dirty, it was old, but I thought it was fascinating.AdvertisementAnd I was breaking ground in some of these areas because oftentimes I was the only woman. There were some pretty rough people in those kinds of environments, but growing up on a farm helped me with that. I had four brothers, and I knew how to hold my own. I would stand my ground, but use a little bit of humor and humility rather than being offended and arrogant.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What were some important leadership lessons you’ve learned over your career?I learned an important one when I first became a general manager of a $150 million business for International Paper. I was euphoric. I thought, I’ve finally made it. That feeling lasted about two weeks.What happened?I looked around and realized we weren’t doing very well. But the most important thing was that I said to myself, “Why do I feel this huge sense of responsibility and accountability today that I didn’t feel two weeks ago?” I had to do a lot of soul-searching to try to figure out the answer.It dawned on me that in my previous roles, I didn’t feel like I could impact the results of the company. That’s when I got my first life lesson about how you’ve got to engage the people of the company — around strategy and decisions — to make things happen. I will never forget that because I felt very alone for a while until I figured out that I didn’t do anything by myself.And so we developed a guiding coalition for the company, with people who were influencers in the company. They didn’t necessarily have the top roles, but we got them together to talk about where we were as a company and what was working and what was not working.I had a few leaders on my executive team who just flat-out refused to participate. Eventually they left. But employees became more interested in what we were doing as a company, and they cared more about what was happening. Morale was better.How do you hire?I think about it on three dimensions, in this order. First, I want to know their values. Are they a team player? Are they an egomaniac? Are they here to help the enterprise succeed? Will they help their colleagues succeed? Or is it just about them and their team?The next thing I test for is their willingness to learn and grow. We are always confronted with change at a mind-boggling pace. We need people who are willing to learn and grow and adapt. We can’t teach willingness. They have to want to adjust.Then I look at their technical capabilities.We can teach them any number of things, but we can’t teach them a willingness to learn, nor can we teach them their values. But if we can get those first two right, we will have the right people, the right team. We will be aligned. I’ve been operating on that philosophy for quite a while, and it’s paid dividends.And so what questions do you ask?I’ll ask how they get things done. I want specifics. Then I’ll listen for the “I”s versus the “we”s. Did they engage across the organization? What did they have to do to get it done? Tell me about some successes with people specifically, good outcomes and bad outcomes. I’ll ask about their willingness to take on different assignments they’ve had. Why did you do that? What did you learn?Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Leadership With Its Roots on the Farm  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »