AdvertisementSupported byBy Stacy CowleyThere’s a natural order to how small-business acquisitions typically work: Big companies buy smaller ones. But in one recent takeover, things ran in reverse — the guppy swallowed the whale.Late last year, Daddies Board Shop, a small surf and skateboarding retailer in Portland, Ore., acquired CCS, a struggling skateboard business being jettisoned by Foot Locker, one of the sports industry’s behemoths. Now, Daddies is wrestling with two unusual challenges: reviving a well-known but battered brand that outlived its prime, and abruptly becoming a much larger business.CCS isn’t well known outside the skateboard industry, but to those who took up skating in the 1980s and ’90s, its name is iconic. Founded in 1985 as California Cheap Skates, the company sold skateboarding gear and apparel through mail-order catalogs sent out by the millions. In the pre-Internet era, it offered young skaters a window on a far greater range of products than they could find in their local shops. The catalogs developed a cult following.“I wanted to buy everything,” recalled Peter Schmeck, 50, the founder of Skate the Planet, a news and reviews website. “They were one of the best-known brands. Everyone wanted to wear their gear and ride their boards.”As online shopping emerged and CCS’s catalog business eroded, the company bounced through a series of owners. Alloy, an e-commerce company, bought it for $53 million in 2000 in a stock-based deal; eight years later, Foot Locker acquired CCS for $103 million in cash.Almost immediately, things went downhill. CCS’s sales never lived up to Foot Locker’s expectations, and the company openly struggled to understand CCS’s brand. A line of bricks-and-mortar retail stores turned into an expensive debacle. In June 2014, Foot Locker gave up and announced plans to close CCS.Daron Horwitz, the owner of Daddies, saw Foot Locker’s news release and leapt into action. He had not planned to expand his company through acquisitions, but the opportunity to scoop up the CCS brand seemed too good to pass up.“We just pounced,” he said. “They were receptive to the idea. I didn’t think we would be able to afford it, but it was a no-brainer to try.”It’s rare for a small business to buy a brand from a big one because most large retailers would rather end a tiny, failing brand than sell it. But a business like CCS, one that appeals to a small but loyal customer base, might be better off in the hands of a small company like Mr. Horwitz’s rather than a larger retail conglomerate.There are some companies where any brand that’s not selling $1 billion is not worth keeping, said Mickey Marks, the managing director of Lisa Marks & Associates, a licensing firm that specializes in nostalgia brands. “It could be a very viable business for someone, but within the structure of a big, multinational group, it may not make sense.”Mr. Horwitz, who has a law degree and an M.B.A., had negotiated acquisitions before; he worked in finance before buying Daddies in 2011 from the shop’s founder. He won’t say what he and his business partners paid for CCS, and Foot Locker did not respond to calls for comment. Both sides, though, appear to have walked away happy.In November 2014, Daddies took control of what remained of CCS: a domain name, some social media accounts and a list of around seven million customers.“The key for us was making sure that we could pay little enough for the business to have plenty of margin of safety,” Mr. Horwitz said. “We weren’t betting on it being anywhere near as big as it had been. We assumed the business could be a small fraction of that and still make the math work.”But CCS brought with it a daunting new set of challenges. Mr. Horwitz now owned an online retailer with no website, no e-commerce system and no inventory.Nearly all of Daddies’ sales are made online, but Mr. Horwitz decided at the outset to keep his two brands separate. They appeal to different markets, he believes, and have distinct product lines. While Daddies makes most of its money from hardgoods like boards and gear, CCS’s strength had historically been in shoes and apparel, a field that Mr. Horwitz knew little about.He decided to plunge in and learn on the fly — with, predictably, some mixed results.Mr. Horwitz shut down CCS.com for a month while his tech team constructed a new website and online sales system. In late December, he reopened the site with inventory scrounged from Daddies and from the end-of-season goods his vendors still had in stock. Customers were not impressed.“We got a lot of complaints about how our selection was pretty awful,” Mr. Horwitz said. Still, shoppers kept buying — in volumes that overwhelmed his staff. Around 15 percent of the orders that shipped in January had problems.The expanded company had to adapt to unfamiliar business rhythms.Daddies manages its inventory nearly in real time, ordering goods from vendors with lead times of a week or less. But the apparel and shoe industries operate seasonally, requiring retailers to commit months in advance to large preorders. Mr. Horwitz relied on vendors’ sales representatives — most of whom knew CCS and its history better than he did — to help him figure out what to stock.The new business dwarfs his existing one in many ways.“This fall is our first full buying season for CCS,” he said. “In the first two weeks of August, we received more inventory than we had ever had in our entire warehouse before the deal.”Ten months in, things are starting to stabilize. Mr. Horwitz now has a full-time staff of 39, more than twice the number he had last year. The problem rate on customers’ orders is down to 2 percent. The time it takes for newly arrived products to be processed, photographed and posted online for sale has dropped to six days from three weeks.A line of CCS-branded apparel is being introduced gradually, and in August, the company released the first of what it intends to be a monthly series of digital catalogs designed to recapture the feel of CCS’s treasured paper catalogs.But will the momentum last? Can a fading brand that peaked more than a decade ago recapture its old customers and appeal to a generation of new ones?Mr. Schmeck, of Skate the Planet, says CCS’s customer service and credibility among skateboarders took a beating during the Foot Locker years — and the retail field is far more crowded now, especially online, than it was in CCS’s heyday.Still, he’s happy to see the brand survive, and he said many skate shoppers preferred to stick with specialty retailers: “I certainly don’t want to buy skate gear through Amazon.”Truly beloved brands tend to endure rough patches without too much lasting damage, Mr. Marks said.“I think human nature is that, over time, we remember the positive things,” he said. “There is a residual level of awareness and love out there for many brands. The half-life of that varies a lot from brand to brand.”Mr. Horwitz knows that reviving CCS is an uphill battle. “When you buy a brand that’s struggling, it’s like catching a falling knife,” he said. But he likes the trajectory he is seeing. CCS’s August sales were three times as high as Daddies’. The combined company is profitable, and by the end of 2016, he is projecting annualized sales of $20 million, with CCS generating 70 percent of the revenue.If that forecast holds, his company won’t be a guppy much longer. Snacking on whales might turn out to be a pretty effective way for some small fish to grow.Advertisement