AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe appeals court decision in United States v. Newman that reversed the convictions of two hedge fund managers caused the Justice Department to take the rare step of asking the Supreme Court to overturn what it called the “stark and overt departure from this court’s definition of insider trading.” But an opinion issued on Monday by one of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s internal judges might have undercut that argument when it found that the Newman case did not work much of a change in the law.That is the odd situation created by the initial decision of Jason S. Patil, an administrative law judge, dismissing insider trading charges against Joseph C. Ruggieri, a former trader at Wells Fargo. Add to that the fact that the decision also goes against the accepted wisdom that internal judges favor the S.E.C., giving it something of a “home court advantage,” and you have a case that knits together two different areas that have raised a great deal of discussion lately.The S.E.C. filed administrative charges in September 2014 against Mr. Ruggieri for reportedly receiving tips from Gregory T. Bolan Jr., an analyst at Wells Fargo who was also charged, about ratings changes on six companies. Mr. Ruggieri made approximately $117,000 for Wells Fargo by trading right before the announcement of the new ratings, according to the S.E.C. Mr. Bolan settled the case by agreeing to pay a $75,000 civil penalty, while Mr. Ruggieri proceeded to a hearing presided over by Judge Patil.To prove a securities fraud case against a recipient of inside information, known as a tippee, the S.E.C. has to show that the source breached a fiduciary duty by passing along the information. The Supreme Court’s decision in Dirks v. S.E.C.  sets forth the basic requirement for showing that breach: “The test is whether the insider personally will benefit, directly or indirectly, from his disclosure. Absent some personal gain, there has been no breach of duty to stockholders.”Proving the benefit is where the Newman decision has made life more difficult for prosecutors and the S.E.C. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan rejected the government’s argument that mere friendship was sufficient to establish the benefit flowing from the recipient to the source. Instead, the appeals court said, the government must show a “meaningfully close personal relationship” in which there was “an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”It was that phrase that led the Justice Department to seek a Supreme Court review because it appeared to conflict with the Dirks decision by requiring a higher level of proof of the benefit needed to prove illegal tipping of inside information. A brief filed on Sept. 8 by Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the solicitor general, argues that the Newman decision effectively instructs “sophisticated investment professionals” on how to trade on confidential information while insulating themselves from possible charges, which will have “a profound destabilizing effect” on insider trading law.Judge Patil adopted the benefit analysis of the decision in the Newman case, rejecting the S.E.C.’s argument that it should not apply. He then concluded there was not a sufficiently close relationship to support finding a benefit to Mr. Bolan from passing along the information to Mr. Ruggieri. Thus, even though the evidence supported the conclusion that Mr. Ruggieri had traded on four stocks on inside information from Mr. Bolan about his ratings changes, there was no violation.On the question of whether the Newman decision is consistent with the tipping analysis in the Dirks decision, Judge Patil expressly disagreed with the Justice Department’s position that the appeals court had altered the law in a way that required the Supreme Court to step in. “I do not, however, read Newman as conflicting with Dirks, but rather as clarifying the standard where proof of a personal benefit is based on a personal relationship or friendship,” he wrote.This is where the complaints about the S.E.C.’s use of its internal judges in complex cases become relevant. The agency received the authority in the Dodd-Frank act to file most enforcement actions seeking monetary penalties in an administrative proceeding rather than going to a Federal District Court. This has caused great consternation among securities lawyers, who claim that the proceedings give the S.E.C. too much of an advantage because of limited rights to discover evidence and the lack of a jury. Another concern is that the administrative judges, who are hired by the agency, will favor the S.E.C., even if only unintentionally.The S.E.C. issued a memorandum outlining the considerations that can lead it to file an administrative case rather than going to Federal District Court. One reason to use administrative judges is that they “develop extensive knowledge and experience concerning the federal securities laws.” If the benefit of using the administrative process is that someone with expertise will be hearing the case, that lends greater credibility to Judge Patil’s conclusion that the Newman and Dirks decisions are not in conflict, despite what Mr. Verrilli, the solicitor general, argued.It would not be the first time that there was a split in the government about how far the law should extend. In the Dirks case itself, the solicitor general took the position in a brief that the S.E.C.’s finding of insider trading should be overturned, a position the agency opposed but one that the Supreme Court agreed with.The decision in favor of Mr. Ruggieri is not the final word on the case as the S.E.C. staff can appeal to the full commission, asking it to reject Judge Patil’s analysis of the impact of the Newman decision by finding an insider trading violation. But that may pose a problem for Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the S.E.C., who said at a DealBook conference last December that the Newman opinion was “overly narrow.” Mr. Ruggieri may challenge her involvement in the case because of possible bias.Judge Patil’s opinion favoring the defendant in an administrative proceeding creates an interesting situation. It supports the position of Andrew J. Ceresney, the director of the S.E.C.’s enforcement division and a staunch advocate for filing cases before internal judges, that the “use of the administrative forum is eminently proper, appropriate and fair to respondents.”Yet lawyers from his division are likely to dispute the applicability of Newman’s benefit analysis to Mr. Ruggieri’s case, arguing that Judge Patil misapplied the law of insider trading. On the other hand, defense lawyers who might otherwise object to an administrative proceeding in an insider trading case are likely to celebrate the decision.In the end, it may be the Justice Department’s petition to the Supreme Court for review, which is set to be decided on Sept. 28, that is affected the most because of the question Judge Patil raises about whether there is actually any conflict with the Dirks decision. Without some disarray in the law, the justices are much less likely to take the case for further consideration.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement