By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINSEPT. 18, 2015
An appellate court has temporarily put a hold on an administrative securities fraud action filed against the private equity financier Lynn Tilton.A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan imposed the stay on Thursday while considering Ms. Tilton’s challenge to a decision by the Securities and Exchange Commission to try her before an administrative law judge.On Wednesday, the panel heard arguments in the case, which poses a challenge to the S.E.C.’s growing use of administrative law judges, rather than the federal district courts, to hear enforcement actions.The administrative trial involving Ms. Tilton and her firm, Patriarch Partners, had been set to begin on Oct. 13.AdvertisementLawyers for Ms. Tilton contend that the use of an administrative judge to consider an enforcement action is unconstitutional because the S.E.C.’s system for selecting administrative law judges violates the “appointments clause” of the United States Constitution.AdvertisementMs. Tilton’s legal challenge is one of several now winding their way through the federal court system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In arguing before the appellate panel, David M. Zornow, one of Ms. Tilton’s lawyers, said his client was “not trying to kill the case,” but trying to get a fair hearing on the civil charges.The S.E.C. filed its action against Ms. Tilton and her firm in March. Securities regulators contended that Ms. Tilton misled investors about the valuations for several collateralized loan obligation funds that her firm had managed and that provided financing to a number of distressed companies.Ms. Tilton, one of Wall Street’s more colorful personalities, is accused by regulators of defrauding her investors by concealing the poor performance of assets her firm had invested in.Ms. Tilton, who calls herself “the turnaround queen," gained celebrity on Wall Street when she sent a racy Christmas card to some of her clients in the late 1990s. On the card, a scantily clad Ms. Tilton posed in knee-high boots while holding a whip.She has since said she regrets sending the card, which has been fodder for the Dealbreaker blog for years.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.