AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Fiona Maharg-BravoPatrick Drahi, the French cable king, appears to be keeping his powder dry after snapping up Cablevision for $17.7 billion, including debt.It is the second foray into the United States for his telecommunications company, Altice, after its recent $9.1 billion acquisition of Suddenlink, and it will create the market’s fourth-largest company.The valuation of Cablevision, at just under 10 times its adjusted operating cash flow — a variant of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebtida — to June looks high, but savings will help. And it’s important to note that Altice isn’t contributing much cash.The move isn’t exactly a surprise given Mr. Drahi’s ambitions in the United States, even if it comes earlier than expected. The deal for Suddenlink hasn’t even closed. The rationale for the larger deal looks similar: Hack costs to the bone. Cablevision, which operates in the New York metropolitan area, already has high broadband penetration but seems ripe for Altice’s rigorous cost treatment. Its cable unit delivered Ebitda margins of 32 percent last year – well below Suddenlink’s 39 percent Ebitda and the mid-to-high 40s achieved in some of Altice’s other subsidiaries.Altice expects $900 million in synergies, as well as $150 million in savings on capital expenditures, which would reduce the headline enterprise value to 6.1 times Ebitda. But savings imply an overall margin of 44 percent, Deutsche Bank analysts say, a tall order given the high content costs in the United States. There may also be economies of scale from scrunching the two together.As with the Suddenlink deal, Altice is contributing only a sliver of equity. It will put in $3.3 billion of cash by issuing shares. The balance will come from $14.5 billion in new and existing debt at Cablevision, plus cash on hand. BC Partners and Canada Pension Plan Investment Board have the option to buy 30 percent of the equity, reducing the costs further.This leaves leverage at Cablevision – which will retain an independent capital structure – at more than seven times. But Altice thinks it can get that down to 4.9 times including synergies.All this makes the latest multibillion-dollar deal a fairly low-risk proposition for Altice shareholders. Debt should be equivalent to five times 2016 Ebitda after the deal, analysts at Goldman Sachs estimate.Yet there is a clear risk of overreach, considering recent jumbo deals in Europe. Altice has yet to prove it can make its United States deals work.Fiona Maharg-Bravo is Reuters Breakingviews Madrid correspondent. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement