
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
SEPT. 17, 2015
Give Donald Trump credit for this: The Republican presidential candidate has done more to put a stake in the heart of the carried-interest tax loophole in the last month than the Obama administration has in the last six and a half years.That’s not for want of trying by the White House. President Obama has proposed closing the loophole in his budget proposals. He has tried to get rid of it as part of bargains on tax reform and budgets. There have also been efforts to kill it in Congress.Yet it lives on, lining the pockets of billionaire financiers and hedge fund and private equity managers by giving them preferential tax treatment on a large portion of their compensation.It’s not just Republicans who have kept it alive. Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, has voted to change the law. But he has long opposed any overhaul that singled out his wealthy Wall Street constituents and donors when other types of investment partnerships — oil and gas, real estate, timber — also benefit from the lower “carried interest” tax.AdvertisementThen came the Trump phenomenon. Last month, he said he would close the carried-interest loophole. “The hedge fund guys didn’t build this country,” Mr. Trump told John Dickerson on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” “These are guys that shift paper around and they get lucky.” He continued: “The hedge fund guys are getting away with murder.”AdvertisementAnd at Wednesday night’s debate, Mr. Trump raised the issue again. “The hedge fund guys won’t like me as much as they like me right now — I know ’em all,” he said. “But they’ll pay more.”Earlier Wednesday, in a speech to the Business Roundtable, President Obama again called for carried interest to be taxed as ordinary income rather than at the lower capital gains rate. He put some teeth into the proposal by linking it to a resolution of the looming budget negotiations and threat of a government shutdown.Even Mr. Schumer threw his support behind this latest idea on Wednesday, saying that treating carried interest like ordinary income “would find a wealth of bipartisan support” and could pave the way to a budget deal this fall.Other presidential candidates have piled on. All the Democratic candidates are on record against it. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont introduced legislation in July to get rid of preferential “carried interest” tax treatment, and has argued that President Obama has the authority to unilaterally abolish it. Last week Jeb Bush, no populist maverick, jumped on the anti-carried-interest bandwagon.With the emergence of what seems a rare bipartisan consensus, the arguments against closing the loophole — both political and economic — seem to be crumbling.“A year ago no one was talking about this,” said Victor Fleischer, a law professor at the University of San Diego, who has been crusading against the carried-interest loophole since 2004 and told me it was the issue that had defined his career. “It’s fascinating that there’s been this resurgence of interest.” (Professor Fleischer is a contributor to The New York Times’s DealBook.)Eric Toder, co-director of the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center in Washington, said that Mr. Trump really put carried interest back in play. “It’s a good populist talking point,” Mr. Toder said.AdvertisementCarried interest is the percentage of investment gains that hedge fund managers, private equity executives and venture capital partners take as compensation, usually in addition to a management fee. (“Two and twenty” has become Wall Street jargon for these funds’ typical compensation scheme, meaning 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of any gains.) Because the “carry” is tied to performance, it is treated like an investment and subjected to the lower capital gains tax rate, rather than as ordinary income, even though most managers don’t put any of their own money at risk.The loophole taps into the public’s insecurities over the fairness of the tax system, and whether it unfairly benefits the wealthiest Americans.“It symbolizes how the 1 percent, or the one-tenth of 1 percent, can exploit the tax and legal system to their own benefit in ways ordinary people cannot,” Professor Fleischer said. “If you’re a teacher or a firefighter or a journalist, you can’t transform your labor income into capital gains.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The issue has especially resonated with Mr. Trump’s supporters, because it demonstrates that he isn’t beholden to big-money interests because he can finance his campaign with his own money.And for other Republican candidates, there’s the specter of the Mitt Romney campaign. Exactly how much Mr. Romney benefited from the carried-interest loophole could not be determined, since he refused to release his tax returns before 2010. But as a former Bain Capital partner, he received substantial carried interest — 31 percent of his 2010 and 2011 income, The Boston Globe reported. President Obama pilloried Mr. Romney over the issue during the 2012 campaign.While distinguishing between ordinary income and capital gains can be complex, “this one looks especially ugly to people,” said Mr. Toder, who favors repealing the loophole. “Look at salesmen who work on commission. Their compensation is at risk, too, but they don’t get to treat their income like a capital gain.”And the people who benefit are among the richest in the country. Even though most hedge funds haven’t had a very good year, last year the top 25 hedge fund managers earned a combined $11.62 billion, according to Institutional Investor, or an average of $467 million each. The latest data from the Internal Revenue Service for the top 400 earners, a list studded with hedge fund and private equity managers, show that in 2012 they paid the second-lowest average federal tax rate since the data has been collected, a mere 16.7 percent, in large part because much of their income (an average of 57 percent) is taxed at the lower capital gains rate.That’s one reason the loophole has survived as long as it has. “The group that benefits may be small, but they’re rich and they give a lot of money” to politicians, said Daniel Shaviro, a specialist in tax policy and law professor at New York University School of Law. “To everyone else it can seem a vague talking point. It’s classic interest group politics.”Estimates of how much revenue closing the loophole would raise vary, in part because it’s hard to know if hedge fund managers and others who benefit would alter their behavior by holding assets longer, in that way deferring taxes. The Treasury estimates it would raise $18 billion over 10 years; Professor Fleischer contends it would be 10 times that much, $180 billion.AdvertisementIn Washington, carried interest has become a bargaining chip in contentious negotiations between the White House and Congress. Most politicians would give it up in the right circumstances, and it has always been on the short list of what should be repealed if there were a bipartisan deal.“What’s frustrating is that carried interest is always held hostage to negotiations over tax reform,” said Professor Fleischer. “And tax reform is always coming tomorrow.”In May, Representative Paul Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, blocked an effort to link the carried-interest issue to corporate tax reform, arguing it was an individual tax issue and should be negotiated in that context, perhaps in 2017. But many Republicans have indicated they are not against repealing the loophole, as long as they get something from Democrats in return. (A spokesman for Mr. Ryan said he was not available for comment.)Republican opposition to reform may be harder to sustain now that Mr. Trump and Mr. Bush have gone rogue on the carried-interest issue while also taking populist stances on other economic issues.“If closing the carried-interest loophole, ending subsidies for oil and gas, and tackling inversions are good enough for Donald Trump and Jeb Bush, it ought to be good enough for Republicans in Congress,” Mr. Schumer said this week.Although the political stars seem to be aligning in their favor at last, opponents of the carried-interest tax break aren’t declaring premature victory.“I’m glad it’s on people’s radar,” Professor Fleischer said. “But I’ve learned not to bet on it.” After 11 years fighting the issue, he said, “I’m wiser than I was as a young pup.”A version of this article appears in print on September 18, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Lands Blow Against a Loophole.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »