By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 17, 2015
LONDON — The Irish drug maker Perrigo’s board of directors urged its shareholders on Thursday to reject an unsolicited, hostile bid from Mylan, saying the $27 billion offer undervalued the company.Mylan, a generic drug maker, first offered to buy Perrigo in the spring and was consistently rebuffed. On Monday, it took its takeover bid directly to investors, offering to pay $75 a share in cash and 2.3 of its shares for each share of Perrigo.In a news release, Perrigo said the latest offer undervalued the company and did not adequately compensate shareholders for its “exceptional stand-alone growth prospects.”“The Perrigo board unanimously believes that Mylan’s offer substantially undervalues the company’s current cash flows, business and financial platforms and future growth opportunities,” Joseph C. Papa, the Perrigo president, chief executive and chairman, said in a letter to shareholders.Advertisement“It presents clear risks and would result in value destruction for shareholders, including forcing them into a ‘corporate governance prison’ with extreme anti-shareholder provisions,” he added. “The Perrigo board is not alone in its belief that this transaction would be detrimental to shareholders, and numerous third parties, including leading proxy advisers, sell-side analysts and credit ratings agencies have questioned the economic logic of this transaction.”AdvertisementPerrigo makes many of the store-brand over-the-counter drugs sold at pharmacies. It has about 13,500 employees and posted sales of $4.6 billion in the 2015 fiscal year, which ended in June.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company moved abroad through a so-called inversion deal in 2013. Previously based in Allegan, Mich., Perrigo paid $6.7 billion for Elan, an Irish drug company, and reincorporated in Dublin.The Mylan offer is conditioned on a majority of Perrigo shareholders agreeing to sell their shares.Perrigo shareholders would own about 40 percent of the combined company if the transaction is consummated. The offer is set to expire Nov. 13.Mylan, based in Amsterdam, manufactures generic pharmaceuticals, as well as brand-name medications. It employs about 30,000 people and posted revenue of $7.7 billion in 2014.The company, which was previously based in Pennsylvania, reincorporated overseas after agreeing last year to buy Abbott Laboratories’ generic drug business outside the United States in an all-stock deal that valued business at about $5.3 billion.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.