AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily Steel and Mark ScottWith its $17.7 billion takeover of Cablevision, the European company Altice solidified its position as a bold new player in the fast-consolidating American cable market. And its executives promised on Thursday that this was just the beginning of the company’s empire building in the United States, noting the potential to acquire other cable companies and even mobile networks.Yet Altice’s track record of aggressively cutting costs to increase profitability in the companies it acquires raised immediate concerns among consumer advocates, who say that this cost-cutting model has not always resulted in happy customers when the company’s execution does not live up to its ambitions.Analysts expected Altice to deploy a similar strategy at Cablevision, citing the deal’s lofty price tag — roughly $10 billion in cash and the assumption of $7.7 billion in debt — as well as weaknesses in Cablevision’s business and perhaps overly optimistic expectations of nearly $900 million in savings.No matter how it proceeds, Altice is entering the market with swagger. “There’s a new sheriff in town, and we’re probably going to run it a little differently,” Dexter Goei, Altice’s chief executive, said in an investor conference in New York on Thursday.Altice, which is based in Amsterdam, made its first foray into American cable in May when it agreed to buy Suddenlink Communications, a cable operator based in St. Louis, for $9.1 billion. If Altice’s deal for Cablevision is approved, its expanded American operations would rank among the largest cable operators in the United States, with about 3.7 million video subscribers, behind Comcast, Time Warner Cable, Charter Communications and Cox Communications. “Six months ago, we were number nonexistent, so this is moving fast,” Patrick Drahi, 52, the French-Israeli billionaire who founded and controls Altice, said in the investor meeting. The deal is likely to draw significant concern from United States regulators, particularly as the number of companies in the broadband and cable television markets shrinks.Charter Communications, a cable operator with ties to the billionaire John C. Malone, has already agreed to buy Time Warner Cable. AT&T recently completed a $48.5 billion takeover of the satellite television operator DirecTV.Those deals put control of the country’s broadband and entertainment infrastructure into the hands of a small number of players. Combined, Comcast, Charter (with Time Warner Cable under its tent) and the new Altice would control 81.2 percent of the cable broadband universe in the United States, according to SNL Kagan.Some analysts forecast that if the deal were to spur additional consolidation among cable operators and television network groups, it could signal more woes for consumers. Gene Kimmelman, the chief executive of Public Knowledge, a consumer advocacy group, and a former antitrust official at the Justice Department, said that he expected the regulatory focus to shift from individual companies to the cable industry as a whole, as worries mount over how the companies could increase prices, control what devices connect to their services and influence the development of new streaming video services.“There is a lot of concern about too much power in a few dominant cable firms,” Mr. Kimmelman said. Michael J. Copps, a former Democratic member of the Federal Communications Commission and an adviser to the Common Cause public interest group, added that consumers’ interests were getting lost as big cable companies kept getting larger.“While Wall Street thinks it is fun to watch this battle of the giants, it is never good news for consumers,” Mr. Copps said. “Prices just keep going up. If these companies have all this money to spend, why don’t they go in and build their own broadband and try for some real competition?”Under the terms of the deal, Altice has offered $34.90 in cash for each Cablevision share, a 22 percent premium to the company’s stock price on Wednesday. Altice is also assuming Cablevision debt.Altice said that it would finance the deal with $14.5 billion of new and existing debt, as well as with cash reserves. The deal is expected to close in the first half of 2016.Altice would also acquire the newspapers Newsday and amNewYork in the deal, as well as a local television news channel, News 12 Networks.While the Dolan family, which founded and controls Cablevision, had advocated keeping Newsday and News 12 Networks during the negotiations, Altice insisted on including them. Altice executives said they would not sell the news media properties, even though they were losing money.“They are a core part of the local community that we will continue to invest in,” Mr. Goei said.The Altice deal does not include other companies controlled by the Dolans, including AMC Networks, a cable channel company; and the Madison Square Garden Company, which owns the sports arena, as well as the New York Knicks basketball team and the New York Rangers hockey team.James L. Dolan, Cablevision’s chief executive, said in a statement that his family’s business, started four decades ago by his father, Charles, would be in good hands with Altice.“The time is right for new ownership of Cablevision and its considerable assets,” Mr. Dolan said. “We believe that Patrick Drahi and Altice will be truly worthy successors.”On Wall Street, Cablevision’s stock closed Thursday afternoon at $32.51, up almost 14 percent.Since starting Altice in 2002, Mr. Drahi has earned a reputation for taking on incumbents in some of Europe’s largest markets, and scooping up smaller assets in countries like Switzerland and Belgium that he has developed into larger operations.If the Altice-Cablevision deal is completed, the United States would account for roughly a third of the company’s annual sales.“My model ideally is to bring the U.S. model to Europe, and the European model to the U.S.,” Mr. Drahi said.In Europe, Altice has built a reputation for ruthlessly reducing operating costs. Just as it has elsewhere, Altice would size up Cablevision and “find out item by item where there is potential improvement,” said Nicolas Paulmier, a London-based partner at Cinven, a private equity group that has worked closely with Mr. Drahi as an adviser and shareholder for more than a decade.At the same time, analysts said, Altice invests heavily in new infrastructure — with a focus on upgrading fixed-line networks with the latest fiber-optic technology. The priority, analysts said, is to provide subscribers with faster Internet connection speeds at competitive prices.Mr. Drahi has access to perhaps $30 billion to invest in United States cable television, some analysts said, and might be better able to pour money into Cablevision’s technology than the Dolan family.Much of the $900 million in savings that Altice has identified, Mr. Goei said, would come from streamlining customer service. About 14 million calls each year to Cablevision’s call centers, for example, involved billing questions, he said.“There are significant opportunities to ramp up and become as efficient as we can be,” he said.In France, where Altice bought mobile operator SFR from Vivendi in 2014 and combined it with its cable company, Numericable, the integration has been a mixed success.Revenue per customer is increasing, in part because of higher subscription rates and an effort to push customers with broadband access to purchase more expensive services. But over the last year, SFR-Numericable has also lost more than 1.2 million French subscribers, particularly among prepaid mobile clients, in the face of heated competition from low-cost competitors.Through its acquisition of Suddenlink and its deal for Cablevision, if completed, Altice has created a beachhead for potential future American deals. Mr. Goei told analysts that Altice might eventually look to float a United States stock offering for its American assets. The recent acquisitions represent a natural extension of Altice’s global ambitions, executives said.“France is 3 percent of the world,” Mr. Drahi said. “We have 97 percent of the world to work on.”Mark Scott reported from Rome. Nicola Clark contributed reporting from Paris, and Sydney Ember contributed from New York.Advertisement