

      By STACY COWLEY

SEPT. 19, 2015

Entrepreneurs who have built companies that touch multiple generations share what they have learned along the way.
The founder of the bow-tie line Mo’s Bows is a charismatic salesman with an intuitive eye for fashion. He’s also 13.“He does have a C.E.O. of Mo, and that’s mama,” says Tramica Morris. “Mama makes the decisions.”Moziah Bridges says working with his mom — who sews the ties he designs, fields customer service calls, coordinates his travel and media appearances and makes sure he does his homework each night — is “the most challenging part” of the business. “We’re like fire and ice,” he says. “But at the end of the day, we come up with a good solution.” “I’m 71,” says Dick Yuengling, the fifth-generation owner of the beer maker D. G. Yuengling & Son. “How many years do I have left? I drop dead, and what’s going to happen?”Yuengling, the oldest brewery in America, has a sixth ownership generation waiting in the wings: Mr. Yuengling’s four daughters. Several are now working at the company — though they are prepared for a very long apprenticeship.“He’ll never make the decision to step away from the business,” says Wendy Yuengling Baker, the company’s chief administrative officer. “When he’s no longer here, it’s going to be because he’s gone.” Gicela López, an immigrant who came to the United States as a teenager, didn’t know how to make tacos, but she always had an ambition to run a business. When a friend in 2010 told her about a taqueria that was for sale at a good price, she jumped on it.“We didn’t know anything about cooking,” she says. “At the beginning, we were only making $40 or $50 a day.” Ms. López describes cooking with one hand while holding recipes in the other.Persistence works. The business, Taqueria Izucar, now makes 10 times as much each day as it did when it started, and it wins awards for tacos that the Village Voice recently called “truly transcendent.” To start his fledgling motorcycle helmet business, Skully Systems, Marcus Weller enlisted his brother, Mitchell Weller, as the company’s co-founder and head of operations.When he summoned Mitchell to San Francisco, Marcus says, he warned him, “Failure is still more likely than success right now, and there’s a good chance that I won’t be able to pay you for a while, but you can sleep on my couch.” Mitchell didn’t hesitate. “I was like, ‘This is my brother. He needs my help,’” he says. “As soon as he said it, we just got down to brass tacks and made it happen.” When a family conflict at Market Basket, a New England supermarket chain, led to the ouster of Arthur T. Demoulas, the company’s longtime president, the ensuing backlash drew headlines nationwide. Customers and employees rallied to his defense — and won his job back.Many of Mr. Demoulas’s most profound leadership gestures were made far from the spotlight, employees say. Terry McCarthy, a store manager who has worked at Market Basket for more than 30 years, recalls Mr. Demoulas’s reaction when Mr. McCarthy’s daughter, Devin, was critically wounded in a car accident. “He said a couple of things to me that I’ll take to my grave,” Mr. McCarthy says. The boss worked personally to make sure that Devin had the best possible medical care. “He stood for me in my worst hours,” Mr. McCarthy says. “I’ll stand for him in his worst.” Hisao Hanafusa started doing home carpentry projects when he was 9 years old. Many decades later, he is the owner of the furniture store Miya Shoji, and he still loves nothing more than sculpting wood.Why does he create? "Fun,” he says. “It should be fun, not serious.” “Our business philosophy is something like, ‘Every day we go to work, and we try to make something beautiful,’ ” says his son Zui Hanafusa, who has joined the business. “It’s more of an artist’s way of thinking through business.” Additional production by CATRIONA STUART and ASHWIN SESHAGIRIAdvertisement