AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressAn index of future economic health in the United States edged up slightly in August after a flat reading in July. The outcome over the two-month period signaled that economic growth could be moderating.The Conference Board said on Friday that its index of leading indicators rose 0.1 percent in August after no change in July and a 0.6 percent jump in June. The July reading had initially been reported as a decline of 0.2 percent.A Conference Board economist, Ataman Ozyildirim, said the index was signaling that growth would be moderate through the rest of the year “with little reason to expect growth to pick up substantially.”Economists at BMO Capital Markets said the performance of the index in August mirrored the mixed signals facing the Federal Reserve. The Fed wrapped up a two-day meeting on Thursday with a decision to leave interest rates unchanged given all the uncertainty facing the global economy.Five of the 10 forward-pointing indicators that make up the index increased; the largest contributions came from favorable interest rates and a rise in building permits.The biggest negative factor weighing on the index was the sharp fall in stock prices in August, when investors grew concerned about developments in China, the world’s second-largest economy.Although the Fed decided not to increase its benchmark interest rate, which has been at a record low near zero since late 2008, many economists expect that the central bank will raise rates at least once this year. The Fed has two more meetings this year, in October and December. In a separate report Friday, the Federal Reserve said that rising home values had driven a modest increase in Americans’ household wealth to a new high of $85.7 trillion in the April-June quarter. Americans’ stock portfolios climbed $61 billion in value, while housing wealth increased $499 billion. Total household wealth is up from $85 trillion in the first quarter. Total mortgage debt grew at the fastest level since the recession ended in 2009, the Fed said. And overall household debt, which includes mortgages, student loans, auto loans and credit card debt, increased at the fastest pace in a year. Advertisement