
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

SEPT. 18, 2015
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit — which includes Delaware, home to many large American companies – has issued an opinion that will have a significant impact on Chapter 11 bankruptcy practice.In short, the decision is apt to reinforce the tendency to resolve Chapter 11 cases by what is known as 363 sales, as opposed to traditional reorganization plans.The case involved a debtor described as “once a leading operator of long-term acute care hospitals.” It was heavily indebted, but attempts to sell itself resulted only in offers that would not even clear the secured debt, let alone the more than $100 million of unsecured debt.So the debtor decided to sell itself under Section 363 of the bankruptcy code. But the only bidder to show up was the secured lender, who agreed to forgive most of the secured debt in exchange for all of the debtor’s assets. Essentially, this is the corporate equivalent of a deed in lieu of foreclosure.AdvertisementThe I.R.S. appeared to note that the debtor was going to owe capital gains taxes on this sale, but that collecting those taxes was going to be difficult if the debtor did not have any assets.AdvertisementThe creditors’ committee also expressed some concern that its constituency was going to be left without anything in this deal, and questioned whether this was an appropriate use of the federal bankruptcy code.The secured lender had already agreed to pay the costs of running the bankruptcy case – otherwise the bankruptcy lawyers would not have shown up on Day 1 of the case. Now, it also agreed to make a token payment to the unsecured creditors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With only the I.R.S. left objecting, the bankruptcy court approved the sale, and the appeals court upheld the bankruptcy court’s decision.The I.R.S. complained that it was just as entitled to payment as the bankruptcy professionals, and moreover was clearly entitled to payment before general unsecured creditors.Both the United States Courts of Appeals for the Second Circuit (which includes Manhattan) and the Third Circuit have previously prohibited “gift plans,” where the secured creditor allows some of its recovery under the plan to flow to select junior creditors.In the opinion of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Judge Thomas L. Ambro, who, unlike many appellate judges, is a member of the American College of Bankruptcy, explained that plans involve the distribution of bankruptcy estate assets. Here, however, the payments to professionals and unsecured creditors were coming directly from the secured lender.It’s a subtle distinction, but an important one. If a secured lender takes everything, the lender can parcel it out as it likes. If the lender leaves stuff behind in the estate, even if it was entitled to take that stuff, the normal bankruptcy rules about who gets paid and when apply.This will greatly affect the structuring of bankruptcy plans in the future. More important, it suggests a flexibility in 363 sales that might not exist in traditional reorganization plans, and thus the case is apt to lead to even more quick sales in corporate bankruptcy cases.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »