By BEN SISARIOOCT. 30, 2015
At the Ghostly Store, an online boutique, you can buy wristwatches, leather wallets, gallery-quality art prints, coffee beans, notebooks and a special line of Warby Parker eyeglasses. And if you’re interested, you can also buy the latest downloads and vinyl from electronic artists like Gold Panda and Tycho.Ghostly International began as a record label in 1999, and it has built a solid reputation on the indie fringes of the industry. But through its store, Ghostly has become almost as well known as a kind of all-purpose hipster lifestyle brand — a Goop for the Pitchfork set — which the company pursues with an attitude of playful, high-concept experimentation, whether selling German-engineered brass pens or releasing albums with $130 sculptural objects.A diversified product line can be a smart survival strategy in a struggling business, which the music industry continues to be 16 years after Napster shattered the highly profitable model of selling CDs. But according to Sam Valenti IV, Ghostly’s founder, the nonmusical goods that it sells are not a hedge against declining record sales. Music, he said, is profitable and by far Ghostly’s biggest product.Instead, like a tiny neighborhood shop that caters to a refined clientele, Ghostly presents itself as an arbiter of fine goods for a certain kind of taste-conscious cultural consumer. The same connoisseur who salivates over a limited-edition vinyl record probably has other shopping obsessions as well — for $185 messenger bags, or eco-friendly travel mugs, or even $350 paintings inspired by Ghostly music videos. Ghostly finds them, sells them and conveys each item’s back story in lush detail.“People care about provenance, and they care about ethics,” said Mr. Valenti, who at 35 is part of a generation of technology-conscious music executives with no experience of the industry’s pre-Napster days. “I like the idea of Ghostly as a community of people that has an ethos and an approach, and I think audiences appreciate these whimsical notions that there is an artistic attribute to doing things in this small-batch or D.I.Y. way.”AdvertisementInspired by 1980s and ’90s indie labels like Factory and 4AD that cultivated a distinct look as well as a sound, Mr. Valenti started Ghostly in his dorm room as a freshman at the University of Michigan, with a mission statement to use music and visuals to “compel, engross and subvert.” The musician Matthew Dear, who met Mr. Valenti as a fellow Michigan student and has been signed to Ghostly since the label’s first release, said that from the beginning Mr. Valenti envisioned the label as “almost a Disney-esque experience.”Advertisement“Disney World is not just the rides, not just Mickey Mouse, not just the merchandising,” Mr. Dear said. “It’s everything, and when you are there you feel connected to so many parts at once. I think Sam really wanted that to be the label — this multitiered environment.”Ghostly’s embrace of merchandising would have been mocked as deeply uncool back in the ’90s, when taste-making labels like Sub Pop — the bastion of grunge that gave the world Nirvana — rarely sold anything other than T-shirts for their bands. But times have changed, and merchandise has become a vital part of the business for labels of every size.For Ghostly, the merchandise and the music embody an aesthetic in which the label can be a defining spirit. Businesses of all kinds now like to portray themselves as cultural “curators.” Mr. Valenti goes a step further by calling Ghostly a “docent” — a kindly guide to walk a visitor through the gallery, and exit through the gift shop.“It’s not necessarily that those lifestyle objects are making up the difference in revenue,” Mr. Valenti said. “It’s that by being part of a larger conversation — about art, technology, design — we can make our relationship to the world more interesting.”At Ghostly’s offices in a converted industrial loft in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, the spare décor suggests a tech start-up until you notice the neatly arranged stacks of shrink-wrapped CDs and vinyl records by artists like Shigeto, Heathered Pearls and Tobacco.Resting on a conference table, however, was a more unusual object: a 60-pound box of white statuary marble, carefully sculpted in semi-crumbled form to suggest a D.J.’s standard-issue record crate reimagined as an ancient ruin. A few Ghostly LPs were placed inside, as if to indicate that this object still had a practical function.The company commissioned the sculpture from the design studio Snarkitecture in an edition of three, but Mr. Valenti does not really know its purpose yet, other than that it will not be for sale. As dreamlike sounds wafted from one of Ghostly’s new releases, an LP of background music from the hit video game Minecraft, the lanky Mr. Valenti mused on the object’s possible meanings. Dressed in black slacks, a black sweater and a white shirt buttoned all the way up, he wondered if it might be a “totem,” a comment about the vogue for vinyl in an age of digital ephemera. Could it stand for the ailing music industry itself?Advertisement“Is it a tomb? Is it a reliquary?” Mr. Valenti said, studying the box, which he said cost “a couple grand.” “It’s a conversation starter. We’re figuring out what it means.”To some extent, the sculpture symbolizes Mr. Valenti’s belief in the artistic value of his company’s merchandise. Ghostly has long made a priority of gorgeous, high-quality visuals, working with accomplished artists like Michael Cina, Andy Gilmore and Will Calcutt for cover art and packaging. But the crate sculpture may be the culmination of Ghostly’s ambitions to make products that are as meaningful as its music.As a new label in the early 2000s, when the industry was still reeling from its collision with the Internet, Ghostly was particularly bold in its plans, and early on toyed with physical formats. A 2002 album, “Disco Nouveau,” was released as a hardcover book, and in 2006 the label released a compilation on a USB drive, then a novel concept. After years of maintaining its online store as little more than an outlet for records and T-shirts, in 2009 the company began to revamp it with artwork and a selection of merchandise from outside suppliers, and the plan began to draw admirers throughout the music world.“If you refer to something as a lifestyle brand, it can come across as pejorative,” said Chris Swanson, a founder of Secretly Canadian and one of many indie-label executives who call Mr. Valenti a visionary. “The way Sam does it, it feels deeply personal without him pointing at himself. There’s a Midwestern modesty to it.”In 2012, Mr. Valenti met Neil Blumenthal, co-chief executive of Warby Parker, at a media conference and pitched him on a collaboration. The next year Warby unveiled the Curtis sunglasses, branded on the temples with Ghostly’s logo, a cartoon ghost that Mr. Valenti began drawing as a high school student in suburban Detroit. The Curtis was an immediate hit, and this year the company introduced a second Ghostly-branded model, the Henning.“We saw that we were both trying to build businesses in very similar ways,” Mr. Blumenthal said, “which is through cultural references and technology, and through direct, special relationships with customers.”That the Warby partnership has little to do with music per se reflects Mr. Valenti’s influences. His stated model for Ghostly’s business, for example, got its start as a sandwich shop. That shop, Zingerman’s, is now a group of progressive food companies in Ann Arbor, Mich., that espouses an open management philosophy and structures its empire as separate but interlocking businesses. Mr. Valenti went through Zingerman’s management training seminars and set up Ghostly in four parts: a record label, a publishing company (for songwriting rights), the online store and a holding company.The label’s brand of sleek, mellow electronica gained a niche following; its best-selling album is Tycho’s “Awake,” with about 60,000 copies sold in the United States, according to Nielsen. (By comparison, Taylor Swift moves that many records in a couple of weeks.)AdvertisementIn the spirit of Zingerman’s, Mr. Valenti practices open-book accounting and encourages Ghostly’s 12 employees to start their own enterprises. His side business is Drip.com, founded three years ago as an online subscription service where artists and record labels can brand themselves in ways largely unavailable on outlets like Spotify and iTunes.Ghostly’s online store has been profitable for five years, Mr. Valenti said, and to some extent does not rely on music to attract customers. The most popular item is not an album but rather Action Method, a series of notebooks intended to aid productivity.While Ghostly’s online store may be among the more quirky examples of selling in the music business, the merchandising model has spread throughout the music industry, as the sale value of music itself has fallen. Last year, Sub Pop opened a gift shop at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport that, in addition to records and shirts, sells branded coffee mugs, bags, magnets, key chains and dice. With typical humor, the label is now offering what is perhaps its own version of Ghostly’s marble totem — copies of the comedian Eugene Mirman’s new album “I’m Sorry (You’re Welcome)” in the form of embroidered bathrobes and chairs that come embedded with audio players (cost: $225 for the robe, $1,200 for the chair).While Jonathan Poneman, one of Sub Pop’s founders, expressed admiration for Mr. Valenti’s vision of Ghostly, he said that he viewed his label’s merchandise as secondary.“I want the context of Sub Pop,” Mr. Poneman said in an interview, “to be basically measured and defined by the music we put out.”Mr. Valenti is trying to find a place for both music and more tangible things. Ghostly recently added a collection of new prints by one of its signature artists, Sougwen Chung, and is developing its holiday collection, which includes a scented candle. But Mr. Valenti has been preoccupied by the marble crate sculpture, which may be the most radical project it has undertaken.The idea for the crate has been in gestation for years, but after receiving the final product from Snarkitecture a few weeks ago, the company is still trying to figure out how to present it to the world. It could be the focus of a podcast, Mr. Valenti said, or a Tumblr page, or even a series of parties.Late one night recently, at the CMJ Music Marathon in New York, where labels show off their slate of new acts, Mr. Valenti watched a set by Ghostly’s group Starchild & the New Romantic. The label had considered introducing the crate there, but the cramped bar in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, where the event was held had no good spot to show it off.He was in no rush. “I wouldn’t call it a business model,” he said of the loose plans for the crate. “I would call it an experiment.”A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2015, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Label With a Lifestyle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.