AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Worldpay Group, a British payment processor, said on Friday that it expected to raise 890 million pounds, or about $1.4 billion, in an initial public offering next month.The company, which is owned by the private equity firms Advent International and Bain Capital, said it intended to seek a listing on the London Stock Exchange and expected to sell about 25 percent of its shares in the offering.“Worldpay has been transformed into a global leader in payments since it became an independent company,” Philip Jansen, the Worldpay chief executive, said in a news release.Worldpay was carved out of the Royal Bank of Scotland to become a stand-alone business in 2010.“The I.P.O. is an exciting and logical next step as we seek to continue this momentum,” Mr. Jansen said. “It will enable us to access new capital for growth, augment our global proposition and further enhance our ability to serve customers across the world.”The company provides payment services to a variety of merchants around the world, processing about 31 million mobile, online and in-store transactions a day. The company posted revenue of £863.4 million in 2014 and has about 4,500 employees.“I believe Worldpay is very well positioned to continue its leadership in the ever-evolving global payments landscape,” Michael Rake, Worldpay’s new chairman, said in a news release. “I look forward to contributing to this next exciting stage, and helping Worldpay to achieve its vision to be the world’s most progressive and reliable payments partner, sharing insights and helping customers prosper.”In July, the British bank Barclays sought to clarify how long Mr. Rake, then the deputy chairman and a senior independent director at Barclays, would continue to serve on the bank’s board after he accepted the chairman’s role at Worldpay.The announcement of Mr. Rake’s new role at Worldpay came a little over a week after Antony Jenkins was ousted as the Barclays chief executive, a move that the bank said was orchestrated at the behest of its independent directors, including Mr. Rake.The Worldpay offering is expected to sell shares to institutional and professional investors in Britain and elsewhere outside the United States, as well as certain qualified institutional investors in the United States.The I.P.O. will be led by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. Lazard is acting as Worldpay’s financial adviser.Advertisement