By NEIL GOUGHSEPT. 17, 2015
HONG KONG — Global markets were largely down on Friday after the United States Federal Reserve signaled fresh concerns over slowing growth in China and other emerging markets.With investors watching closely, the Fed highlighted the improving state of the American economy as the job market continues to rebound. But the outlook — particularly deepening concerns that China’s economic slowdown could weigh on the continuing recovery in the United States — prompted the Fed to keep interest rates at ultralow levels.The Fed’s decision weighed on global markets Friday, and Wall Street opened lower as well after edging down modestly the day before.Stocks in Japan closed 2 percent lower, ending a three-day rally. Shanghai stocks see-sawed between small gains and losses, closing up 0.4 percent after a week of more volatile swings.AdvertisementMarkets in Europe had fallen sharply by early afternoon, with the Euro Stoxx 50, an index of eurozone blue-chip stocks, off about 3.2 percent. In London, the FTSE 100 was down 1.8 percent, while the CAC 40 index in Paris had slipped 3.12. The DAX index in Frankfurt was also down 3.3 percent.AdvertisementIn early trading in New York, the Standard & Poor’s 500-share index was 1.1 percent lower, the Dow Jones industrial average fell 1.4 percent, and Nasdaq composite lost 0.9 percent.Concerns over China’s economic slowdown have shaken global financial markets in recent weeks, after Beijing bungled a bailout of the country’s stock markets and made a surprise devaluation of its currency. The prospect of the Fed’s raising rates has only added to the volatility in emerging markets, which have been particularly dependent on the flood of cheap money.The slowing growth in China, along with the weakness in emerging market economies like Brazil, Russia and Indonesia, has created a rout in global commodity prices, as demand for raw materials like oil, industrial metals and iron ore have slumped. This has tempered inflation around the world, as well as in the United States.In deciding not to raise rates for now, the Fed cited such concerns, saying that inflation could remain lower than expected because of weak economic growth in emerging markets like China.“Heightened concerns about growth in China and other emerging market economies have led to notable volatility in financial markets,” Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, said in prepared remarks to reporters after its meeting on Thursday.“These developments may restrain U.S. economic activity somewhat and are likely to put further downward pressure on inflation in the near term,” Ms. Yellen added.Frederic Neumann, the co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC in Hong Kong, said that the Fed postponed a rate increase largely because “jitters” from China had “spread far and wide.”Advertisement“Ultimately, the drags from China’s slowdown will only delay rate hikes by the Fed, rather than prevent the Fed tightening its stance altogether,” Mr. Neumann said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The troubled outlook for emerging market nations has been a sharp contrast to the building strength of the American economy. And while ultralow interest rates have been blamed in recent years for adding froth to bubbly markets, the recovery in the six years since the global financial crisis has been tangible for the United States.“It’s not just fantasy money coming from the Fed — there are real jobs and profits being created, there’s real economic growth,” said Robert P. Browne, the chief investment officer at Northern Trust, a Chicago-based investment firm.“This is not just the drug of monetary easing making the patient better — the patient is getting better through real rehabilitation,” he added.At the other end of the spectrum is China, where the economy is expected to grow this year at its slowest pace in a quarter-century. The economy is sputtering because of a sharp downturn in manufacturing and housing construction, previously key engines of growth. Chinese officials have responded in recent months with a flurry of interest rate cuts and billions of dollars in investment in new infrastructure, but the economy continues to decelerate.The effects are being felt in places like Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia. Such countries rode the commodities boom as they fed demand from China for materials like iron ore, coal and edible oils.The situation has reversed sharply in the past year. And the diminished growth prospects have led to rising outflows of funds and falling exchange rates in many emerging markets.A weaker currency tends to lift a country’s exports, making overseas shipments cheaper in dollar terms. But it provides little advantage when it becomes the general trend.In Asia, for example, many countries that rely on exports “form part of the same cross-border supply chain, making different parts or components of one final product that’s shipped out of China a couple of months later,” said Christian de Guzman, a senior analyst in the sovereign risk group at Moody’s Investors Service in Singapore.For these countries, he added, “it’s hard to gain advantage from a depreciated local currency because they’ve all depreciated.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.