AdvertisementSupported byWorkspaceInterview by Patricia R. OlsenWe have 18 acres off Interstate 84 in Danbury, Conn. Years ago this was a farm. The company bought the farmland in the 1970s and moved the headquarters here from New York.My office furniture is a classic American style; it is from various Ethan Allen collections, except for the antique cherry desk. Ethan Allen represents American design, but the United States reflects the world’s diversity. Our classics have evolved from ideas all over the world. We modify the influences and give them back.Nat Ancell, one of the company’s founders, gave me his desk when he handed me the reins. He was the only other C.E.O. of Ethan Allen. Your home is very personal. It’s where you sleep and dine, and contains your family room and your children’s rooms.It took courage to hand over an iconic American brand to a young man born in Kashmir and named Farooq, so the desk is very meaningful to me.Tea is more than just tea in many parts of the world. When you meet someone, having tea together makes you more relaxed and removes the formality of the occasion. I offer tea to visitors and drink several cups a day myself. In the afternoon, I have a cookie with it. I’m not supposed to, but I do. My tea set is a white Wedgwood china cup and pitcher that my daughter, Farah, picked out. She was a designer here for several years. Next to the cup is a ceramic tile that my son Omar gave me.Fresh fruitSeveral years ago I bought a fruit and dairy farm in Columbia County, N.Y., and became a part-time fruit farmer. I keep a serving bowl in the conference room, and in the fall I fill it with apples from the farm to hand out to guests and employees.My mouse pad looks like a rug and feels like silk. To me, it’s evocative of Kashmir’s history and art and harks back to my start here. As a student at New York University, I sold Kashmiri handicrafts to Bloomingdale’s and Ethan Allen. Later, when I worked on Wall Street, Nat Ancell called and said he was having trouble getting rugs from India and Romania and asked if I could help.We have an upholstery factory in Guanajuato, Mexico. Every year when some of the executives visit, they bring me a book on Mexico signed by employees there.I came to the U.S. in 1965 during one of several conflicts surrounding Kashmir and have worked for peace there ever since. In 2011, the New York congressman Gary Ackerman addressed Congress and recognized my efforts. It was quite an honor. Later he presented me with the flag that flew atop the United States Capitol that day.Contemplation timeI like to think in the morning. I have tea and then take a walk with my cat, Pashmina. I do a little gardening, and then my driver picks me up for the hour commute. I eat breakfast in the car, and for the next 50 minutes or so, I make phone calls and take notes on what the company needs to do.I had a popular saying written on a poster: “Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again but expecting different results.” I sometimes use it during presentations.Mountain wisdomI grew up in the mountains and did a lot of hiking and horseback riding. In my office I have a photo of my son Irfan and me on horseback in Kashmir in 1989; it makes me think of those peaks. The mountains teach you the importance of pacing yourself. If you climb too fast and too high, you get water in your lungs, so you learn it’s O.K. to descend a bit during the ascent. Having to step down or step back on the way up doesn’t mean you’ve failed, either in mountain climbing or in business.This interview has been condensed.Advertisement