AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Jonathan M. Tisch, co-chairman of the board of the Loews Corporation and chairman of its subsidiary Loews Hotels & Resorts, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences?A. I was fortunate to have grown up as a young kid in the hotel business watching my father, Bob Tisch, and my uncle, Larry Tisch, create what is today the Loews Corporation. I have a recollection of being 5 years old, standing at the front door of the Traymore Hotel, greeting President Eisenhower. I was given instructions that I first salute him because he was a general, and then I shake his hand. I was so nervous I did them both at the same time.My cousins, my siblings and I were fully indoctrinated into the hotel business as children. In 1957, my father and uncle opened the Americana of Bal Harbour, and we would often go there on vacation. If I was bored, I would go behind the front desk at 7 years old. I would go into the kitchen. I would go into the laundry. I had free rein to walk around the property, and I took full advantage of that.My first paying job in the industry started when I was 15 years old, and I worked at the former Americana on Seventh Avenue in New York, a big hotel that my family built. I worked behind the front desk, and I used my middle name as my last name so that nobody knew that I was a member of the family that controlled Loews Hotels and the Loews Corporation.It said “Jonathan Mark” on my name badge. On nights when the hotel was sold out, somebody might walk up and say, “I have a reservation,” and I’d check. If they didn’t have one, I’d say, “No, sorry, there’s no reservation.” Then they’d say, “Well, I’m going to call the Tisch brothers. I know them very well. I know all three Tisch brothers.”Now, my father’s name was Preston Robert and my uncle is Larry. So in one particular case, an individual thought that there were three Tisch brothers. He was going to call Preston, Robert or Larry. So I knew right away that he didn’t know our family.Were you always going to go into the family business?I took about four years off and made a detour to go into the TV business. During my senior year at Tufts, I started as an intern and became a cinematographer-producer for what was then the NBC affiliate in Boston. I had no experience. I befriended the producer, who taught me how to shoot and edit film, and then videotape. When I graduated in 1976, they offered me a job, and I spent the next three years in various roles producing shows.I found those years very informative and helpful to me for the lodging industry. With the properties, I get very involved in the design. Hotels are made up of thousands of edits — what the lobby looks like, what the room looks like, what the food tastes like. And so those years in TV have become incredibly beneficial to me.Early management lessons you learned?Making sure that I knew what I was talking about and that I had done my homework on a particular issue, so that when I spoke, I had a sense of gravitas. One of the things I talk about today is that you really have to know your trade. You don’t have to have every answer. You can’t be all things to all people, and it’s good to surround yourself with people who complement your skill set. But you have to know enough to be fluent in every aspect of your company. There were some lessons learned early on when I might not have done as much homework as I should have.Another area is rushing to make decisions. I think taking time is important, especially when you’re making big decisions. You need to pull all the facts together and canvass your team to get their input. When you’re the C.E.O. or the chairman, the air gets very thin at the top, and oftentimes you’ve got people telling you what they think you should hear as opposed to telling you the truth. And as you become more competent in your abilities, you start to be able to parse out what’s fact from fiction and then press somebody to say, “Are you telling me this because it’s what you believe in, or because you think it’s what I want to hear?” That only comes from experience.How do you hire?You have to have a gene for hospitality, and I want to see that you have the ability to be creative. It doesn’t matter what role you’re in, you have to be creative in how you look at the challenges you face. And I want people who know how to listen. You can learn a lot with your mouth shut.What advice do you give to new college grads?I will say to them, take a job, any job. You’re not necessarily going to get the first job right out of the box that you want. But what you will learn by taking a job immediately is how to deal with other people, how to process information, how to be part of a team, and it’s easier to get a job when you have a job. Try to work in the field you’re interested in, but sometimes you may have to take a job that is not your ideal position, but you will still benefit from it.I also learned something in my first month at Loews Hotels in 1980. My boss told me that whenever you’re writing a letter — and now it applies to emails today — never start a paragraph with the word “I,” because that immediately sends a message that you are more important than the person that you’re communicating with.It has stayed with me now for 35 years, and it’s a message that I always deliver. When you start to train your thinking about how to not use “I,” you become a better writer, and it teaches you how to really think through an issue. What are you really trying to say and how are you going to say it without starting the paragraph with the word “I”?Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement