AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonIt’s Corporate Governance 101: Company directors are supposed to respect the wishes of the shareholders they are duty bound to serve. And if the directors defy them, those shareholders are supposed to hold the directors accountable.That principle of board accountability will face an unusually stark test on Sept. 22, when Bank of America shareholders gather at company headquarters in Charlotte, N.C., for a special meeting — and a significant vote.The question before the shareholders seems innocuous: It asks them to allow the directors a free hand in setting board structure. But some investors see the question as a slap in the face. Here’s why: At the bank’s 2009 annual meeting, shareholders passed a bylaw requiring that the board be overseen by an independent “chairman.” The bylaw passed by a whisker, but it was nonetheless binding.Last fall, however, the board abruptly overturned the bylaw when it elected Brian T. Moynihan, the bank’s chief executive, its chairman as well. A vote for the motion on Sept. 22 would essentially enshrine that decision.Therefore, the vote on Tuesday is only a little bit about the value of separating the chairman and chief executive roles at Bank of America. It is a lot more about reminding the bank’s directors not to treat shareholders with contempt.While corporate directors claim to work in their shareholders’ best interests, it is all too clear that many boards believe they serve the company’s chief executive first and foremost. Votes on governance matters, such as executive pay practices and director elections, are a crucial way for investors to keep boards attentive to their shareholder duties. So is Tuesday’s vote.“Power is the only issue here,” said Bob Monks, a governance expert who is chairman of ValueEdge Advisors, an activist firm. “This is simply saying power is with the C.E.O. and any structural arrangement that purports to dilute his power will be driven out.”Bank of America recommends that investors vote for its proposal, which would give the board flexibility in devising its structure and keep Mr. Moynihan on as both chairman and chief executive.“Our directors believe that the appropriate leadership structure for our board will vary depending on the strategy and environment in which our company operates,” the company recently told shareholders. Removing “the provision requiring an independent chairman was a decision our board considered carefully,” it added. At the time, the board adopted new duties for the bank’s lead independent director.Some investors will no doubt agree. Among them will be investment managers, especially mutual fund companies that follow the guidance of management when they cast shareholder votes on behalf of their clients.But a no vote happens to be a great way to inform the bank’s board that its unilateral flouting of the shareholder-approved bylaw was unacceptable.Many public pensions have stated that they will vote against the proposal. Among them is the New York City Employees’ Retirement System, whose pension funds are overseen by Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller.“When the Bank of America board chose to revoke the independent chair bylaw, they made a fundamental error, undermining investor confidence and calling into question their commitment to accountability,” Mr. Stringer said. While he acknowledged that putting the matter to a special vote of shareholders showed that the board was taking steps to demonstrate accountability to share owners, he said, “investors should oppose the proposal in order to strengthen the board’s independence.”The Illinois State Board of Investment and the North Carolina state retirement system have also announced their opposition. Together these three funds hold 45 million Bank of America shares, or just less than half a percent of the stock outstanding.Frederick E. Rowe Jr., principal at Greenbrier Partners, a money management firm in Dallas, said he recently sold his Bank of America stock because of his view of the company’s culture. “The organizational mind-set is not ‘How can we better serve our customers?’ but ‘How can we charge more money for doing less?’ ” he said. “Not coincidentally, the company’s attitude is similar toward its shareholders, the legal owners of the business, to whom the board owes its primary fiduciary duty. It would not be surprising if this egregious behavior sparked other shareholders to act like the owners they are.”The vote appears to be close. If Bank of America prevails, it will probably be because big private fund companies like Dodge & Cox, Fidelity, Vanguard and others vote their investors’ shares with the bank’s management. These three fund companies together hold 11 percent of the bank’s outstanding shares.Spokesmen for the fund companies declined to discuss how they planned to vote. But their past votes and published policies indicate they are likely to support the bank with their clients’ shares.Fund companies say they vote shares in their clients’ best interests. But large mutual fund companies often have conflicts in their business models that are not visible. They may conduct business with Bank of America or have other relationships with the company that they don’t want to imperil by voting against management on this issue.After it changed the bylaw, Bank of America apparently got an earful from some investors.Jack O. Bovender Jr., the bank’s lead independent director, along with the vice chairwoman, Anne M. Finucane, and the vice chairman, Gary G. Lynch, have traveled the country speaking to investors about the matter. “We have had frank discussions about the vote that the board announced last spring,” Ms. Finucane said. “We have heard our shareholders’ voices, and we will abide by their decision on Tuesday.”Investors expressed some of that candor at the bank’s annual shareholders’ meeting in May by voting against all four members of the board’s corporate governance committee, led by Thomas J. May, the chairman, chief executive and president of Eversource Energy, a utility in the Northeast. Records show the directors received a thumbs-down from on average 29 percent of the votes, an unusually high level of dissent.Dodge & Cox, Fidelity and Vanguard were not among the dissenters. They voted their investors’ shares in favor of the bank’s governance committee members.If Bank of America wins Tuesday’s vote, it will be because money managers who are also fiduciaries don’t mind being disrespected by the boards of companies whose shares they hold.But what if their investor clients do mind? Well, that’s just too bad.Advertisement