By THE NEW YORK TIMESSEPT. 20, 2015
Shareholders of both Charter Communications and Time Warner Cable will vote on Monday on their proposed $56.7 billion merger. Announced in May, Charter’s takeover of Time Warner Cable, along with a deal for Bright House Networks, would create the country’s second-largest broadband Internet provider and third-largest video provider.Charter shareholders will also vote on Monday on the company’s $10.4 billion deal for Bright House and the sale of $5 billion in stock to Liberty Broadband. The vote comes a little more than a week after the Federal Communications Commission started its 180-day timetable to review the deal. EMILY STEELOn Tuesday, Bank of America shareholders will decide whether Brian T. Moynihan, above, keeps his dual titles of chief executive and board chairman. The bank’s board argues that it needs the flexibility to grant him one or both titles.Opponents, including two large California pension funds, say the two roles should be separated to allow for greater oversight. Bank officials and the pensions have been lobbying major shareholders ahead of the vote in Charlotte, N.C. MICHAEL CORKERYAdvertisementOn Wednesday, China’s president, Xi Jinping, is scheduled to mark the second day of his visit to America in Seattle attending a photo opportunity with select leaders of Chinese and American technology companies, possibly including Timothy D. Cook of Apple, after members of his delegation attend a broader tech gathering.AdvertisementChina’s Internet czar, Lu Wei, and executives like Jack Ma of Alibaba are expected at the gathering, which has frustrated American officials by veering off the plan for the visit.While some companies in the United States may take the chance to announce new deals in China, American officials worry that the gathering could portray China’s leadership as constructively engaging American companies even as the administration has argued that China’s cyberattacks and anticompetitive practices have hurt American firms. PAUL MOZUROn Wednesday, a French court will rule on whether Uber’s low-cost ride-hailing service can operate legally in the country. The decision follows widespread violent protests this summer by members of French taxi associations who were angry about Uber’s aggressive expansion from Paris to Marseille.The legality ruling comes a week before two Uber executives in France accused of operating an illegal taxi service are scheduled to stand trial. MARK SCOTTThe advocate general of the European Court of Justice, the region’s highest court, will issue an opinion on Wednesday on whether people’s online data can be shared between Europe and the United States. The case involves claims that Facebook cooperated in the National Security Agency’s data collection program, called Prism, and could have wider implications for other American tech companies.While not binding, the advocate general’s opinion will be a sign of how the European court will rule on the case later this year. MARK SCOTTJanet L. Yellen, above, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, is scheduled to deliver a speech about inflation on Thursday at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.AdvertisementThe speech comes one week after the Fed concluded its September policy-making meeting by announcing that it was keeping interest rates near zero, in part because of the persistent sluggishness of inflation. Ms. Yellen’s speech may shed light on why she thinks inflation has been so slow. BINYAMIN APPELBAUMNavinder Singh Sarao, above, a British futures trader, will face a court hearing in London on Friday to determine whether he will be sent to the United States to face charges of engaging in improper trading that contributed to a sudden plunge in American stock markets five years ago, known as the “flash crash.”Mr. Sarao, 36, was arrested in Britain in April and has been fighting extradition. He was indicted by a grand jury in Chicago this month. CHAD BRAYPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release its third and final estimate of economic growth in the second quarter.The estimate was revised sharply upward to 3.7 percent in late August, and most economists are not looking for another big revision. But some analysts think a slight uptick could be in the offing, with growth boosted by stronger consumer spending and higher levels of construction. NELSON D. SCHWARTZAlso Friday morning, the University of Michigan will release its final reading on consumer sentiment in September. The initial September survey showed an unexpectedly steep drop in the index to 85.7, as worries about volatility on Wall Street and global markets filtered down to consumers.Experts will be watching to see if the recent partial rebound in stocks has improved the outlook among consumers. NELSON D. SCHWARTZApple’s latest smartphones, the iPhone 6S and 6S Plus, go on sale on Friday in several countries and territories, including the United States and China. Shoppers who buy the new devices in an Apple store can opt in to the new iPhone Upgrade Program, which includes Apple’s warranty program and the option to upgrade to a new phone every year.Apple recently said that global preorders for the phones exceeded forecasts and that the company was racing to catch up with demand. KATIE BENNERA version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.