AdvertisementSupported byBy Stanley ReedLONDON — The British government said on Monday that it would provide 2 billion pounds, or about $3.1 billion, in state aid for a nuclear power station planned for Hinkley Point in southwest England.The announcement of financial support — which was made by George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, on a visit to China — appeared to be a confidence-building measure aimed at wrapping up a deal, years in gestation, to build Britain’s first nuclear plant since the mid-1990s.“They are edging toward trying to sign a deal, but it is taking a long time,” said Antony Froggatt, a nuclear analyst at Chatham House, a London research organization.The British government said that it expected EDF, the French state-controlled utility leading the project, to make a final decision later this year to go ahead with the plant. If EDF moves forward, it will be supported by two Chinese companies, China General Nuclear Corporation and China National Nuclear Corporation, the government said. Mr. Osborne has been courting Chinese companies to help finance the new Hinkley Point station, which will cost at least £16 billion. “I am delighted to announce this guarantee for Hinkley Point today and to be in China to discuss their investments in Britain’s nuclear industry,” Mr. Osborne said in a statement.In trying to build nuclear plants, Britain is bucking the trend in the West. In the wake of the 2011 Fukushima disaster in Japan, Germany and other Western nations decided to gradually phase out nuclear power. Few plants are under construction in America and Western Europe, and two of those, in Finland and France, have encountered long delays and huge cost overruns.Despite such problems, Britain strongly backs construction of new nuclear plants. It views nuclear energy as a low-carbon source of power generation useful for meeting its targets to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. It also worries about keeping the lights on, as its nuclear power plants — which produced about 19 percent of Britain’s electricity last year — age and regulations force utilities to close coal-fired plants.With British utilities lacking the expertise and financial strength to build a nuclear plant, the government has turned to EDF, which is backed by the French state. The British government has also signaled that it is open to other international financing, including from China and from state-controlled entities like sovereign wealth funds.Hinkley Point would provide an opening for Chinese companies to begin taking an international role in the industry. China leads the world in plants under construction at home, but its nuclear industry has only limited experience outside of China.The British effort is being closely watched by policy makers around the world and has attracted widespread interest. Along with EDF, other nuclear suppliers like Toshiba and Hitachi are pursuing British projects.The British government is not only offering financing to help with the construction but has guaranteed EDF a much higher price for the electricity it generates than current market rates. The government also says that it may increase financial support for the plant as the project progresses. Last year, the European Union approved Britain’s use of state aid to finance the plant. The government says the plant, which will be built near an existing nuclear station on the Severn Estuary, will create 25,000 jobs. It is expected to generate 7 percent of Britain’s power.Still, Britain’s effort to build nuclear plants has proceeded at what seems a glacial pace. The Hinkley Point project is already several years behind its original schedule. Centrica, a British utility, walked away from an option to take a 20 percent stake in Hinkley Point and another nuclear plant, citing frustration over delay and costs.Advertisement