SEPT. 20, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was -0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.10 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was -0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $195.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida, $230.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYAurora, Ill., $63.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York City Transportation Authority, $250 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementTHURSDAYNorth Texas Municipal Water District, $65.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAdvertisementCorpus Christi, Tex., $84.9 million of improvement refinancing bonds. Frost Bank.Illinois Finance Authority, $60 million of college revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Illinois, $91.1 million of unified school district general obligation refinancing bonds. William Blair.Lucas, Ohio, $50 million of hospital revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Mississippi, $200 million of tax revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.New York City Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of future tax-secured, tax-exempt bonds. Goldman Sachs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Palm Beach, Fla., School Board, $62.6 million of certificates of participation. Morgan Stanley.Pittsburgh Parking Authority, $67.5 million of revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.ProMedica Healthcare Obligated Group, Ohio, $270 million of debt securities. Barclays Capital.Sacramento Public Financing Authority, $274 million of lease revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.San Bernardino, Calif., $56 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.San Francisco Bay Area Transit District, $358.6 million of sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Sumter Landing, Fla., Community Development District, $55 million of recreational revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementTarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $50.5 million of retirement facilities revenue bonds. Ziegler.Tennessee Housing Development Agency, $132 million of residential finance program bonds. Raymond James.Valdosta, Ga., City School System, $69.7 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Washington Biomedical Research Properties, $129 million of taxable lease revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.