By RACHEL ABRAMSSEPT. 20, 2015
McDonald’s has gathered a number of like-minded organizations to raise money to help the United Nations’ food program respond to the migrant crisis in Europe and the Middle East.McDonald’s, along with companies like DreamWorks Animation, MasterCard and Facebook, will donate paid television airtime or access to digital media to promote the World Food Program, including through the use of a 30-second animated commercial narrated by the actor Liam Neeson.The World Food Program unveiled the partnership on Sunday, one day before the United Nations’ annual International Day of Peace.For McDonald’s, which replaced its chief executive in March, the move also represents an opportunity to connect with consumers as it tries to turn around its corporate identity. As news of the migrant crisis has flooded the mainstream news media, Steve Easterbrook, McDonald’s new chief executive, said the company wanted to show that it could respond to issues its customers cared about.“We felt it was an opportunity for us to contribute something meaningful, something authentic,” Mr. Easterbrook said. “This is not about single brands. This is about doing good.”AdvertisementThe announcement also comes about a month after Burger King challenged McDonald’s to team up and create a “McWhopper,” a combination of the fast-food chains’ hamburgers, that would help raise money for the nonprofit group Peace One Day. Mr. Easterbrook rebuffed the challenge in messages on Facebook and Twitter, but said he would “be in touch.”AdvertisementThe World Food Program is under increasing pressure to help respond to the millions of Syrians, Iraqis and others displaced from areas of conflict. Tens of thousands of migrants have fled to Europe, which has scrambled to respond to the influx.Providing much-needed food assistance and other aid would help ease the desperation that has pushed thousands west, said Jay Aldous, the food program’s director of private sector partnerships. Companies including Google, Twitter and United Airlines have agreed to contribute paid TV time or access to digital promotion for the food program, according to the organization.“If we’re unable to do our job because of funding shortfalls, the volume of individuals and families seeking asylum in Europe will increase,” Mr. Aldous said.Millions of migrants, desperate to escape war, starvation and persecution, have risked their lives in rickety rafts or in the care of human smugglers. Thousands have died during the journey, and others have been trapped at border crossings and in camps.The World Food Program estimates that it will need more than $7 billion to deal with the various humanitarian crises this year, but expects to receive closer to $4 billion through its usual channels, which primarily include government aid.Mr. Aldous said using the ads to appeal directly to individuals could help address that shortfall. The donated corporate media access could reach more than 300 million people in 38 countries, Mr. Aldous said. He also said he hoped that individual donors could collectively give more than if the corporations had donated directly.McDonald’s declined to say how much the ad time was worth, but characterized it as a “multimillion-dollar” contribution.AdvertisementIn the new commercial, Mr. Neeson tells viewers that wars around the world have resulted in more refugees now than any time since World War II.“People not so different from you and me, except more than half of them are children,” he says. “They are innocent, and they are hungry.”Burger King will also participate in the partnership with the World Food Program, according to the organization, but its role was not clear.A Burger King spokeswoman said, “Any peace-related activity McDonald’s undertakes, whether in partnership with Burger King or on their own, is great, as it will raise further awareness for Peace Day.”A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2015, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: McDonald’s Leads Effort to Promote Migrant Aid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.