AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelBrian Williams was eating dinner in early June at the Bronxville, N.Y., house of his new boss, Andrew Lack, discussing his fate at NBC News.It had been nearly four months since Mr. Williams had been suspended from his position as anchor of “Nightly News,” and he had been reflecting on how he might make a return to the air.Mr. Williams said that he hoped to focus on live, breaking news.Mr. Lack responded that he had the perfect fit. Mr. Williams could resume his career at MSNBC, the ratings-challenged cable network that was in the midst of overhauling its daytime coverage.“His passion fit exactly with one of our biggest needs,” Mr. Lack, chairman of NBC News and MSNBC, said in an interview on Monday. “Brian will be such an important contribution to MSNBC’s page-turn here.”Now, after seven months of making news, Mr. Williams will start covering it once again. He is expected to return to the air on MSNBC about 3 p.m. on Tuesday in his new role as a breaking news anchor, starting with coverage of Pope Francis’ visit to the United States.His re-emergence represents the opportunity for Mr. Williams to rehabilitate his image and restore the trust he once commanded as head of the country’s No. 1 evening news broadcast. At the same time, NBC News executives are hoping that he can help MSNBC reverse its fortunes by focusing on hard news during the daytime and by integrating with NBC News to create one news operation that delivers its coverage across broadcast, cable and digital outlets.“The news is the star,” Mr. Lack said. “We are building a network that has as its core value delivering breaking news better than anyone else. It is not about the anchor who happens to be delivering the news.”There is no guarantee that the transition will be smooth. As breaking news anchor, Mr. Williams has not been assigned to a specific time slot on the network, but rather is expected to lead coverage when big stories unfold, whether that’s about politics, the pope or natural disasters.Some NBC News staff members welcomed Mr. Williams’s return, saying that it would add a dose of star power to the network. Others, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, questioned how Mr. Williams’s role would evolve after the pope departs, and whether the move to MSNBC was a way to ease him into a bigger role at the network.Some also questioned whether checks and balances had been put in place to prevent Mr. Williams from repeating the mistakes that caused his problems in the first place; he was suspended in mid-February after acknowledging that he had embellished accounts of his reporting, a crisis that sent the news group into turmoil and led to Mr. Lack’s hiring in March.Asked whether Mr. Williams could integrate smoothly into his new home in the aftermath of the controversy, Mr. Lack said he expected Mr. Williams to win back the trust of both his colleagues and his viewers. He said Mr. Williams would abide by the “normal checks and balances that exist for all of us.”“This is a long game that is not measured in tomorrow’s coverage, or this week’s coverage or this month’s coverage,” Mr. Lack said. “He looks forward to finding himself in this role.”NBC News did not make Mr. Williams available for an interview. He has kept a low profile during the last seven months, and Mr. Lack said he had been spending a lot of time with his family, “visiting privately with people who have been able to talk” about the controversy, and preparing to return to the job. His daughter, Allison Williams, was married in Wyoming Saturday night.Jonathan Klein, the former president of CNN, said that NBC needed to buttress its news division in the wake of Mr. Williams’s downfall.“This could be seen as a statement of the reach and the skill set and the bench of what NBC News has to offer,” Mr. Klein said. “In that sense, it is a smart, strategic move.”At the same time, NBC News and MSNBC face broader questions over the role of a round-the-clock news network in an age of fierce competition and unlimited, real-time information.“There doesn’t appear to be room for three 24/7 news networks,” said Andrew Heyward, a former president of CBS News, who now is a consultant to media companies, referring to MSNBC, CNN and Fox News. “Each of them has got to define themselves.”Mr. Lack, who had been president of NBC News from 1993 until 2001, was recruited to restore a sense of calm and stability across the news division. In addition to sorting out Mr. Williams’s fate, he also needed to deal with big ratings declines at MSNBC. Mr. Lack said that when he arrived he was “not up to speed with where MSNBC was, what it was or how it was doing,” noting that he had been more focused on foreign, financial and business news.The ratings picture is fairly bleak at the network, particularly during the daytime hours. MSNBC drew an average of 286,000 viewers from 9 a.m. until 6 p.m. over the first eight months of 2015, down 20 percent from the same period in 2013, according to Nielsen.MSNBC already had begun a broader reassessment of its programming in early 2015, canceling shows hosted by Ronan Farrow and Joy-Ann Reid to focus on straight news rather than left-leaning political commentary.Mr. Lack said that he accelerated that transition, pushing to change MSNBC’s daytime lineup and introduce more coordination between MSNBC and NBC News.MSNBC announced last week that Kate Snow, an NBC News national correspondent, would anchor news coverage at MSNBC from 3 to 5 p.m. during the week. Chuck Todd, moderator of “Meet the Press” on NBC, will host a new show at 5 p.m. called “MTP Daily.”“That is what MSNBC was created to do: Put NBC News into the 24/7, live breaking news business,” Mr. Lack said.Mr. Lack engineered the start of MSNBC in the mid-1990s, and has said that its revival is a priority for him. Mr. Williams also has experience at MSNBC; he covered a plane crash the first week the network went live.Mr. Lack said that Mr. Williams had noted their shared history at MSNBC during their dinner in June.Mr. Lack recalled that as Mr. Williams was leaving the dinner, he turned to his boss, smiled, and said, “Back to the future.”Advertisement