AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinLOS ANGELES — Hours after the Emmy Awards ended, HBO executives, actors and writers were still busy celebrating the premium cable network’s dominance at a sweaty after-party at the Pacific Design Center.There was laughter, high-fiving — and plenty of crowing.George R. R. Martin, the author of the “Game of Thrones” books that are the basis for the hit fantasy epic that won best dramatic series Sunday night, was sitting at a table across from the comedian John Hodgman, and discussing his “nice birthday present” (Mr. Martin turned 67 on Sunday). He gestured to the Emmy sitting right in front of him, and warned people just how sharp the tips of the trophy were.“I lost this six times and the seventh is the lucky charm,” Mr. Martin said. “Between ‘Thrones,’ ‘Veep’ and ‘Olive Kitteridge,’ we crushed the competition.”Considering the sprawling nature of today’s television landscape, that was no small statement. Though HBO has long been a favorite of the Emmys — this year was the 15th in a row that it had more nominations than any other network — it has faced an increasingly competitive creative environment with the rise of streaming services like Amazon and Netflix.Yet while Amazon scored notable victories for its show “Transparent,” Netflix was limited to one Emmy on Sunday. And with the broadcast networks seemingly being left behind — Viola Davis’s historic win for best dramatic actress notwithstanding — HBO found itself alone at the top.It won 14 Emmys on Sunday alone, 10 more than any other network, and 43 over all — 31 more than any other. And though in many ways HBO is the embodiment of Emmys establishment, it was notable that the victory for “Game of Thrones” was the first time in eight years that the network had captured best drama, and the best comedy win for “Veep” gave HBO its first win in that category in 14 years.“I was in a daze most of the night, and sort of pinching myself, saying that this couldn’t be happening, that all these great nominees would actually be winning,” Michael Lombardo, the network’s president of programming, said. “I got very used to being nominated and not winning.”A number of factors help explain HBO’s dominance but perhaps most significant was a change in the Emmy voting. This year, the Emmys opened up final voting to the entire Television Academy, not a closed committee, which may have rewarded audience favorites like “Game of Thrones,” the most viewed show in HBO’s history.“I think, inevitably, the new voting changed some of the dynamics,” said Gary Newman, co-chief executive of the Fox Television Group.Or, as HBO’s chief executive, Richard Plepler, said in an interview, “I can’t help but think the more democratized the process, the better it is for our shows, and this was a democratized process.”It was also a year in which space seemed to open up in the major categories. “Breaking Bad,” which had won the Emmy for best drama the last two years, went off the air in 2013. “Mad Men,” victorious in the category four times, is now off the air, too. (The show’s star, Jon Hamm, did win a best actor Emmy after being nominated seven previous times.) Netflix’s “Orange Is the New Black” was reclassified as a drama this year instead of a comedy, though the result was the same — it did not win.In the comedy category, “Modern Family” had won for series five times in a row, but it showed signs of wear and tear this year, garnering the fewest nominations in its history. That may have opened the door for “Veep.”The traditional broadcast networks, meanwhile, had another rough night, garnering a total of only four Emmys in the major categories. (ABC won two, CBS and NBC each earned one and Fox went home empty-handed.)“It is all cyclical,” Mr. Newman said at the Fox after-party. “We’ve had years where we’ve had an incredible number of winners, and this year, that wasn’t the case. I congratulate HBO, and I look forward to competing next year.”Even if network television had a poor night, it had arguably the most memorable moment: Ms. Davis becoming the first African-American woman to win the best actress in a drama, for ABC’s “How to Get Away With Murder.” In an emotional speech, she discussed the difficulties of being a black actress and working on TV, and said, “You cannot win an Emmy for roles that are simply not there.”Amazon and Netflix combined to win three awards, including for Jeffrey Tambor in his role as a transgender woman on “Transparent.” It was the first time the streaming services earned more than one major award — David Fincher won a directing Emmy for “House of Cards” in 2013 — but there remained a sizable gap between the streaming services and HBO.“I can’t take anything away from them and they’re doing good work and quality work, and it raises everyone’s game and it’s raised ours as well,” Mr. Plepler said.HBO was propelled by “Game of Thrones,” which won 12 awards, the most Emmys for one show in a single year. “Olive Kitteridge,” the four-part limited series, nearly swept every major award it was eligible for, including actress (Frances McDormand), actor (Richard Jenkins), supporting actor (Bill Murray), writing and for the series itself.HBO also had a few missteps this year, and Andy Samberg, the Emmys host, poked fun at one of the network’s not-so-great moments: the second season of “True Detective,” which got decidedly mixed reviews. “It’s been a year of goodbyes,” he said during the broadcast. “We said goodbye to ‘Mad Men’ and ‘Parks and Recreation.’ And we also said goodbye to ‘True Detective,’ even though it’s still on the air.”Now that the Emmys have crowned new victors in some major categories — in addition to familiar ones, like Julia Louis-Dreyfus, who won her sixth Emmy, and Allison Janney, who won her seventh — the question is whether this will usher in a new era of unpredictability at the awards show. Or will “Game of Thrones” and “Veep” claim a chokehold on the best series awards in a way “Mad Men,” “Modern Family” and “Frasier” did in years past?For their part, HBO executives are shying away from predictions, knowing that it will be difficult to repeat a dominating performance like this one.“It’s one of those moments that I don’t to be expect to be replicated in my lifetime,” Mr. Lombardo said. “I’m enjoying it for just that thing: It’s a once-in-a-lifetime moment.”Advertisement