
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 3, 2015
This interview with Gary B. Smith, chief executive of Ciena, the broadband and telecommunications company, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. What were some early influences for you?A. I was born in Birmingham, an industrialized part of the U.K. I played rugby — I was captain of the high school team — and I also played soccer and was a sprinter. My parents were factory workers, and I grew up with a very blue-collar background.I remember going to what was the equivalent of a career day. We got on this old bus, traveled to a coal mine in the morning, went down into the mine, and then visited a smelting works after that. I remember getting back on the bus and thinking, “This is not for me.”I always wanted to get out and see the world. So I left when I was about 16. I didn’t go straight to college. Photography was my passion, and I worked in London doing that and did various jobs to pay the rent, including bartending. That gives you a good understanding of people from all walks of life.AdvertisementTell me more about your parents. How have they influenced your leadership style?My father was particularly influential. He never said a bad word about anybody, and I’ve taken some lessons from that. He was always very positive, and he did it naturally. He’s not confrontational at all and will do anything to avoid a confrontation.My mother was a little more confrontational and very direct when she needed to be. I’ve taken a little bit of both of them, and part of the skill is to know when to pull on the different levers. It’s very situational.And what did you do after photography and bartending?My first real job was in sales, working for a company called Telephone Rentals. I basically had to knock on doors of small companies and try to sell them phone systems.I survived, mostly because I figured out the rule that 90 percent of success is turning up. If I worked really hard and had a lot of meetings, I’d get a better hit rate. I was recruited to another company and rose up very quickly into a management role, overseeing their European business outside the U.K. I was about 21. They needed a warm body that was vaguely competent, and they gave me a shot at it.What were some early management lessons for you?My learning curve was pretty steep. I just managed by the numbers early on. If people were successful, they were fine. If they were not, that wasn’t good. It was pretty simplistic. And I was also exposed at a young age to some pretty harsh management techniques from people above me.AdvertisementEventually the penny dropped, and I realized that my role was to facilitate and create an environment that people could be successful in. And I learned to listen more than I talked.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.What are some other leadership lessons you’ve learned over the years?Early on in my career, I was told, “It’s all about people.” I got it intellectually, but it took me quite a while to really get it. It really is all about people, and if you get that right, the other stuff will get addressed. But you have to work at it all the time.And you’ve got to have a leadership team that is synchronized, because if you don’t, a crack at the top becomes a chasm farther down in the company. People know exactly what’s going on, and it gets amplified.You should have differences of opinion, of course. That’s healthy. But once you agree on a strategy, then we’re all moving in the same direction. That’s critical. I’m a great believer in getting consensus, but you can’t always get consensus, and you’ve got to say, “O.K., that’s good enough. This is what we’re doing.” And then you have to make sure that’s communicated down the organization as one team.Culture takes an awful lot of time and effort, and it can be destroyed very quickly, because it’s built on trust and respect. You’re respecting the individual and what they do, and you’re trusting them, and they’re doing the same for you. That doesn’t happen overnight. It’s like personal relationships.How do you hire?I tend to focus more on whether the person is the right fit for the company. So I’ll ask questions like What do you truly enjoy doing? How can I tell if you’re having a bad day, and how does that manifest itself? What are the things that really irritate you, and what do you do about it? What’s it like to work for you? How do you interact with your peers? What do you do if you don’t agree with the direction of the company?How do people react to the “bad day” question?They often pause at first, and I’ve heard a variety of responses. If they say they become quiet, then I’ll ask, “Tell me what comes next? How do you deal with it? Do you walk away from the issue?” And I’ll drill down on that, because it leads to a lot of good discussions around what motivates them, and what they enjoy about their work and what they don’t like about it.What would be your best questions if you could interview someone for only a few minutes?What are you good at and why? Why do you think you’re good at it? That second question will tell you how self-aware they are.What advice do you give new college grads?I tell them about the most important lesson I learned: It’s all about the people you work with. Relationships really matter, and you need to get that right, both for your career as an individual and as a future leader.I think a lot of people pay attention to the technical stuff and the hard stuff about whatever discipline they’re in. But it’s the softer side that will get you every time if you’re not paying attention to it. It’s probably the biggest determinant of whether you’re going to be successful.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice.This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Build a Culture on Trust and Respect.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »