AdvertisementSupported byBy Susan AntillaThe Securities and Exchange Commission said on Monday that it had reached a $40 million settlement with a New York-based investment adviser over charges that it had improperly used mutual fund assets to pay brokerage firms for the marketing and distribution of its funds.The agency said the money would be returned to the accounts of the affected shareholders.The case against the investment adviser, First Eagle Investment Management, is the first brought against an asset manager under the agency’s so-called Distribution-in-Guise Initiative, which aims to protect mutual fund shareholders from paying for marketing expenses that should come out of the firm’s own assets.First Eagle, which has $100 billion in assets under management, did not admit or deny the accusations. In a statement, the company said that it had acted promptly to remedy the violations and immediately offered to return the money that had been paid from the funds’ assets.“We sincerely regret this matter and have taken steps to strengthen our policies and procedures,” the statement said. Bob Rendine, a spokesman for First Eagle, declined to comment when asked whether anyone at the firm had been fired, suspended or censured as a result of the charges.The S.E.C. did not name any individuals in the action. The two brokerage firms were not identified.The S.E.C. announced the Distribution-in-Guise Initiative two years ago, based on concern that some managers in the $16 trillion mutual fund industry were dipping into investors’ money to pay for marketing, in violation of the agency’s rules.Mutual fund managers are permitted to pay the broker-dealers who sell their funds, but they can use fund assets only if they have done so as part of a 12b-1 plan, in which shareholders are informed that their money will be used that way. Investor advocates are often critical of such arrangements, arguing that they encourage brokers to sell the fund that garners the biggest fees, and not necessarily the fund that is best for the client.First Eagle was already making payments to its intermediaries via a 12b-1 plan and then made additional payments for distribution and marketing services using fund assets, the S.E.C. said.“Mutual fund advisers have a fiduciary duty to manage the conflict of interest associated with fund distribution, namely whether to use their own assets or to recommend to their fund’s board to use the fund’s assets to distribute shares,” Julie M. Riewe, co-chief of the S.E.C. Enforcement Division’s asset management unit, said in a statement on Monday. Ms. Riewe said that First Eagle breached its fiduciary duty by using fund assets for distribution and failing to give accurate information to the funds’ boards.Fund companies are allowed to pay brokers out of fund assets for accounting and other services. But the S.E.C. has been concerned that some funds are setting up contracts to provide administrative services — which may be paid with fund assets — when in fact the brokers are being paid for marketing.“The S.E.C.’s message is, ‘If you improperly use fund assets to pay for distribution we are coming after you,’ ” said Jay G. Baris, who runs the investment management practice at the law firm Morrison & Foerster in New York.Barry Barbash, a former director of the S.E.C.’s Division of Investment Management who is co-head of the asset management group at Willkie Farr & Gallagher, said it was important for investors to understand “what they’re paying for and why they’re paying for it.”“I don’t think we’ve seen the end of distribution-in-guise cases,” he said.Advertisement