AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressHome sales in the United States slid in August at the steepest pace since January as tight supplies and rising prices discouraged potential buyers.Sales of existing homes fell 4.8 percent from the previous month, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5.31 million, the lowest level since April, the National Association of Realtors said on Monday. That’s down from 5.58 million in July, which was the highest in more than eight years.Solid job growth and low mortgage rates have pushed sales 6.2 percent higher in the last year. But the median home price has increased 4.7 percent during that time, more than double the increase in average hourly pay. That is likely to be pushing more homes out of reach for many buyers.Sales are expected to remain flat for much of the rest of the year, according to the Realtors’ group and some private economists. The Realtors’ group forecasts that sales will be 5.3 million this year, the most since the recession.There were signs of fundamental improvement in the housing market. First-time home buyers, a critical source of demand, made up 32 percent of sales last month, up from 28 percent in July. That is still below historical averages of nearly 40 percent. And foreclosures and short sales — where the seller owes more than the house is worth — fell to the lowest level in nearly seven years.“Given stronger job growth, and low rates that are going to be sticking around for at least a little while longer, the U.S. housing market is still in good shape,” said Jennifer Lee, an economist at BMO Capital Markets.Still, Americans looking to buy a home also have fewer to choose from. The number of available homes has fallen 1.7 percent in the last 12 months to just 2.29 million. That is equivalent to 5.2 months of supply at the current sales pace, below the six months that is typical of a balanced market.Home sales may remain steady in the coming months because Federal Reserve policy makers last Thursday decided against raising the short-term interest rate they control. The Fed has held its benchmark rate at nearly zero since December 2008 in an effort to spur more borrowing and spending.That has kept mortgage rates quite low for most of the six years since the recession. The rate for a 30-year fixed mortgage averaged just 3.9 percent nationwide last week, according to the mortgage buyer Freddie Mac. Home sales had plunged to an annual rate of just four million when the Fed pegged its rate to zero.Still, it’s not clear that a rate increase by the Fed — which may come at its next meetings in either October or December — will have that great an impact on sales, at least in the short run.Nela Richardson, chief economist at the real estate broker Redfin, says most home buyers are not likely to be deterred by a small increase in mortgage rates. More buyers are worried about qualifying for a mortgage to begin with. “People are not that concerned that a rate hike will torpedo their plans to buy a house,” Ms. Richardson said.Advertisement