AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedEvercore Partners has poached yet another senior banker from a rival firm, as the investment bank continues to build its practices.The firm said on Monday that it has hired Daniel M. Aronson from Lazard to serve as a top adviser on corporate bankruptcies and financial restructurings.Evercore has proved itself more aggressive in hiring veteran bankers in recent months. In July, the firm hired William Anderson, one of Wall Street’s most prominent advisers against activist investors, from Goldman Sachs in a surprising coup.Mr. Aronson will be based out of Evercore’s new Chicago office, which is scheduled to open in November, and will be responsible not only for corporate reorganizations but also with helping enhance the firm’s Midwest presence.He had spent 15 years at Lazard as a specialist in bankruptcies, although in 2012 he was given an additional mandate to bolster investment banking coverage out of Chicago.He previously worked at the Peter J. Solomon Company and at Ernst & Young. Among the reorganizations on which he worked were those of Adelphia Communications, Northwest Airlines and Trump International.“We are extraordinarily pleased to have a banker of Dan’s quality and experience join Evercore’s restructuring and debt advisory platform,” Roger C. Altman, Evercore’s executive chairman, said in a statement. “Dan’s track record for advising on many of the largest and most complex restructuring transactions will enhance our ability to grow our restructuring business, and his stature in the Midwest corporate marketplace will enhance our standing with those companies.”Mr. Aronson isn’t the first restructuring banker whom Evercore tried to hire from its rival. In late 2011, the firm sought to poach David Kurtz from Lazard. Instead, he was promoted to global head of its restructuring business, although people briefed on the matter said at the time that the personnel move had been in the works for some time.Advertisement