AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Olaf StorbeckVolkswagen has found itself in a situation not unlike the interest-rate scandal involving Libor.Authorities in the United States say Europe’s biggest carmaker rigged emissions tests. With VW, it is too early to know how widespread the bad behavior was, whether bosses knew and who else was involved. But without rogue traders to blame, VW may well find it harder to excuse itself.According to federal regulators, VW admitted on Sept. 3 that some of its diesel vehicles were fitted with a device which the authorities said would “cheat on clean air rules.” There was, regulators said, a “sophisticated software algorithm” that turned on a car’s emission control technology when the vehicle was undergoing official emissions testing. During normal driving, emissions of nitrogen oxides, an exhaust gas harmful to humans, were up to 40 times above the legal limit. Turning off the emission control system during normal use apparently helped to improve driving performance.VW’s chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, has already apologized publicly. He has ordered an investigation, led by people unconnected to the carmaker. Volkswagen has also recalled 500,000 diesel vehicles sold in the United States since 2009. If vehicles outside the United States were fitted with a similar device, the emissions violations — and the ensuing reputational damage — may be far bigger. In Germany, 48 percent of all new passenger cars are diesel, compared with less than 1 percent in the United States.Banks accused of rigging the London interbank offered rate, known as Libor, which is the rate they charge each other for loans, could point to rogue individuals, acting to enrich themselves personally, to reduce the negative impact. Volkswagen may struggle to save face similarly. The design of a new car is a multiyear collaborative activity. The opportunity for individual Volkswagen engineers to gain personally seems limited. Meanwhile, the German group is known for having a centralized internal culture.United States authorities may be able to levy fines on Volkswagen of up to $18 billion.. Volkswagen may also have to compensate customers for misleading them about a car’s performance with working emission control systems. Shareholders could sue for compensation, too.The market seems to have few illusions about the depth of VW’s embarrassment and its cost. Shares sank 22 percent on Monday, wiping away more than 13 billion euros in market capitalization. If this plays out anything like the Libor scandal, there could be worse to come.Advertisement