AdvertisementSupported byBy Patricia CohenBurdened by debt and struggling to meet its financial obligations, Freedom Communications, the media company that owns The Orange County Register, filed for bankruptcy protection on Sunday with an eye toward selling the company to the publisher and a group of local investors.In a letter to employees, Rich Mirman, the chief executive of Freedom and publisher of The Register, said he was leading a group of investors, including Mike Harrah, a real estate developer who bought The Register’s headquarters last year, to purchase the company at a court-supervised auction. Other competitors, however, could also make a bid for the troubled media group, based in Santa Ana, Calif.The letter, which was posted on the company’s website, said that publication of its two newspapers — The Register and The Press-Enterprise in Riverside — would continue and that the filing would have “minimal impact on the day-to-day operations of the business,” with no effect on advertisers and subscribers. Mr. Mirman, who took the helm last year, promised employees that they would receive full benefits from their pension plan.Although the company, which also owns glossy magazines, websites and some community newspapers, has accumulated more than $40 million in losses in recent years, Mr. Mirman said it was on track to earn a profit in 2015.The filing is the just the latest tumult for the media industry in general, and Southern California’s newspaper market in particular. Several other newspapers have been forced into bankruptcy in recent years, including the owner of The Los Angeles Times, the Tribune Company.This is the second time in six years that Freedom has turned to bankruptcy court for protection.The family-owned company filed for bankruptcy in 2009 before being taken over by a group of hedge funds. The new owners soon began selling off some of the company’s varied assets and dismantling the media conglomerate. In 2012, a savior seemed to arrive in the form of two Boston investors, Aaron Kushner and Eric Spitz, who promised to refocus on newspapers and reinvest in the company. They bought Freedom for about $50 million and assumed about $110 million in pension obligations and began an ambitious expansion. But the strategy failed and losses grew, followed by deep cuts in staff and budgets.According to The Register, Mr. Mirman, a former casino executive, developed a passion for the business, saying, “I’ve caught the bug of what news journalism can do in its community.” He acknowledged his group could face competition at the auction from others like Tribune Publishing. “It’s the court’s obligation to seek out the highest bid,” he said of the sale, which is scheduled to take place in the next 60 to 90 days.Advertisement