AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningOne of the biggest product defects in recent American manufacturing history, linked to at least 124 deaths and numerous injuries, was traceable to a mundane automobile part, the ignition switch. For General Motors, the debacle over how it handled that defect scarred the organization as it had to admit to repeated failures in simply identifying the problem that reflected a corporate culture that seemed to prize inaction and deflection.The settlement with the Justice Department that requires G.M. to pay $900 million, along with the resolution of a number of private lawsuits for which it set aside another $575 million, means the company has largely put the controversy to rest.But any case that involves a well-known company — the oft-repeated misquote of a former G.M. chief executive, Charles E. Wilson, that “what’s good for G.M. is good for America” — is going to be a viewed as a signpost. So the question now is what messages can be drawn from the case, both for companies that might find themselves the target of a criminal investigation and for the public that sees how justice is dispensed for corporate wrongdoing.The government hopes the settlement, which includes a deferred prosecution agreement to false statement and wire fraud charges, will serve as some form of deterrent to keep corporations from putting consumers at risk. A statement by the Transportation secretary, Anthony Foxx, asserted that “today’s announcement sends a message to manufacturers: deception and delay are unacceptable, and the price for engaging in such behavior is high.”But apparently not as high for G.M. as it was for Toyota, which paid $1.2 billion for covering up defects that caused unintended acceleration in its vehicles. The G.M. case involved multiple deaths, including one in June 2013 in Quebec, when many of its engineers and lawyers were already aware of the defect yet had delayed seeking a recall of the affected vehicles.The New York Times has exposed missteps and delays by automakers and federal safety regulators in responding to deadly defects in automobiles during what became a record year for recalls.How can a lower monetary penalty be imposed on a company for actions that resulted in numerous accidents causing substantial harm?It turns out that the two criminal charges filed against G.M., which will be dismissed in three years if it complies with the settlement, have almost nothing to do with the deaths and injuries that resulted from the faulty ignition switch. The primary violation involves the company’s failure to disclose to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration “a potentially deadly safety defect” that it was required to reveal within five days of learning about it, which can lead to a criminal fine against a corporation of $500,000.A second charge for violating the wire fraud statute appears to have been added because it authorized prosecutors to seek the forfeiture of any assets tied to a violation. That allowed for the payment of $900 million, an amount that appears to have little to do with how much money G.M. actually made on the defective vehicles and more about finding a round figure that would appear to be a substantial penalty. Like the false statement count, this charge is not based on the deaths caused by defective ignition switches, but only about how G.M. misled buyers of its certified used vehicles regarding their safety.The key message is not in the actual penalty or even the filing of criminal charges, but in how the Justice Department wants other companies under investigation to view the significant benefits realized by G.M. from its cooperation. Prosecutors have promised reduced penalties if corporations take a cooperative stance early in an investigation, and now they can see the tangible benefits in this settlement.The New York Times reported that Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, who was also responsible for the Toyota prosecution, described G.M.’s cooperation as “fairly extraordinary” once it disclosed the defect in February 2014. Along the way, the company demonstrated its willingness to work with the government by furnishing “a continuous flow of unvarnished facts” during the internal investigation and waiving the attorney-client privilege in providing information that it might otherwise have withheld from the government.The issue of disclosing privileged information is something of a sore spot for the Justice Department because of problems it encountered a decade ago when prosecutors routinely demanded waivers from companies. That approach drew severe criticism from federal judges and Congress, leading to a change in policy that prohibits prosecutors from asking a company to provide privileged information as a condition of being considered cooperative in an investigation.Just because it can’t ask for privileged information does not mean the Justice Department can’t reward a company that makes such disclosures on its own. The benefits of “fairly extraordinary” cooperation are clear by comparing how the government approached the Toyota and G.M. cases, especially in light of G.M.’s conduct that was far more harmful and covered a much longer period.More vehicles, including old models, have been recalled in the United States in 2014 than ever before. Explore the size and scope of the recalls, and find out if your car has been affected.Unlike the announcement in the Toyota case that included appearances by then-Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and Mr. Foxx, the news conference for G.M. “was notably more subdued than the bravado” shown in the earlier case.Another company that may run afoul of the government for defective automobile parts is Takata, the Japanese manufacturer, which was fined by N.H.T.S.A. for not being fully cooperative with its investigation into defective airbags. The company also rejected creating a compensation fund for those injured by its product, something G.M. did that helped earn credit for being cooperative. Don’t be surprised if Takata, which is under investigation by the United States attorney’s office in Detroit, eventually pays a higher fine for defective airbags than G.M. did.Another message in the settlement is that, once again, no individuals involved in the corporate decisions have been charged with wrongdoing. The statement of facts that G.M. admitted points the finger at two supervisors at the company, a safety director and a safety lawyer, as having knowledge of the defect and its role in causing accidents well before a recall was ordered. But moving from knowledge to criminal intent is, as is often the case, the seemingly insurmountable barrier to individual prosecutions.Reuters reported that Mr. Bharara pointed to the difficulties in charging any employees because of the “siloing” that occurs in corporate decision-making, so that “a particular person may have had only partial knowledge, and contributed in a chain of actions.” That is certainly not unique to G.M., although the company may have raised it to a fine art.This is the continual lament in the prosecution of corporate misconduct, that the law imposes such a high threshold to proving individual culpability for corporate decisions that it is impossible to prove criminal responsibility. Thus, while the settlement points out the culpable roles played by various individuals inside G.M., none are likely to ever face criminal prosecution, although a number lost their jobs.In a recent speech about efforts to focus on individuals responsible for corporate misconduct, Sally Q. Yates, the deputy attorney general, said that “Americans should never believe, even incorrectly, that one’s criminal activity will go unpunished simply because it was committed on behalf of a corporation.”But as much as the Justice Department says it will pursue individuals in future investigations, the reality of the corporate structure means that most employees — especially those at the top of the organization — can operate with a high degree of impunity, with G.M.’s settlement serving as the latest example.Advertisement