By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 21, 2015
LONDON — Zurich Insurance Group said on Monday that it was abandoning its pursuit of RSA Insurance Group, a smaller British rival, after a deterioration in its business performance, particularly in Zurich’s general insurance unit.Zurich also said that it was conducting an in-depth review of those general insurance operations and that it expected losses of about $275 million on insurance claims related to a series of explosions that rocked the port city of Tianjin, China, in August.The company, one of the largest insurers in Europe, had said in July that it was considering making an unsolicited bid for RSA. Last month, it indicated that it was willing to offer 5.6 billion pounds, or about $8.7 billion, for RSA.On Monday, Zurich said that its discussions with RSA had been terminated and that weaker-than-expected profit in its general insurance business in the first half of this year was expected to continue in the third quarter.AdvertisementGiven the claims related to the Tianjin explosions and the outcome of a recent review of its reserves, Zurich said that it expected its general insurance business to post an operating loss of about $200 million in the third quarter. The operating profit in the general insurance business declined 31 percent to $1.2 billion in the first half of the year.Advertisement“In light of the above recent deterioration in the trading performance in the group’s general insurance business, Zurich announced this morning that it has terminated its discussions in connection with a possible offer for RSA,” Zurich said in a news release.The news sent shares of RSA down 21.7 percent to 399 pence in early trading in London.RSA, which is based in London, offers insurance to consumers and businesses, including home, automobile, liability and marine insurance. The company is worth about £5 billion, based on its market capitalization.The insurer employs about 19,000 people worldwide and wrote £7.47 billion in net premiums in 2014.Zurich, founded in 1872, offers general and life insurance across several product lines. It has about 55,000 employees in more than 170 countries and had net written premiums of $48.7 billion in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In August, Zurich said it was willing to offer to pay 550 pence a share for RSA, a bid that was conditioned on completing a due diligence review of the insurer and receiving a recommendation from RSA’s board of directors that shareholders accept the offer.RSA had indicated its board was willing to recommend the offer if other terms were met.In a news release on Monday, RSA confirmed that its discussions with Zurich had ended, but that Zurich’s due diligence review “had not found anything that would have prevented them from proceeding with the transaction.”“Since that time, RSA has continued to make good progress in the delivery of its action plans, as evidenced by our half-year results,” RSA said.RSA brought in Stephen Hester, a former chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland, as chief executive in February 2014. He had taken the helm of R.B.S. after a government bailout in 2008. In December 2013, Simon Lee, RSA’s top executive, quit after a capital shortfall in its Irish operations.Since joining RSA, Mr. Hester has sold businesses and raised capital in order to bolster its balance sheet.RSA was created in 1996 by the merger of two of the largest British insurers, Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Abandoned Pursuit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.