AdvertisementSupported byBy Ravi SomaiyaTribune Publishing executives said in a conference call to investors on Tuesday that the company had reduced its guidance for the year based on what was described as a review of its holdings in Southern California.The company issued the revised guidance Friday evening, saying that its total revenue would be as low as $1.64 billion, compared with previous estimates as high as $1.7 billion. Its adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, it said, would be as low as $145 million compared with previous estimates as high as $175 million. The revised guidance, it said, “reflects lower forecasted revenue estimates for the year, concentrated in Southern California.”Two weeks ago, the company’s chief executive, Jack Griffin, dismissed the publisher of The Los Angeles Times and The San Diego Union-Tribune, Austin Beutner, after disagreements over strategy.Mr. Beutner had outlined a plan for increasing revenue based on close ties to the Los Angeles community. In interviews over the last week, current and former Times and Tribune employees portrayed that plan as a cause for hope compared with what they felt was a flawed and vague strategy from Tribune headquarters in Chicago, which was based on centralizing many operations.Tribune Publishing’s stock, which had once reached a high of over $23, dropped significantly on Monday and Tuesday from its price last week of around $11, and closed at $8.27 on Tuesday afternoon.On the call on Tuesday, Sandra J. Martin, Tribune Publishing’s chief financial officer, emphasized the connection between the new guidance and the recent turmoil. “The update resulted from a rigorous review of 2015 forecasts following the departure of a key executive,” she said, an apparent reference to Mr. Beutner’s dismissal two weeks ago. Executives did not take questions on the call.In an interview last week, Mr. Griffin defended the corporate strategy and predicted it would lead to new revenue. On Tuesday, he praised Mr. Beutner’s replacement, Timothy E. Ryan, and said that Tribune publishers must balance the needs of the entire company with those of their own newspapers.“Our publishers are also charged with participating fully in our companywide initiatives to develop new sources of revenue and leverage the company’s shared services infrastructure, which provides the digital and print scale necessary to succeed in this environment,” Mr. Griffin said.A spokesman for the company did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment from company officials in Los Angeles.Two people with knowledge of the company’s practices, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that it was unusual for Tribune Publishing to issue such guidance except around quarterly earnings.Advertisement