AdvertisementSupported byAdvertisingBy Michael McCarthyMeet advertising’s favorite new villains: the ultrarich.As resentment toward the extraordinarily wealthy swells in many parts of the country and as wealth inequality emerges as a topic of constant conversation on the presidential campaign trail, the advertising industry has made the caricature of the rich snob who doesn’t know, or care, about the struggles of ordinary Americans a popular target. The New York Lottery and the advertising agency McCann New York on Monday will release a humorous campaign showing the idle rich wasting their money in eccentric ways.Its message to New Yorkers of all economic groups who play the Lotto: “You’d make a way better rich person.”One TV commercial shows a man indulging in “pinot therapy” by soaking in a bathtub full of pinot noir. He gets annoyed at his butler for allowing a speck of cork to get in the tub.“A New York gentleman spends $28,000 a week on wine — to sit in,” the voice-over says. “You’d make a way better rich person. Lotto: Making more New Yorkers rich than any other game.”In another commercial, a man shows off the dead bat collection in his posh, wood-paneled home. “I have such enormous respect for these creatures,” he says. “Which is why I stuff them and hang them on the walls.”The get-rich-quick dream has always been the driving force behind Lotto’s popularity. But its $3 million jackpots can be overshadowed by the $100 million jackpots offered by multistate games like Powerball and Mega Millions, according to Gardner Gurney, director of the lottery division at the New York State Gaming Commission. Hence, its latest public-relations push. The new campaign “is a little bit out there,” Mr. Gurney said. “But it’s a lot of fun. It makes people think.”Tom Murphy, a chief creative officer of McCann New York, said the campaign tapped into the belief that rich people live by their own rules — and spend their money in odd ways. It can be fun for those who are less well-off financially to play the part of armchair millionaire.“Sometimes when you see what the very rich are doing, there’s a lot of fun in imagining how you might do a better job at it,” Mr. Murphy said. “You look at the guy who has the massive house on this beach and you say, ‘If I was rich, I’d have a smaller house on that beach. But I’d also have one in the south of France. Plus, a pied-à-terre in Manhattan.’ ”Lotto’s marketing effort will include TV and radio spots in English and Spanish. There is also an online “field guide” to the rich that reads like something from the National Audubon Society. (One representative species: “The Money Trader.”)The New York Lottery is not alone in using wealth inequality as a focus of its advertising. Sprint teamed up with the Los Angeles arm of Deutsch, an advertising agency, to create a humorous campaign called “Too Rich to Care” last spring. The theme: While some people are so “stupid rich” that they don’t care if a phone company offers to cut their bill in half, for the rest of us, there is Sprint.One commercial shows an affluent mother and daughter who snicker at Sprint’s offer. “Like Daddy always says, money doesn’t spend itself,” the daughter says with a Southern twang. Another features three spoiled siblings. “When Sprint told us they’d cut our Verizon bill in half, we were like, ‘Why?’ ” asks one of them as he steps off a jet.If Sprint’s ads portrayed average Joes, few would have paid attention, said Mike Sheldon, Deutsch’s chief executive for North America. But because they lampooned the stereotype of the spoiled rich brat, they connected with viewers.“Snobby rich people make great common enemies,” Mr. Sheldon said. “It’s sort of the Paris Hilton or Donald Trump effect. You can only make fun of people who beg you to make fun of them. People think of snobby rich people as cartoon characters. So they can’t really be offended.”Those in the advertising world point to the 2008 economic crash as a turning point. In the wake of the downturn, any advertisements that appeared to present the wealthy in too positive a light risked criticism.General Motors’ Cadillac luxury division was criticized by some for its “Poolside” commercial last year in which a strutting, wealthy businessman type (played by the actor Neal McDonough) proudly contrasted work-obsessed Americans with lazy Europeans who take August off.Conservative commentators like Rush Limbaugh loved the ad, while many on the left did not. “Cadillac made a commercial about the American Dream, and it’s a nightmare,” read one headline in The Huffington Post.The problem, at least from the standpoint of the advertising industry, is that any misstep can cause consumer backlash — or worse, said Ernest Lupinacci, a branding consultant. That makes the ultrarich an inviting target. Mr. Lupinacci, who has also written for TV and film, noted that the caricature of the self-absorbed rich person is also a common foil in movies. “You can’t make fun of a poor person, you can’t make fun of a self-made person,” he said. “But you can poke fun at rich guys who didn’t earn it.”Advertisement