By EMILY STEELSEPT. 22, 2015
With little fanfare, Brian Williams returned to television Tuesday afternoon in his new position as a breaking-news anchor at MSNBC with coverage of Pope Francis’s arrival in the United States.“And good day,” Mr. Williams said in his familiar baritone, his first on-air words in his new role. “I am Brian Williams at MSNBC headquarters here in New York.”Mr. Williams then went directly into two hours of coverage following the pope’s arrival at Joint Base Andrews outside Washington. He called on a team of NBC News personalities and experts — including Kate Snow, Chuck Todd and Andrea Mitchell — to discuss mundane details, such as the pope’s age, health and love of ice cream, as well as the broader political, security and social implications of the visit.Mr. Williams was removed as anchor of NBC’s “Nightly News” in February after he fabricated his role in a helicopter incident in Iraq. A subsequent internal NBC investigation found that Mr. Williams had made a number of inaccurate statements about the helicopter attack and other reporting experiences, although most were during public appearances, not news broadcasts.AdvertisementHe did not address the controversy during his broadcast on Tuesday.Mr. Williams, wearing a navy blue suit and blue-striped tie, anchored the broadcast from a studio, with the MSNBC newsroom as the backdrop.AdvertisementHe smiled and displayed a sense of humor, laughing about a comment the pope made about his security being in God’s hands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The live broadcast was not flawless. There were technical problems in communication with correspondents. At one point, Mr. Williams stumbled over a word. He also mistakenly credited a comment about how the pope’s visit would cool the tenor of the presidential campaign to Mr. Todd, who quickly corrected him.Mr. Williams had kept a low profile since losing his job as NBC’s main anchor. In June, he started to try to repair his public image during an interview with his NBC colleague Matt Lauer for the “Today” show. Mr. Williams said during the segment that he blamed his ego for telling stories that were not true.Mr. Williams’s new position at MSNBC, which came with a salary cut, presents the opportunity for him to restore the trust he once commanded as one of the nation’s most respected broadcast journalists. MSNBC is overhauling its daytime programming to focus on hard news rather than opinion.While media observers raised questions about how Mr. Williams’s role would evolve after the pope’s visit, they said that the event provided a chance for a smooth return. Considered breaking news, the visit is also planned, relatively predictable and unlikely to raise questions about credibility of the coverage, they said.“There is a halo effect when you are covering the pope,” said Andrew Heyward, a former president of CBS News, who now is a consultant to media companies.A version of this article appears in print on September 23, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Williams Back on Air After 7 Months .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.