AdvertisementSupported byBy Geraldine FabrikantThe Harvard University Management Company, which oversees an endowment of $37.6 billion, the academic world’s largest, generated a 5.8 percent return for its most recent fiscal year, significantly lower than several of its rivals.The return, for the year that ended June 30, beats the preliminary 5.6 percent figure that Cambridge Associates released as the average for endowments over $3 billion that it tracks.Still, “the Harvard result was disappointing,” said Charles Skorina, owner of a company that recruits chief investment officers for endowments.Mr. Skorina noted that Harvard had consistently underperformed its rivals over the last few years despite having one of the biggest and most expensive endowment offices.While Harvard’s biggest rivals in the universe of large endowments — including Princeton and Yale — have yet to release their returns, several people in the endowment sector said that those schools were all expected to release results of well over 10 percent. The people spoke on the condition of anonymity.Massachusetts Institute of Technology, for example, just reported a 13.2 percent return. Bowdoin College, a far smaller school with a $1.3 billion endowment, this week reported returns of 14.6 percent.Still, results varied widely. The University of Texas Management, which has $26.6 billion to manage, reported that it had a weighted 3.5 percent return for its two funds.Weak returns in the market are expected to depress investment performance at schools where portfolios are limited to stocks and bonds. But schools such as Harvard have access to a range of alternative investments such as private equity, hedge funds and real estate.In the last fiscal year, private equity and real estate fared particularly well. Although Harvard did not disclose its asset allocation in its most recent report, it had roughly 20 percent of its assets in private equity in the 2014 fiscal year; Yale, by contrast, had about 33 percent of assets in that sector. Harvard’s decision not to provide its asset allocation numbers made it harder to evaluate the impact of allocation decisions on performance.And although Harvard outperformed the internal benchmarks it sets for itself in all but the “absolute” or hedge fund category, the outperformance may not necessarily have been as impressive as those at other endowments. There were, however, some savvy moves, such as eliminating investment in commodity indexes when such investments were posting steep declines.Endowment performance is crucial at all colleges because a portion of the returns are used to finance their annual budgets. Harvard relies on the endowment for roughly 35 percent of its yearly expenses.Still the Harvard endowment’s leadership team has had a lot of turnover ever since Jack Meyer stepped down as its head in 2005. Harvard had — and continues to have — a strategy in which a portion of its money is managed internally and a portion is managed externally by investment firms including hedge funds. It is the only large university to use such an approach. Most endowment chiefs allocate the school’s funds to outside managers.Before Mr. Meyer’s departure, some members of the Harvard faculty had complained that money managers who worked at the Harvard Management Company were paid enormous sums of money compared with academics. The negative publicity was said to be a factor in Mr. Meyer’s decision to leave, despite a stunning record. He was replaced first by Mohamed El-Erian who had been at Pimco. Mr. El-Erian left in 2007 to return to that firm.He was followed by Jane Mendillo, who had once worked at Harvard and then ran the endowment for Wellesley College, but she quit in 2014 after returns proved disappointing.She has since been replaced by Stephen Blyth, who was promoted to president and chief executive after many years at the endowment firm. Mr. Blyth had previously held posts as head of internal management and public markets.In a long letter released with the performance figures, Mr. Blyth signaled that he intended to keep with Harvard’s history of managing some of its money internally, but he suggested that he would make changes.For example, he wrote that he would aim to have his internal money managers work more closely with one another by tying their compensation not just to the assets each one managed but also how the endowment as a whole performed.Still, Harvard may not pay the same sums as private firms, which could lead to difficulties in attracting and keeping talent.Advertisement