By EUGENE L. MEYERSEPT. 22, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The fate of the proposed new F.B.I. headquarters, to be built near the nation’s capital in return for its current building on Pennsylvania Avenue, is embroiled in a behind-the-scenes funding dispute involving the bureau, the General Services Administration and the federal Office of Management and Budget.Disagreement over how to pay for the 2.1-million-square-foot headquarters for 11,000 employees at one of three suburban sites is holding up release of the critical second request for site-specific proposals, draft environmental impact statements and the names of up to five development teams chosen to submit bids, according to governmental sources and others with knowledge of the discussions.“The fundamental problem with these federal real property assets is that there’s no money to replace and modernize them,” said Daniel M. Tangherlini, who was the administrator of the G.S.A., the government’s landlord, until he left for the private sector in February. “But there is also no money to leave them the way they are.”Currently, he noted, there is netting on one side of the J. Edgar Hoover building, a 41-year-old Brutalist structure, to prevent concrete from falling onto pedestrians below.AdvertisementRenovating the building would cost $850 million to $1.1 billion, according to the G.S.A., but that would not solve the problem because it houses only 52 percent of the headquarters staff.AdvertisementCongress has mandated that all of the employees now scattered among 21 leased facilities in the region — costing the government $168 million annually in rents — be moved to one location. Eliminating those leases could save the government some $50 million a year, about $1 billion over 20 years, according to one estimate.That is the long view, but it is the near term that is posing the problem.Last December, the G.S.A. sought to gauge the interest and qualifications of developers, asking them to assemble teams and submit their financials and qualifications by Feb. 20. Six groups came forward, from which the G.S.A. is to select up to five to make site-specific proposals. That selection, along with draft environmental impact statements, was to be released in the spring and the developer chosen this fall. But in May, the government announced a delay of several months.The government’s next request for proposals does not have to include its plans to pay for the new building, which would not be completed until, perhaps, 2023; only after that would the 6.7-acre Hoover site be turned over for demolition and redevelopment. But no award can be made until the funding is secured.In August, the Office of Management and Budget notified the F.B.I. and the G.S.A. that there was no money in the budget to cover costs for the project, including what the government might pay up front to acquire the chosen site or to rent back the facility once it is built. How to make the developer whole if the value of the Hoover building is less than its cost to build the new headquarters is also at issue.A congressional appropriation is an option, but it is considered unlikely. An alternative would be to have the developer include the cost of acquiring the new headquarters property in its formal bid, essentially an add-on that would be charged to the government.The budget office has told the bureau it must fund the project’s costs from its annual operating budget, according to an official with direct knowledge of the discussions who was not authorized to speak on the record. Under another scenario, the government would own the land, lease it to the developer, who would build the headquarters, and lease it back to the government upon completion. But the budget agency would prefer a plan in which, as Mr. Tangherlini described it, “the full costs have to be reflected in the budget for the year in which the obligation is made.”There is a widespread belief that the Hoover site, despite its prime location blocks from the Capitol and the White House, will be worth much less than the cost of constructing the new headquarters. How to compensate the developer for the difference has been a major part of the discussion.AdvertisementIn February, William Dowd, the G.S.A.’s project executive, said, without giving specifics, that arrangements would be made “to make the developer whole. We will provide specific information on the financing and transaction structure in Phase 2.”Putting together a formal proposal of the kind required in the next phase will not be cheap, costing perhaps as much $2 million, given all the planning, studies and consultants involved. In fairness to the bidders, one development lawyer said, a tentative funding plan should be part of the next public release.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Richard Haley, the F.B.I.’s assistant director for finance, facilities and real estate, was unavailable to answer questions about the project, according to an agency spokeswoman. The spokeswoman referred questions to the G.S.A., which did not respond to repeated requests for comment. David J. Haun, O.M.B. deputy associate director, also did not respond to interview requests.Plans to replace the Hoover building have drawn widespread interest. An initial “industry day” in 2013 to unveil the scope of the project attracted hundreds of developers, consultants and others to a meeting at the General Services Administration. After the G.S.A. made public its preferred three sites — two in Maryland and one in Virginia — and received submissions from major developers in February, the project seemed to have achieved some momentum.While the next crucial steps were delayed, the final award is still on the schedule for next May. Word had been circulating that the public “Phase 2” would occur in early September, but that has been pushed back because of discussions over funding.A related issue involves the sale of the sites to the government. The Springfield, Va., site is already almost entirely federally owned, but it is considered the least likely choice. The C.I.A. has a major secure facility there, and the cost of relocating it is estimated at $500 million to $800 million, an expense the developer would have to bear.Another tract, 80 acres in Landover, Md., is owned by Lerner Enterprises, a major developer of regional malls and offices. The third, in Greenbelt, Md., beside a commuter rail station, is owned by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority. A development group has an agreement with the transit authority to acquire and resell it to the government, which in turn has an option to buy it for the F.B.I. The government’s options to purchase the Maryland sites, reportedly for more than $100 million each, expire next July.“My No. 1 concern is the fiscal thing and transaction structure,” said Garth Beall, a development lawyer associated with the Greenbelt site. “That’s what keeps me up at night. I think G.S.A. has a lot of wishes but not a lot of concrete plans; maybe I’m wrong. It’s easy to send out requests for information, but when you’re talking about writing checks and putting shovels in the ground, it’s different, it’s crunchtime.”Whether the Office of Management and Budget will agree to an operating lease to pay for the project is “the billion-dollar question,” Mr. Beall added. He said he was “skeptical” the matter would be decided quickly.While there is more pressure now to resolve the funding issues, Mr. Tangherlini, the former General Services administrator, said these discussions had been going on for some time. Their resolution now is critical, he said, because of the deteriorating condition of the Hoover building.Advertisement“The simple fact is I don’t actually believe the no-build option, the freezing-it-in-amber option, is an option,” Mr. Tangherlini said.A version of this article appears in print on September 23, 2015, on Page B10 of the New York edition with the headline: Funding Dispute Over F.B.I. Headquarters Delays Next Step.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.