AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryCHARLOTTE, N.C. — When the votes were in and his victory assured, Brian T. Moynihan of Bank of America hustled quickly off the stage, his face showing no hint of celebration.Shareholders had just backed a proposal allowing Mr. Moynihan to keep his job as both chief executive and chairman, capping a monthslong campaign by the bank’s executives and its lead board member to win over wavering investors.But the vote — which occurred after a 13-minute, sparsely attended shareholder meeting Tuesday morning in downtown Charlotte — seemed like a mere formality. In the end, roughly 63 percent of shareholders said the board should have the authority to decide whether the bank’s chief executive should also hold the title of chairman.The vote became a flash point for shareholder activists, who said too many companies like Bank of America run roughshod over the wishes of their investors. Some of the nation’s largest pension funds in California, New York and Illinois had opposed the board’s proposal, saying two separate jobs would provide more oversight at the bank.Last October, the board unilaterally overturned a shareholder vote in 2009 that had required separation of the two roles. Charles Holliday was chairman until he stepped down this year. The board argued that dividing the roles was a decision made in another era — in the depths of the financial crisis when Bank of America’s very survival was in doubt.Bank officials, speaking with reporters Tuesday after the vote, called the results a “huge victory,” saying they were in line with the results at other companies that have faced proposals to separate the chairman and chief executive titles. Among the nation’s largest banks, only Citigroup has an independent chairman.“It’s one more piece in the process of the bank getting back to normal,” Mr. Moynihan said after the meeting, looking a bit more relaxed than he did on stage.Before the meeting, the proposal was not viewed as much as a referendum on Mr. Moynihan’s leadership, but on the governance practices at Bank of America. But with the results in, bank officials said the vote signaled broad confidence in Mr. Moynihan, who became chief executive in 2010.It has been a difficult time for Mr. Moynihan. In March, the bank struggled during the Federal Reserve’s annual stress test, designed to determine a bank’s financial health. As a result it gained only a conditional approval to increase its dividend. With the bank’s stock badly lagging competitors’ — shares are down about 12 percent this year — Mr. Moynihan has tried to shake up his management ranks, appointing a new chief financial officer among other moves.Still, the bank is being buffeted by forces outside of Mr. Moynihan’s control. The Fed’s decision not to increase interest rates last week was a blow to the bank’s earnings power. The pressure is growing on Mr. Moynihan to find other ways to increase profits. In the past, Bank of America has cut expenses and leaned heavily on the investment bank to generate earnings.But for all the bank’s troubles, Mr. Moynihan, who rose up through the ranks of FleetBoston, which Bank of America acquired in 2003, has managed to deepen his hold on the company, culminating in the vote on Tuesday.When asked whether he regretted that the board had unilaterally appointed him chairman last October, bringing outrage from some shareholder groups, Mr. Moynihan sounded ready to move on.“You never look back,” he said. “We learned a lot in the process.”The storm began to brew last October not long after Mr. Holliday decided not to stand for re-election as board chairman. The board briefly considered appointing a temporary chairman, but decided that might send the wrong signal to investors about confidence in the bank’s leadership. Instead, the board opted to overturn the shareholder vote in 2009 that had required a separate chairman, and to give the title to Mr. Moynihan.Jack O. Bovender, a former health care executive, was appointed the lead independent director. On Tuesday, Mr. Bovender shared the stage with Mr. Moynihan, in an apparent effort by the bank to showcase the importance of the lead director.“In 2008 and 2009, this was a badly broken company,” Mr. Bovender said after the meeting. He said that the previous vote to separate the two roles “was about the past C.E.O. and chairman, not about this C.E.O. and chairman.”The debate before Tuesday’s vote also raised broader questions about oversight at Bank of America, the nation’s second-largest bank by assets behind JPMorgan Chase.The proxy advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services, which favored separating the chairman role, pointed out that only four of the bank’s 13 board members had significant experience in financial services. The firm also noted that some board members served before the financial crisis when the bank made epic stumbles, including the acquisition of Countrywide Financial in 2008.Mr. Moynihan said it was helpful for members to have a range of experiences and expertise, not just in banking. Shrugging off suggestions that the board needed a shake-up, Mr. Moynihan said the bank had asked Charles K. Gifford, the former chief executive of FleetBoston, to remain on the board even though he had reached retirement age.The bank made an exception for Mr. Gifford to continue beyond the age of 72 because of his extensive expertise, Mr. Moynihan said. Mr. Gifford is seen by some as a key supporter of Mr. Moynihan.While the bank does not make public how its investors vote, many of its largest shareholders had been expected to follow the bank’s recommendation to keep the roles together.A portfolio manager at one of the bank’s largest investors said it was not clear that separating the roles would improve oversight. This person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, also expressed confidence in Mr. Moynihan’s leadership of the bank, despite the sluggish share price.Thomas K. Brown, chief executive of Second Curve Capital, a New York hedge fund that voted its Bank of America shares in Mr. Moynihan’s favor, said he was comfortable with the current leadership structure. He said that Bank of America’s board had taken a more active role since the financial crisis and that the chairmanship question had been blown out of proportion.“Good corporate governance is not determined by form, it is determined by substance,” Mr. Brown said in an interview on Tuesday. “And substance is when you have a strong lead director and active board members, and that is what Bank of America has.”Bank of America waged an all-out campaign to sway the vote, meeting face-to-face with dozens of investors, from London to Houston. Bank executives argued that Bank of America should have the same flexibility as other large American companies in deciding whether to combine its chief executive and chairman roles.The bank knew well ahead of the meeting on Tuesday that the outcome was trending in Mr. Moynihan’s favor because most investors cast their votes early.Still, some shareholder groups claimed a partial victory. “Even though it mustered a majority, Bank of America’s leadership emerges wounded and weakened from today’s vote,” said Michael Pryce-Jones, the director of Corporate Governance at CtW Investment Group, which works with funds that hold 21 million Bank of America shares.“The bank failed to secure the overwhelming victory it needed to show that it has investors’ confidence,” he said in a statement.In 2013, JPMorgan’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, prevailed in an effort by some shareholders to strip him of his chairmanship. About 70 percent of shareholders voted against that measure, up from about 60 percent when the issue came up in 2012.Advertisement