AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedIt seemed to be no big deal when Gary D. Cohn, the president of Goldman Sachs, spoke at a panel event Monday night.But Mr. Cohn, who had just flown in from Singapore, was appearing on short notice. Unbeknown to the audience, he was filling in because his boss, Lloyd C. Blankfein, had hours earlier learned he had cancer.Mr. Blankfein, who is Goldman’s chairman and chief executive, publicly revealed Tuesday morning on the firm’s website that he had what he described as a “highly curable” form of lymphoma.The 61-year-old Mr. Blankfein will remain in charge as he undergoes chemotherapy over the next several months. “My doctors have advised me that during the treatment, I will be able to work substantially as normal, leading the firm,” he said in a statement posted on the firm’s website on Tuesday.Still, the disclosure again thrusts into the spotlight the future of Goldman as it enters a ninth year under the leadership of Mr. Blankfein. Under him, Goldman bounced back from the financial crisis to continue its reign as one of the top banking and trading firms.Analysts and investors have long wondered who waited in the wings as a potential successor. Now that question has acquired greater urgency.The current group of likely candidates has come down to a small cadre of Goldman executives, according to people inside the company who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Should Mr. Blankfein step down in the near term, his most logical replacement is his longtime lieutenant, Mr. Cohn, who has served as the firm’s president since 2006. Mr. Cohn, who is six years younger than Mr. Blankfein, has been likened to Prince Charles — an heir waiting, and waiting, to ascend the throne.One rung below Mr. Cohn is a generation of younger Goldman officials. Among them are Harvey M. Schwartz, the firm’s chief financial officer and previously a top trading executive, and David M. Solomon, a co-head of investment banking and a longtime deal maker. Michael S. Sherwood, a vice chairman and a co-head of the firm’s European division, has also long been considered a potential successor.Others in the firm have discussed Pablo J. Salame, a co-head of Goldman’s trading arm, as a possible future candidate, given his role in the bank’s biggest business.Mr. Blankfein’s announcement is the second time in a little more than a year that a top financial firm’s chief executive has disclosed a serious illness. Last year, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase said he was being treated for a curable form of throat cancer. He disclosed his illness in similar fashion, believing it material to shareholders and employees.Mr. Dimon also faced questions about his potential successor, after a flurry of departures of high-level JPMorgan executives.In December, Mr. Dimon said his doctors had found no evidence of cancer in his body, a few months after he concluded treatment. During his treatments, he maintained much of his normal pace.“I wish my friend Lloyd a fast and full recovery,” the JPMorgan chief said in an emailed statement on Tuesday. “He is blessed with a lot of love and support from family and friends, including me.”And Warren E. Buffett, who extended Goldman a lifeline during the financial crisis — and who underwent treatment for prostate cancer three years ago — also wished Mr. Blankfein well.Shares of Goldman closed down 2 percent on Tuesday.For now, Mr. Blankfein still holds the reins. And while he has canceled travel for the next month, he will try to maintain a mostly normal schedule.“Fortunately, my form of lymphoma is highly curable and my doctors’ and my own expectation is that I will be cured,” he said in the statement.Mr. Blankfein had been feeling ill for weeks during the summer, according to people with direct knowledge of the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Mr. Blankfein also appeared to have lost a significant amount of weight.He consulted with doctors before receiving his final diagnosis around noon on Monday.Then around 7 p.m., he spoke with the top 20 members of Goldman’s management committee, made up of the firm’s most senior executives, according to people at the company who were not authorized to speak publicly.Mr. Blankfein’s illness is considered highly treatable. According to the National Cancer Institute, lymphoma is the most common type of blood cancer in the United States. It represented about 5 percent of all new cancers diagnosed in the United States last year, or about 80,000 cases.The disease begins in the lymph system, which is part of the body’s immune system, and is typically described as Hodgkin lymphoma or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Mr. Blankfein did not announce which type of lymphoma he has.The illness is the latest challenge for Mr. Blankfein, whose life has virtually been a Horatio Alger story. A New York native, he rose from a Brooklyn housing project — his father was a postal worker, his mother a receptionist — and public schools to Harvard College and Harvard Law, where he received scholarships and other financial aid.He briefly worked as a lawyer before joining J. Aron & Company, a prominent trading firm, just after Goldman bought the operation. From there, he ascended from gold salesman to a co-head of trading to president of Goldman, serving under Henry M. Paulson Jr.When Mr. Paulson left to become Treasury secretary in 2006, Mr. Blankfein took over. Within a few years, he was forced to steer Goldman through the financial crisis, shoring up its financing and reducing some of its risk.Along the way, he has become an elder statesman of Wall Street, becoming a spokesman on matters like same-sex marriage and delivering one-liners with no small amount of self-deprecation.He has recently been navigating a different sort of challenge, guiding the firm to a future when its trading arm is no longer the enormous moneymaker of years past.In his letter, Mr. Blankfein played down the difficulty of treating his lymphoma.“There are many people who are dealing with cancer every day. I draw on their experiences as I begin my own,” he said. “I have a lot of energy and I’m anxious to begin the treatment.”Nathaniel Popper, Chad Bray and Peter Eavis contributed reporting.Advertisement