By CHOE SANG-HUNSEPT. 22, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — The plot sounds like something out of a Korean television drama.An executive is kicked out of the management of his family’s $79 billion business empire and suspects his younger brother is behind the move. The elder brother enlists the help of the chairman — their father — in regaining power. But the younger brother dethrones their father, too, and consolidates control of the conglomerate, at least for now.Yet this isn’t fiction. It’s the saga of the Lotte Group, a household name in South Korea that includes a nationwide chain of hotels, shopping malls, movie theaters, apartment buildings, coffee shops and burger joints.Sibling disputes — like the feud this summer between the two sons of Shin Kyuk-ho, the 92-year-old founder of Lotte — are a recurring phenomenon at South Korean chaebol, or family-owned conglomerates. And as small as these squabbles may appear, they have direct implications for the country’s economy. Every major industry in South Korea is dominated by such groups, which include Samsung, Hyundai and LG.The country’s lawmakers were concerned enough that they called a parliamentary hearing on Lotte’s troubles last week, in which the younger brother personally apologized for the turmoil.Advertisement“There is hardly any major chaebol group that has not been rocked by a ‘war of princes’; it’s such a volatile issue that it’s a great blessing for Samsung and Hyundai that their current chairmen only had one son,” said Lee Ji-soo, the director of the Law and Business Research Center in Seoul, which monitors chaebol. “When investors demand better corporate governance at chaebol, they include transparency in succession plans.”AdvertisementSuch governance issues can be alarming to global investors. They fear that the combination of complex business structures and chains of succession tied only to which founder’s child is in favor exposes multibillion-dollar companies to upheaval.The families that run the top 10 chaebol own only 2.7 percent of their empires on average, according to government data. But typical chairmen wield what critics call kinglike control over their groups by keeping their companies interlocked through cross-shareholding. Units are supervised by executives whose careers rise and fall at the whims of the chairman.Lotte, South Korea’s fifth-largest chaebol, is a classic example.Its subsidiaries’ ownerships and futures are entangled in 416 rings of circular shareholding, which would make a diagram explaining it all look like a bowl of spaghetti. The structure is designed in part to prevent hostile takeovers by ensuring that no large stakes will be vulnerable. But it also means financial troubles at one company can easily spill over into the rest of the conglomerate.Chaebol chairmen delay selecting heirs until late in life. With multibillion-dollar fortunes at stake, their offspring commonly file lawsuits, install surveillance cameras and accuse each other of forging their father’s wills in winner-takes-all struggles.Family feuds have often broken up chaebol. In 2000, Hyundai was split into four groups by such a spat. In other cases, they have led to prolonged management disarray, as in the episodes at the Doosan and Kumho groups.Lotte is one of South Korea’s biggest employers, with 310,000 people on its payroll at home and abroad. In 2014, its 80 subsidiaries posted 93 trillion won, or $79 billion, in revenue. But it had humble roots.Mr. Shin stowed away on a ship to Japan in 1941, when Korea was still a Japanese colony. There, he attended college and started a chewing gum company, later expanding his business to his home country. His Korean wife died young, leaving him with a daughter. He later had two sons with his Japanese wife: Dong-joo, 61, put in charge of Lotte’s operation in Japan; and Dong-bin, 60, the leader of Lotte in South Korea.While Lotte’s growth stalled in Japan, the younger son, Dong-bin, helped build it into South Korea’s No. 1 retail giant through mergers and acquisitions. Under his leadership, Lotte expanded its petrochemical business, opened a chain of shopping malls in China and Vietnam and bought hotels abroad, including the New York Palace Hotel. It is building the 1,821-foot Lotte World Tower, South Korea’s tallest building, in Seoul.AdvertisementThen, over several months starting at the end of 2014, Dong-joo was stripped of responsibility.“It’s father, who is doing this,” Dong-bin told reporters in January, referring to his elder brother’s being edged out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In mid-July, Dong-bin was named chief executive of Lotte Holdings of Japan, the de facto holding company of the entire group. But Dong-joo fought back, appealing to his father and rallying support from uncles and his half sister, who local media said “holds the ears” of the wheelchair-bound patriarch. In late July, Dong-joo said the father had ordered the removal of Dong-bin and his allies from the board of Lotte Holdings.The next day, however, Dong-bin convened a board meeting, where Mr. Shin’s order was nullified and the father was stripped of his chairman’s title.In early August, the battle reached a crescendo. Dong-joo called his younger brother an ingrate mutinous son who had gone “against father’s will” in his greed to run the whole empire. Dong-joo also released documents anointing him as heir, which he said had been signed by his father.“Shin Dong-bin has no authority, no justification,” a frail Mr. Shin said, reading haltingly from a prepared statement, in video footage released by Dong-joo. “I can never understand or tolerate him for trying to exclude me, his father, from Lotte Group, which I have built for 70 years.”Supporters of Dong-bin called his older brother an incompetent manager and accused him and his cronies of “brainwashing” Mr. Shin’s “addled mind” and plotting to split the group. To chaebol watchers, such comments crossed a line: It is taboo for chaebol managers to speak in public about the condition of a chairman.“Lotte is what it is today due to the great leadership of the general chairman,” said Hwang Kag-gyu, a Lotte executive and an ally of Dong-bin, referring to the founder. “If you compare the performances of the two brothers, it’s clear who is the proven leader, who is better for the group and for its stakeholders and employees.”By mid-August, the dust had settled, with Dong-bin emerging as the victor. Shareholders of Lotte Holdings approved his leadership and his management plans, but the sibling dispute is not completely over. Dong-joo still is a major shareholder in key Lotte companies, and each brother has threatened to take the other to court.Advertisement“The management of the group remains in a medieval era,” Chosun Ilbo, a South Korean daily, said in an editorial.Dong-bin said the company would spend 7 trillion won, or about $5.9 billion, to remove many of the interlocking shareholder rings. That would make the conglomerate more resilient to losses at any of its component companies.“This happened because while Lotte has been growing, it didn’t do enough to improve its ownership structure and management transparency,” he said, bowing in apology at a news conference in Seoul last month.He said that he still respected his father. But, he added, “management is separate from the family.”A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘War of Princes’ Disrupts a South Korean Conglomerate, Upsetting Investors.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.