AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie StromMark Bittman, cookbook author and former New York Times columnist, is joining the Purple Carrot, one of the many new meal kit delivery services that have sprung up over the last several years.“We’ll be presenting a new website, incorporating Mark and a new image and language he’s helped develop,” said Andrew Levitt, founder and chief executive of the Purple Carrot. “We’ll also be starting a subscription-based business, where we currently are pay as you go.”The company, which was started in October 2014, will also begin offering meal kits to make dinner for two, in addition to the four-person kits it currently makes. And it will begin delivering meal kits on the West Coast. Until now, it has been primarily focused in the Northeast.The Purple Carrot is a vegan version of subscription meal kit services like Plated, Blue Apron, Green Chef and HelloFresh. Mr. Bittman will be involved in helping the company develop menus, as well as writing for its website, doing online chats on Twitter and other social media sites, and taking on other roles as the “face” of the business.Mr. Bittman announced in September that he would be leaving The New York Times to join a start-up with the goal of helping people eat more plants. Foodies have been speculating ever since about where he was going. Many thought he was joining Impossible Foods, which is working to find plant-based alternatives to meat; others thought he might join a venture capital firm.Mr. Levitt said he first met Mr. Bittman in mid-May in Washington after an introduction was made by a friend in the venture capital business. At that time, the Purple Carrot had been delivering its products for about seven months, establishing what Mr. Levitt called a “proof of concept.”“We really hit it off,” Mr. Levitt recalled. “The next day, he texted and said let’s talk, which we did for two hours on a Saturday.”Neither Mr. Levitt nor Mr. Bittman is a vegan or vegetarian. Rather, they are what Mr. Bittman has termed “flexitarians,” meaning they eat mostly plant-based diets with occasional meals with meat.“We’re not preaching veganism at all,” Mr. Levitt said. “I look at it as a great opportunity to make a real difference in the world by teaching people how to eat a plant-based diet that is good for health, good for the environment and good for animal welfare.”Mr. Levitt previously worked in the biotech business, as director of marketing for Genzyme and then as founder of HealthTalker, a health care marketing business, which he sold in 2012.The Purple Carrot was started with $125,000 and credit card debt, Mr. Levitt said. He then raised about $1 million from friends and family and is currently about two-thirds of the way through another effort to raise $3 million to support the company’s West Coast expansion.The company does not disclose how many people use its service, but Mr. Levitt said it had shipped about 100,000 meal kits by its first anniversary on Oct. 1. Customers pick two of four dinner options for the week ahead, and for $59, the Purple Carrot ships recipes and premeasured ingredients to make two meals for four people.Advertisement