By WILLIAM GRIMESSEPT. 23, 2015
Phil Patton, a prolific writer on design and technology who saw the deeper cultural messages in subjects as varied as the interstate highway system, Air Jordan sneakers, tire treads and Mountain Dew’s Mega Mouth Slam Can, died on Tuesday in Wayne, N.J. He was 63.The cause was complications of emphysema, his wife, Kathleen Hamilton, said.Mr. Patton’s keen eye for objects and their hidden significance made him a highly sought-after contributor for a host of magazines, including Art in America, Esquire, Smithsonian, Architectural Digest and Wired.For many years he wrote on design for the Home section of The New York Times, where he originated the Public Eye column in the late 1990s, and The New York Times Magazine. In recent years he contributed to the paper’s Automobile section and wrote for its Wheels blog.Although best known for his writing on product design, especially the design of cars, Mr. Patton could turn almost anything to account. His first book, “Razzle-Dazzle: The Curious Marriage of Television and Professional Football” (1984), described the way television affected the style of play and the business of the N.F.L. An abiding fascination with cars and highways led to “Open Road: A Celebration of the American Highway” (1986), and in “Made in U.S.A.: The Secret Histories of the Things That Made America” (1992), he examined common objects with the eye of a connoisseur and the mind of a cultural critic.Advertisement“He was an old-fashioned intellectual, curious about everything,” the architecture and design historian Christopher W. Mount said in a telephone interview. “He wrote a famous article about the tops of takeout coffee cups, how the indentations work. It sounds small, but he would expand these things and make them pertinent to the wider world.”AdvertisementHe did it with great flair. The Oakley Time Bomb watch, he wrote, “is a combination of Rube Goldberg and H. R. Giger, designer of sets for films like ‘Alien,’ with a dose of Groucho Marx’s Professor Flywheel thrown in.”He made short work of a toothbrush holder described by its makers as “pearlescent,” which, he wrote, was “not to be confused with pearl or even mother-of-pearl; think of it, maybe, as mother-in-law of pearl.”Lewis Foster Patton was born on March 23, 1952, in Durham, N.C. His father, Lewis, was an Air Force gunner left blind and badly wounded in a bombing raid over Japan during World War II. A few months after Lewis Sr.’s son was born, the crew member who had saved the father’s life died. In his honor, Lewis Sr. passed the man’s name, Phil, on to his son.Mr. Patton attended Harvard, where he was the arts editor of The Crimson and earned a bachelor’s degree in English and history in 1974. He graduated from Columbia University in 1975 with a master’s degree in comparative literature; he wrote his thesis on Vladimir Nabokov.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He worked briefly as a fact-checker for Esquire and as the editor of Delta’s in-flight magazine. But he had already begun contributing articles on art and design to a variety of publications while still in college, and he soon gave up steady employment for freelance work.In the mid-1980s, Mr. Patton underwent a kind of conversion, becoming more skeptical about European design and more appreciative of homegrown products. Calling himself “a recovering modernist,” he told New York magazine that “suddenly, the Art Deco spires of the Chrysler Building started to look a whole lot better than the steel-and-glass outlines of the Lever House.”Mr. Patton, who taught in the design criticism program at the School of Visual Arts in Manhattan, helped develop many museum shows, as either a curator or a consultant, notably “Different Roads: Automobiles for the Next Century” at the Museum of Modern Art in 1999, “On the Job: Design and the American Office” at the National Building Museum in Washington in 2001, and “Curves of Steel: Streamlined Automobile Design” at the Phoenix Art Museum in 2007. With Donald Albrecht, he was the curator of “Cars, Culture and the City” at the Museum of the City of New York in 2010.Mr. Patton lived in Woodland Park, N.J. His first marriage ended in divorce. In addition to his wife, he is survived by a daughter, Caroline Patton, and a son, Andrew.AdvertisementHis other books include “Dreamland: Travels Inside the Secret World of Roswell and Area 51” (1998), about the subculture of U.F.O. watchers; “Bug: The Strange Mutations of the World’s Most Famous Automobile” (2002); and “Michael Graves Designs: The Art of the Everyday Object” (2004).Serendipity often ruled Mr. Patton’s choice of subjects. He became interested in coffee-cup lids, for example, because they piled up around him in his car.“Gathering them up one day in an unaccustomed fit of neatness,” he wrote in his design blog in 2011, “I noticed how many varieties there were, and how complex the combination of instructions and indications on them, how various and intricate the devices for opening and locking back flaps — in short, how intensely designed they were.”Trivial? Not at all. “Coffee lids,” he continued, “show the whole vast machinery of modern culture.”A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2015, on Page B19 of the New York edition with the headline: Phil Patton, 63, Scrutinizer of the Mundane.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.