AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesIt’s another busy week for earnings reports in Europe as several of the region’s biggest banks plan to report their third-quarter results, including the British lenders HSBC and Standard Chartered, the Swiss bank UBS and the French lenders Société Générale and Crédit Agricole.Uncertainty in the financial markets in the third quarter weighed on the results of several lenders that had already reported, particularly in bond and fixed-income trading. Several European lenders this year have hired new chief executives as they seek to reshape their businesses in a tighter regulatory environment, which includes requirements that they hold more capital. Both Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank have announced plans to greatly reduce costs and shrink their operations under their new chief executives. —Chad BraySenior executives from Google and Facebook will be among the 30,000 participants expected to gather in Dublin for one of Europe’s largest technology conferences, Web Summit, which starts on Tuesday. The annual event is likely to highlight Ireland’s role as a low-tax haven for many of the world’s largest tech companies, which has put it under increasing pressure. Some other European countries, along with some further away, think that Ireland has used its low corporate tax rate to unfairly attract global companies. —Mark ScottA pack of media giants will report earnings this week, shedding light on whether the industry is out of the woods yet. The companies reporting results include Walt Disney, 21st Century Fox, Time Warner, CBS and Discovery Communications.Last quarter, the industry suffered a mass sell-off on the stock market because of fears of cord-cutting, when people cancel their cable subscriptions for cheaper streaming alternatives. The concerns were amplified by steep ratings declines and weak advertising sales. While shares in media companies have mostly recovered since then, executives will still probably face questions about how they are preparing themselves for the digital future of the television business. —Emily SteelJapan Post, the network of post offices that doubles as one of the world’s largest banking and insurance groups, is set to make its stock market debut on Wednesday in a $12 billion listing that is the largest initial public offering globally this year. The Japanese government is selling 11 percent of Japan Post in three separate stock offerings for the parent company — which operates the mail-delivery system — the savings bank and the insurance businesses. It is the largest new stock offering in Japan since 1987.The privatization is the culmination of a 10-year political battle. The Japan Post Bank controls more than 200 trillion yen, or about $1.7 trillion, of savings from Japanese households. Much of it is used to finance government projects, and critics have called the system a source of wasteful, politically motivated spending. —Jonathan SobleWednesday morning, the Commerce Department will report new data on the nation’s trade balance in September. Economists are expecting a net trade deficit of $41 billion, a significant improvement from the $48.3 billion gap in August. The improvement is somewhat surprising, given weakness in China and the headwinds created for domestic companies by the strong dollar. If the experts are wrong, and the gap is wider than expected, it would not bode well for economic growth in the third and fourth quarters. —Nelson D. SchwartzFacebook reports its third-quarter earnings on Wednesday, and analysts expect another blockbuster quarter of roughly $4.3 billion in revenue, and earnings per share of about 52 cents. As always, Wall Street will be looking at the growth in the number of Facebook users, which is approaching 1.5 billion, as well as the amount of time people spend using the platform. Keep an ear out for any new statistics on video advertising, one of the company’s largest financial priorities. —Mike IsaacJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, will testify on Wednesday about regulatory issues before the House Financial Services Committee. The Fed is supposed to have a vice chairman for regulation, who would make regular visits to Capitol Hill. But the position has been vacant since it was created five years ago, and Congressional Republicans pressed Ms. Yellen to appear instead. The hearing will probably focus on the overhaul of financial regulations since the 2008 crisis. —Binyamin AppelbaumAnheuser-Busch InBev, the world’s largest brewer, has until Wednesday to make a formal offer for its closest rival, SABMiller, under British takeover rules. The maker of Budweiser and Stella Artois, Anheuser-Busch InBev struck an agreement in principle in October to acquire SABMiller for about $104 billion, and British regulators extended the deadline to complete a deal until this week.Anheuser-Busch InBev said last week that it had completed its “due diligence review” and confirmed that “facilities which will allow AB InBev to provide certain funds in support of the cash components of the possible offer have been negotiated and can be executed at short notice.”The deal, if consummated, would create a behemoth in the beer industry with annual revenue of about $64 billion. And it is expected to attract extensive regulatory scrutiny given the size of the combined company and its potential dominance in several markets worldwide, including the United States. —Chad BrayThe Bank of England will announce its monthly decision on whether to raise a crucial interest rate on Thursday. The Monetary Policy Committee is expected to leave the benchmark rate steady at 0.5 percent, where it has been since March 2009. At its October meeting, eight of the committee members voted to keep the rate unchanged, finding “the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate,” according to committee’s minutes. Ian McCafferty was the sole dissenter, arguing that rates should be increased to 0.75 percent to keep inflation from overshooting the bank’s medium-term targets, according to the minutes. —Chad BrayFriday morning, the Labor Department will report the latest figures on hiring and unemployment in October. The monthly jobs report is a major economic indicator, but this one is especially important because it will figure heavily in whether the Federal Reserve decides to raise interest rates when its policy makers meet in mid-December. Wall Street is expecting an increase of 180,000 jobs and the unemployment rate to remain flat at 5.1 percent. Anything above 200,000 would significantly increase the odds of a December rate increase, although the Fed will also have the employment report for November to consider by the time it meets. —Nelson D. Schwartz Berkshire Hathaway, the conglomerate run by Warren E. Buffett that owns businesses ranging from the railroad Burlington Northern Santa Fe to Fruit of the Loom underwear, is scheduled to report earnings on Friday. The company missed earnings expectations last quarter because of weakness in its core insurance operations, but its portfolio of noninsurance divisions has shown strong performance. —Michael J. de la MercedAdvertisement