By LANDON THOMAS Jr.SEPT. 23, 2015
When Mark L. Hart III, a hedge fund investor based in Texas, makes an investment bet, he does it in the style of his home state: big time.Since 2007, his winners have included high-risk, high-return wagers that the United States housing market would collapse and that Greece would go bankrupt.But Mr. Hart’s most audacious gamble to date may well be the one he is making on China. He is betting that the mini-devaluation of China’s currency last month was a mere appetizer to a 50 percent currency implosion that he predicts will come when foreign investors pull their money out of China.Such an extreme drop in China’s currency, the renminbi, would propel a broader rout in emerging-market currencies — from South Korea to Turkey to Brazil — and result in a sustained global slump as China’s borrowing binge grinds to a halt.Advertisement“Extreme credit growth usually leads to a credit bust,” Mr. Hart said in an interview on Real Vision TV — a new media venture in which sophisticated investors and financial experts offer their insights to fellow practitioners in a Charlie Rose-style format. In the video, which was produced a year ago — well before the recent currency devaluation — Mr. Hart explained how investors pulling their money out of China would lead to a collapse of the renminbi. “It is the story of 1997 and the Asian currency crisis,” he warned.AdvertisementA growing number of investors like Mr. Hart have concluded that a dollar that strengthens with the United States economy will have a devastating effect not only on China but on emerging markets in general. Their view is that the trillions of dollars that chased risky investment opportunities in China, Brazil, Turkey and other countries are swiftly exiting and that the pace will pick up when the Federal Reserve eventually raises interest rates.The result, they say, will be plunging currencies, corporate defaults and a sustained growth slowdown over the next few years. This week, emerging-market currencies continued their decline, led by Brazil, Turkey, Mexico and South Africa.John H. Burbank III, a veteran emerging-market investor at Passport Capital, a $4 billion hedge fund in San Francisco, has earned stellar returns this year by betting on weak commodities and imploding emerging-market stock markets and currencies.In a report by HSBC on top-performing hedge fund managers, a special opportunities fund managed by Mr. Burbank increased 29 percent through July of this year. Through August, his Global Strategy Fund was up 14.5 percent.“Emerging markets are being liquidated,” Mr. Burbank said in a separate Real Vision interview. This will continue, he argued, as investors keep taking their dollars out of these economies.At the root of this investment thesis is the belief that China’s 3 percent currency devaluation last month was not a one-time event, as many analysts have suggested.Instead, these investors think that after a borrowing and investing frenzy — much of which was financed by dollar-based lenders — China is experiencing a run on the bank similar to what happened to Asian countries in 1997 when their semi-pegged currencies collapsed.AdvertisementIn the first quarter of this year, $109 billion left Chinese banks for overseas institutions, according to the Bank for International Settlements, a clearinghouse for global central banks.And the investors further think that the country’s $3.5 trillion in foreign exchange reserves — down from $4 trillion a year ago — will not be enough to prevent a large-scale currency rout.According to Tim Lee of Pi Economics, a research firm based in Greenwich, Conn., emerging-market borrowers have accumulated $3 trillion in cheap dollar-based loans in the last decade of extra-loose central bank policies.China has been at the forefront of this so-called carry trade, in which corporations and countries tap dollar-based lenders and then invest the proceeds in higher-yielding assets denominated in local currencies, such as real estate, commodities and large-scale investments.As long as interest rates in the United States remain low and emerging-market currencies remain strong, these trades have been highly profitable. But as rates in the United States increase and the values of local currencies plunge, these profits evaporate, causing investors to flee — as they have in countries like Turkey, Brazil and South Africa.Mr. Hart calculates that the size of the Chinese carry trade is around $2 trillion, by far the highest figure for any emerging-market borrower. And his view from the beginning has been that the dollars that have flowed into China — financing an investment rate of 50 percent of the overall economy — must eventually flow out again.“It is the greatest carry trade in modern history,” Mr. Hart said. “There is nothing that is even close.”To calculate China’s ability to prevent a run on the renminbi, Mr. Hart has focused on an obscure financial measure that is attracting increased attention as analysts scramble to gauge how vulnerable emerging-market currencies have become.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The ratio examines a country’s stash of dollar reserves — its primary asset pile — relative to all the short-term money it must pay back on demand, such as deposits socked away in banks.AdvertisementIn the event of a currency crisis, these funds would flee. So economies with a large proportion of cash reserves compared to these broad liabilities would be in the best position to defend their currencies.According to a recent paper by economists at Prudential’s bond division, China’s foreign currency reserve ratio — in effect its net cash position available to defend against speculators — is just a bit over 20 percent, putting it in the neighborhood of countries known to be vulnerable to capital outflows, like Brazil, Turkey and South Africa.“If there is a run on the currency, everyone will want to turn their yuan into dollars,” said Jurgen Odenius, the chief economist of Prudential Fixed Income. Yuan is a shorthand reference to China’s currency. “And on that basis, China’s foreign exchange reserves do not rank among the stronger countries. There is a lot of leverage in the system.”Since the dollar began its relentless move upward about a year ago, the Turkish lira has lost 35 percent, the Brazilian real has dropped 65 percent and the South African dollar has declined 20 percent.But many analysts point to the weakness in currencies that are trade competitors with China as being a more telling sign that China’s currency will devalue further. The Japanese yen has fallen 60 percent against the dollar since 2012, and over the last year, the Korean won and the Taiwan dollar have lost more than 10 percent.As such, China’s 3 percent currency adjustment does absolutely nothing to improve its export competitiveness, said Julian Brigden of Macro Intelligence 2 Partners, an independent research firm based in Vail, Colo.Of course, having a bright idea does not guarantee it will make money. Mr. Hart, who reaped 500 percent and 200 percent returns on his mortgage and European trades, has yet to hit the jackpot on his China play even though he first put it on in 2010.It could also be that the Federal Reserve’s reluctance to increase interest rates will weaken the dollar and take the pressure off China and other emerging-market currencies.AdvertisementMr. Hart, who is 43, has a different approach compared with most hedge fund managers. There is his Texas domicile, which he credits with keeping him and his team at Corriente Advisors at a safe distance from the groupthink traps found in traditional hedge fund centers in New York, London and Greenwich. (The name of his firm is taken from Corriente cattle, a longhorn breed.)A classic macro investor, he will identify a theme, raise money from wealthy individuals and institutions and then return the cash, regardless if his bet has paid off or not.So he gets paid not for sitting on a pile of assets but when the gamble pays off, at which point he takes a slice of the profit. Mr. Hart’s China bets consist mostly of buying currency derivatives that pay off if the renminbi loses value against the dollar.This June, he closed his China fund, just months before the devaluation. But he has kept his China bet on for himself and several private investors. Mr. Hart would not comment on whether he had plans to start a new China fund.In his Real Vision interview, Mr. Hart explained that since 2006, he had been putting on a series of disaster trades in the belief that the world economy would be entering a sustained phase of deflation and low growth.The United States mortgage and European bets represented the first two legs of this thesis; China was the third.“My fund would have benefited quite a bit, but my timing was off,” Mr. Hart said in an email exchange. “I believe that there is still much more downside in the yuan.”A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Fund Is Going Short on Renminbi.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.