AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Olaf Storbeck and Antony CurrieMartin Winterkorn’s resignation as Volkswagen’s chief executive clears the way for sweeping changes at Europe’s largest carmaker.VW needs to explain how 482,000 of its United States diesel passenger vehicles were rigged to cheat on emissions tests – with software that was also installed in 11 million cars globally. But it also needs to reform its culture and radically simplify an overly complex structure. A good place to start would be to overhaul executive compensation.Mr. Winterkorn took home 15.9 million euros, or $17.8 million, last year, not including pension benefits. That made him one of Germany’s highest-paid bosses. VW’s former chairman, Ferdinand Piëch, who resigned in April, was the country’s best-remunerated chairman in 2014, with €1.5 million .Bonuses of €68 million, mostly in cash, accounted for some 90 percent of Mr. Winterkorn’s pay from 2009 to 2014, the period when Volkswagen was manipulating emission tests. During most of that time, he was not only the chief executive of the entire company but was also boss of the VW passenger car brand that sold the bulk of the doctored cars. He was also directly responsible for the company’s research and development operations.The company set aside €6.5 billion on Tuesday just to cover the potential costs of recalling and fixing the affected cars. That equates to roughly 60 percent of the net income Volkswagen is expected to earn this year, according to Thomson Reuters data.That could be just the start, though. The Environmental Protection Agency could in theory hit VW with a bill as high as $18 billion. In addition, the company’s market value has plunged by some €22 billion and it may lose sales and face other legal claims as a result of the fiasco.Ideally, Mr. Winterkorn should shoulder his share of the financial pain. His employer should claw back some or all of his bonuses, akin to what banks have promised to do after the 2008 financial crisis.For now, it looks as if Volkswagen’s compensation program lacks any mechanism to do that. The company’s board could, of course, apply moral pressure. And it should certainly consider a clawback policy for future top executives. That would send a strong message to prospective managers, customers and regulators alike.Olaf Storbeck is a columnist and Antony Currie is an associate editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement