By SYDNEY EMBERSEPT. 23, 2015
The current television landscape is a challenging one for advertisers. Ratings are down but the amount of programming is sharply up, along with the number of streaming options available, many of which allow viewers to skip commercials altogether.Now, as advertisers consider the best ways to spend their money, the excitement that once greeted the beginning of the fall television season has given way to anxiety. Industry analysts and advertising executives said the upfront market — the annual ad sales period that begins in May with lavish presentations by the networks — was unambiguously weak this year.Magna Global, an ad-buying group owned by the Interpublic Group, estimates that the total amount of money advertisers committed during the upfront market this year fell 10 percent for broadcast networks and 5 percent for cable networks.Yet, advertisers have still poured billions of dollars into the fall TV season, which begins in earnest this week with a flood of new programming. Advertising and television executives say activity has picked up during the so-called scatter market, when advertisers buy commercial time during the season, but they also acknowledge the dark clouds hovering over TV Land.Advertisement“What you can’t do on the one hand is say, ‘Television is dead,’ because there’s a huge demand,” said Rob Norman, chief digital officer of WPP’s GroupM. “On the other hand, you can’t say ‘Everything is O.K., television is fine.’”AdvertisementAdvertisers still see conventional prime-time television as a way to reach a huge audience. But as more viewers record shows to watch later and shift to on-demand and streaming services like Netflix and Hulu, the notion of real-time viewing has declined, especially for scripted TV shows. And that has made it harder for networks to persuade advertisers to open their wallets.Magna Global predicts that TV advertising in the United States will fall 3.5 percent this year, to $63.3 billion.At the same time, the percentage of ad dollars going to digital media continues to rise.Advertisers are especially concerned that traditional television is losing its effectiveness as a way to reach young audiences, who are increasingly watching shows online.According to a recent report from the research firm Forrester, 36 percent of the core television audience — defined as those aged 18 to 58 — now watch traditional television in a typical month. That is down 2 percent from last year.That shift in viewing behavior has made many advertisers rethink their marketing strategies.General Electric, for instance, has for the last several years largely moved away from prime-time advertising, said Linda Boff, the newly appointed chief marketing officer. The company, which still advertises on television during live sporting events and late-night shows, has pushed onto digital platforms like Twitter and Vine to capture the attention of younger consumers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We want to be where our audience is spending their time, period,” Ms. Boff said.To be sure, television shows can still attract advertisers. One show that has generated significant buzz is the Fox series, “Empire,” which begins its second season on Wednesday. Advertising executives say that Fox is selling 30-second commercial spots for half a million dollars.“ ‘Empire’ has resonated,” said Lia Silkworth, an executive at Tapestry, part of Starcom Mediavest Group’s multicultural division. “As an agency, we know that there’s going to be a lot of live viewing. People aren’t going to want to miss out on being able to talk about what they saw.”Ad executives said that shows including NBC’s “Blindspot,” a one-hour drama about an amnesiac, tattooed woman discovered in a duffel bag in Times Square, and ABC’s “The Muppets” could also attract big, real-time audiences.AdvertisementTelevision networks are also coming up with new ways to lure advertisers. Fox International Channels, for example, is introducing a way for advertisers to buy global campaigns during popular shows like “The Walking Dead.” The goal, said Liz Dolan, the chief marketing officer of Fox International Channels, is to give advertisers a way to maximize their exposure during shows that huge numbers of people are watching at the same time around the world.“All brands have a need to cut through, and the big water-cooler shows cut through better than anything out there,” Ms. Dolan said.Digital alternatives are also reshaping the advertising landscape. While traditional prime-time television might give advertisers a way to reach big audiences, social media outlets like Facebook, Twitter and Snapchat can offer less expensive ways to connect with specific consumer groups. (In a recent interview, David Lawenda, the head of global marketing solutions in the United States for Facebook, said that the social network offered “prime-time reach with late-night pricing.”) These sites are also going directly for television’s heart by giving advertisers ways to reach television viewers during, for example, a commercial break, when many turn to their mobile devices and social media.Although ad money might be flowing more toward digital media, traditional television still receives a significant proportion of most advertisers’ budgets. A big difference now is that many advertisers see television as one part of a broader marketing strategy.“TV in general is on the list of ingredients that we know we want to put into our recipes,” said Ivan Pollard, a top marketing executive at Coca-Cola North America. “It’s just a question of how and how much.”A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fall TV Season Arrives and Finds a Changed Ad Landscape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.