By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 23, 2015
LONDON — The reinsurance provider Swiss Re said on Wednesday that it had agreed to acquire Guardian Financial Services from the European private equity firm Cinven for 1.6 billion pounds, or about $2.5 billion.The deal for Guardian Holdings Europe, which operates under the Guardian Financial Services name, is expected to increase and diversify the business of the Swiss reinsurer’s Admin Re unit.The transaction will add 900,000 annuity, life insurance and pension policies in Britain and Ireland, giving Admin Re more than four million policies in total.“This acquisition is an excellent opportunity for Admin Re to further enlarge its successful business and diversify its portfolio,” Michel M. Liès, the Swiss Re chief executive, said in a news release.Advertisement“It is proof that we can deliver on our ambitions to seek profitable growth opportunities for Admin Re in the U.K.,” he added. “The expected returns exceed our profitability targets for new business and represent an excellent fit with our Group strategy as well as with Admin Re’s capabilities and existing infrastructure.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Guardian Financial Services, based in London, is a so-called closed-book insurance consolidator. The company manages about £18 billion in assets.AdvertisementMuch like Admin Re, Guardian Financial Services does not write new policies. Instead, it acquires blocks of existing insurance policies from banks and insurers looking to sell noncore assets or provides insurance against potential losses on policies written by others.The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to be completed early next year.The deal is to be financed with cash on hand and debt.Swiss Re, based in Zurich, provides reinsurance and insurance products. It generated earned premiums and fee income of $31.3 billion in 2014 and has more than 12,000 employees.A version of this article appears in print on September 24, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Insurance Diversification.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.