AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — Since it was created in 1994, the Brazilian currency, the real, has been synonymous with the country’s return to financial stability and its subsequent ascent as an economic power.But a stunning decline in the value of the currency — dropping to a record low against the dollar this week — is now the latest blow to Brazilian businesses struggling with recession.The weakness in the real is causing companies to delay plans and deals, and the market for initial public offerings has been effectively frozen.“The level of uncertainty and volatility we are facing is making pricing assets a significant challenge to anyone,” said Daniel Wainstein, who heads operations in Brazil for the investment bank Greenhill & Company.Or, as one private equity manager said: “Everything is on hold.”Dozens of Brazilian companies, especially the oil giant Petrobras, have dollar-denominated debt and are being hit especially hard. The Brazilian consulting firm Economatica estimates that the Petrobras debt will increase to 455.8 billion reais this quarter from 344.6 billion reais, solely because of the fluctuation in the value of the currency against the dollar.Brazil is one of the emerging-market economies — Turkey, Mexico and South Africa are among the most prominent others — whose currencies have tumbled of late as global investors withdraw as fears of a broader slowdown in economic growth spread. The retreat has been spurred by a slide in commodity prices, a stronger dollar and by China’s devaluation last month.But Brazil is also plagued by political turmoil, as its embattled president Dilma Rousseff struggles to get a budget through Congress. She is under increasing pressure to shore up the government’s fiscal accounts and avert a second downgrade by credit agencies, following the one by Standard & Poor’s this month.“The Brazilian real is the most vulnerable link in the current emerging market crisis,” said Bernd Berg, director of emerging market strategy at Société Générale.So far this year, the real has fallen 33 percent against the dollar.On Tuesday, it broke the psychologically important level of 4 reais to the dollar for the first time. After weakening to 4.1034 reais on Wednesday, the currency strengthened a bit on Thursday, when Alexandre Tombini, the president of Brazil’s central bank, indicated that foreign reserves could be used to bolster the currency.Still, some are pessimistic about the currency’s outlook.“In an extreme scenario with the political crisis getting out of control, I see the possibility that the BRL overshoots to a level of 5.00,” Mr. Berg of Société Générale wrote in an email on Thursday, referring to the currency by its abbreviation.Other estimates are not as high but also expect a deterioration. Credit Suisse has the real reaching 4.25 by the end of this year and 4.50 next year.“Unfortunately, there is no obvious bottom in sight,” said Alberto M. Ramos, co-head of the Latin America economic research team at Goldman Sachs. “The macro and political reality continue to deteriorate, and the currency is just reflecting that,” he said.A falling real, in theory, should make companies and assets cheaper here for foreign buyers. And that may be a silver lining, as a number of struggling Brazilian companies seek to sell assets and businesses.But investment firms that made investments here early this year are already underwater because of the sharp slide in the value of the real. And it is difficult to evaluate the projected earnings of companies being considered for acquisition because of the uncertainty.Petrobras, which has an aggressive program between now and 2017 to sell nonessential assets, said this week that it was in “final negotiations” with Mitsui of Japan to sell natural gas distribution assets. So far this year, the number of deals, 501, is only slightly fewer than the 505 announced over the same period last year, according to Dealogic. In terms of dollar volume, however, Brazil has had $27.71 billion in mergers and acquisitions this year, down from $41.97 billion over the same period last year. It is the country’s lowest volume at this point since 2005, when there were $6.5 billion in deals. Its peak was 2010, when there were $122.16 billion in deals over the same period.For foreign investors, Brazil still has factors in its favor, including strong institutions and an independent judiciary.Some companies, like Fibria and Suzano in the pulp and paper sector, both of whose revenues are in dollars, have performed well.In addition, a boom in entrepreneurship continues, according to Edson Rigonatti, founding partner at Astella Investimentos, a respected early-stage start-up investor.“The quality of deal-flow is improving significantly,” he said.The current difficulties started early in Ms. Rousseff’s first term, as global commodity prices began to fall and economic growth decreased from the second term of her predecessor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.The continued aggressive use of state public banks and interventionist economic policies, combined with a failure to tackle structural reforms like the country’s costly pension system, drove up government spending. The government also upset investors by continually offering more rosy economic forecasts than what materialized. Then there are the woes affecting Petrobras, currently involved in a widening corruptions scandal. The overall result was deteriorating fiscal accounts, and so Ms. Rousseff is now trying to enact fiscal austerity measures.The situation worsened this month when S.&P. stripped Brazil of its investment grade rating. Many investors are worried that a second ratings agency may follow suit. Fitch visited the country’s capital, Brasilia, this week and met with the finance minister, Joaquim Levy, and his team.“I think that this crisis is going to take longer than the other ones,” José Olympio Pereira, the chief executive of Credit Suisse in Brazil, said in a recent interview, adding that Brazil continues to improve every 10 years.“I think that the big frustration for all of us is that even though we’re better every 10 years than we were 10 years before, we could have been miles ahead.”Advertisement