AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben SisarioBMG, the former record company that seven years ago started over with a new catalog and approach, has added again to its growing stable of projects with S-Curve, an independent pop label that scored a big hit this year with Andy Grammer’s “Honey, I’m Good.” BMG plans to announce on Monday that it has acquired S-Curve Records’ recorded music and publishing catalogs. The deal is estimated to be worth at least $10 million.Owned by the German media giant Bertelsmann, the new BMG was created in 2008 after Bertelsmann — once a major power in music, controlling RCA, Jive and other labels — sold most of BMG’s assets to Sony and Universal. Through acquisitions, BMG has now built the world’s fourth-largest music-publishing catalog, the side of the business that deals with songwriting rights.Lately, BMG has turned its attention to recorded music, buying the American rock labels Vagrant and Rise, and doing a deal with Janet Jackson that last month gave the new company its first No. 1 on Billboard’s album chart. Laurent Hubert, president of creative and marketing for BMG in the United States, said in an interview that the company in its new incarnation has tried to focus on efficiency and transparency in its operations. “We want to be the most compelling platform in the music business,” Mr. Hubert said.The deal with S-Curve represents an effort by BMG to move further into the pop world. S-Curve was founded in 2000 by Steve Greenberg, a veteran executive who in the 1990s discovered the boy band Hanson. S-Curve’s first release was the Baha Men’s “Who Let the Dogs Out,” which became a pop hit and a sports anthem.BMG’s deal for S-Curve is limited. It does not include S-Curve’s catalog before 2007. Those releases — including hits by Joss Stone and Fountains of Wayne — are controlled by Universal, which will remain S-Curve’s distributor in North America. And BMG will not gain S-Curve’s investments in technology companies like Interlude, whose design for interactive videos is popular with musicians.Mr. Greenberg said that he did the deal because BMG, like his own company, is independent, with a nimble approach to promoting artists. S-Curve has only three employees, but with innovative videos and promotion on outlets like Sirius XM, it has made Mr. Grammer a budding star. With 2.4 million sales, “Honey, I’m Good” is the No. 7 top-selling single of the year so far, according to Nielsen.The deal with BMG, Mr. Greenberg said, would give the company deeper resources to pursue the kinds of artists it wants.“Every record we make,” Mr. Greenberg said, “we imagine that if we get it right, and get the music to enough people, we can have a big pop hit.”Advertisement