AdvertisementSupported byBy William K. RashbaumFor much of his 11-year career as an assistant United States attorney in the Southern District of New York, Jason P.W. Halperin straddled two worlds: public corruption and terrorism. He took 13 cases to trial and never lost one.Now, Mr. Halperin will take his multitasking to Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. There, he will divide his time between such white-collar pursuits as internal investigations, Foreign Corrupt Practices Act work, unlawful exports and securities enforcement.A former Southern District colleague, Elie Honig, now the director of the division of criminal justice in the New Jersey attorney general’s office, said that Mr. Halperin’s ability to be effective in both corruption and terrorism cases belies the difficulty of prosecuting such widely divergent crimes.“What unifies those kinds of cases is just how difficult they are,” Mr. Honig said.Mr. Halperin, 45, who worked for three-and-a-half years in the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan and then in the White Plains office, while continuing to try cases in Manhattan, won convictions in cases against three state senators, four political aides and two developers for corruption and tax fraud.He also prosecuted cases that involved bank fraud, wire fraud, mortgage fraud, money laundering, tax evasion, obstruction of justice and false statements, and led teams of prosecutors and agents in complex white-collar grand jury investigations.Mr. Halperin also served as liaison in the United States attorney’s office with the three F.B.I. counterterrorism squads that covered six counties north of New York City, which included some 50 agents.Mr. Halperin is the latest white-collar prosecutor in Manhattan to decamp to the private sector, where he will most likely make multiples of his government salary.A graduate of Yale and the New York University School of Law, Mr. Halperin worked as an associate at Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering in Washington, D.C., and Schulte Roth & Zabel in New York. After law school, he clerked for Judge Ricardo Urbina of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.Advertisement