AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Ewing and Melissa EddyFRANKFURT — Volkswagen is expected to name a new chief executive on Friday to replace Martin Winterkorn, who resigned on Wednesday in the face of a widening emissions scandal that has engulfed the automaker.A leading candidate is Matthias Müller, who is in charge of the division of Volkswagen that makes Porsche sports cars, according to people close to the company’s supervisory board, which meets on Friday. But those people said it was too early to confirm that a decision had been made.Mr. Müller, 62, leads a division that is untouched by revelations that VW used software in diesel cars to fool emissions tests in the United States. Porsche, along with the Audi division, accounts for most of the parent company’s profit.The board that oversees the management of Volkswagen, the world’s largest automaker, is also expected to announce further management changes as the company tries to quell the growing outcry over the deception.Still, pressure continued to mount on the company. On Thursday, Germany’s transportation minister, Alexander Dobrindt, said that software might have been used to fool official emissions tests on millions of cars in Europe, not just in the United States.Mr. Dobrindt indicated that the 10 million cars in Europe with the diesel engines could be affected by the manipulation. If so, the Volkswagen software used to deceive emissions tests would have been more widely used than the company had disclosed.Volkswagen said on Tuesday that 11 million cars worldwide were equipped with the same software that the Environmental Protection Agency said was used to evade emissions tests in the United States. About half a million of those cars are in the United States, and analysts say about 10 million are in Europe.But it had been unclear whether the software was dormant in cars sold in Europe or actively used to evade pollution standards, as Volkswagen admitted was the case in the United States.Disclosures of larger problems would add to the widespread damage to the reputation of Volkswagen, which is a leader in an industry that forms the bedrock of the German economy.As an indication that other European officials are growing wary, the European Commission on Thursday urged the 28 member nations of the European Union to test vehicles on their roads and report the findings. France indicated its intentions to begin random testing.Investors, too, have become nervous that the scandal could spread beyond Volkswagen. Shares of the rival German carmaker BMW fell on Thursday after a German auto magazine reported that one of BMW’s models produced suspicious test results. BMW denied the accusation.The testing group cited in the article, which is the same group that raised early alarms about Volkswagen’s deception, also questioned the validity of the magazine’s report.Mr. Dobrindt said on Thursday that Volkswagens in Europe were also “affected by the manipulations,” although he added that officials were still investigating. He did not elaborate, and officials in his office did not answer their phones on Thursday. Volkswagen declined to comment.Mr. Dobrindt spoke in Berlin after German officials met with Volkswagen representatives in Wolfsburg, where the company is based. He said that cars with 1.6-liter engines were affected, not just those with two-liter engines.Volkswagen has been in crisis since revealing last week that cars with two-liter engines sold in the United States were equipped with software to detect when emissions testing was taking place and turn on features that lowered pollution levels.When the controls were off, levels of nitrogen oxide, a component of smog linked to respiratory ailments, could rise to 40 times the allowed amount, the E.P.A. said last week.Environmental groups have long complained that diesel vehicles often produce much more pollution under road conditions than when undergoing official tests, even if other companies were not cheating as blatantly as Volkswagen in the United States.In a statement, the European Commission said that it called on national authorities “to look into the implications for vehicles sold in Europe and ensure that E.U. pollutant emission standards are scrupulously respected.”Ségolène Royal, the French environment minister, said on Thursday that French authorities would conduct random tests on about 100 cars around the country to ensure that they met pollution standards and that they did not have software installed to cheat on emissions tests.“Manufacturers have assured me that in France, with French automakers, there is no fraud,” she told the French broadcaster BFMTV after a meeting with carmakers. “And what we have all agreed on is that today there had to be proof of what is being said.”Mr. Dobrindt, the German official, said that members of a governmental investigatory committee were continuing to question Volkswagen representatives and comb through documents at the company’s headquarters.In addition, the Transportation Ministry had asked the emissions authorities to carry out lab and road tests on Volkswagen vehicles, as well as on cars made by other German automakers.“We will continue to intensively work together with Volkswagen to determine which cars are affected so that we can inform the public,” Mr. Dobrindt said in Berlin.If the chief’s job falls to Mr. Müller, Volkswagen would acquire a leader widely regarded as more approachable than Mr. Winterkorn, who was known for his autocratic style. Mr. Müller, however, might be seen as a transitional leader because of his age. And many commentators have said Volkswagen should bring in an outsider better able to fix flaws in the company that allowed the scandal to arise.Mr. Müller has been president and chief executive of Volkswagen’s Porsche unit for nearly five years. According to the Porsche website, he began his career at Volkswagen’s Audi unit in 1977 before eventually rising to head of product management there in 1995.After eventually overseeing all Audi and Lamborghini product lines, Mr. Müller was put in charge of all vehicle projects and brands for the parent company, the Volkswagen Group, before taking the top job at Porsche in October 2010.Nicola Clark, Aurelien Breeden and David Jolly contributed reporting from Paris.Advertisement