AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningIt appears automakers have become the latest source of corporate misconduct after Volkswagen admitted installing software to fool emissions tests.It comes after the General Motors settlement of a criminal investigation into how it handled defective ignition switches that caused at least 124 deaths. And when there is a video in which the head of Volkswagen’s American operations tells an audience in Brooklyn that the company was “dishonest” and “totally screwed up,” then it is only a matter of time before the company has to deal with multiple civil and criminal penalties.The question is what types of proceedings Volkswagen is likely to face and how far up the corporate ladder prosecutors can go in seeking to hold individuals accountable.According to a notice of violation filed by the Environmental Protection Agency on Sept. 18, Volkswagen installed what is known as a “defeat device” in vehicles equipped with 2-liter diesel engines that made it appear to meet emissions standards. The software installed in the cars very likely resulted in a violation of the Clean Air Act by avoiding applicable testing requirements for automobiles and providing false information to obtain a “certificate of conformity” required to sell cars in the United States.The E.P.A. can impose civil penalties on an automaker of up to $37,500 for every vehicle for violations of the Clean Air Act. Thus, Volkswagen could face a total penalty of about $18 billion, based on selling nearly 500,000 vehicles with the defeat device.For Volkswagen, that is just the start of its potential liability. The E.P.A. can impose only a civil penalty, but the Justice Department can seek criminal punishment based on the same conduct. The Supreme Court held in Hudson v. United States that the protection against double jeopardy does not bar prosecutors from pursuing criminal charges even if a substantial monetary penalty was already imposed by a regulatory agency.The Clean Air Act authorizes a criminal prosecution for knowingly making a false statement in an application to the E.P.A. and for tampering with “any monitoring device or method” required for tracking emissions. That Volkswagen apparently designed the software to make its emission controls work in a testing lab but not on the road would seem to rule out any defense based on a lack of knowledge or mistake.The company could face a fine based on its profits from the violations or any loss suffered by victims. Given the potential costs owners of its vehicles could face because their cars may not perform anywhere close to what Volkswagen claimed or get much lower gas millage, the losses could be substantial.The Justice Department is not limited to environmental violations in its investigation. Bloomberg News reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s office in Detroit is handling the criminal inquiry, which means that other avenues for pursuing charges will be considered.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.The recent G.M. settlement can provide a template for a case against Volkswagen because it involved criminal charges for making false statements to the government and wire fraud. Those charges will be dismissed if G.M. fulfills the terms of a deferred prosecution agreement, a favorable outcome because of what the government termed the company’s “fairly extraordinary” cooperation in the investigation.The same provisions could be applied to Volkswagen’s use of the defeat device and for misleading customers about the benefits of its diesel engines. A wire fraud charge could also be the basis to forfeit corporate assets tied to the violation, which could result in Volkswagen paying out hundreds of millions of dollars.To get a nice deal like the one G.M. received from the Justice Department, Volkswagen will have to demonstrate its cooperation, which means providing information about violations by people inside the company, including its executives.Unlike the G.M. case, which involved multiple failures to act, the defeat device episode appears to be the result of a conscious decision and involved a fairly sophisticated computer program to make it appear the vehicles complied with emissions standards in the test lab. That certainly does not look like the result of an oversight or an unforeseen problem in the software, but the product of intentional steps to avoid legal requirements that only individuals could design and implement.In a short video, Volkswagen’s former chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, attributed the “irregularities” in the diesel engines to “terrible mistakes made by only a few.” That seems to be an effort to attribute any violations to rogue employees acting against the company’s wishes.It appears that senior management is trying to wall itself off by putting the focus on lower level employees. In announcing his resignation from Volkswagen, Mr. Winterkorn said he accepted responsibility for the “irregularities,” but insisted that “I am not aware of any wrongdoing on my part.” The company’s supervisory board said it does not believe that Mr. Winterkorn knew about the software.Even though it is hard to believe that Volkswagen’s actions were the result of decisions by a small group of employees working outside management’s purview, suspicion alone is not enough to establish the culpability of corporate executives. The advantage of a Clean Air Act charge is that knowledge can be established by showing that a defendant was aware of red flags about illegal conduct but chose to ignore them, known as willful blindness. This type of proof can overcome claims of ignorance often offered by corporate managers and prove their intent to violate the law.The challenge for prosecutors will be getting information that implicates people higher up at Volkswagen. The Justice Department recently announced a change in its policy that required companies seeking to be viewed as cooperative to receive a lighter penalty to provide information identifying culpable employees.That approach will be tested in dealing with Volkswagen. The company and its management are largely in Germany, so there may not be as much concern about being prosecuted in the United States, which could reduce the pressure to demonstrate the expected level of cooperation by identifying individuals.Assessing the measure of Volkswagen’s cooperation about the role of its employees and executives is likely to slow prosecutors. The Justice Department does not want to see a company flout its new guidelines by refusing to furnish evidence, effectively insulating executives from prosecution. So we can expect prosecutors to push hard for information about individuals, perhaps all the way to the top of Volkswagen.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningAdvertisement