
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

SEPT. 24, 2015
Sumner M. Redstone says he plans to live forever. If that doesn’t work out, his media empire will be controlled by a trust.Either way, ending the dual-class share structure at the $21 billion CBS could lift the broadcaster’s value by a fifth, according to a Breakingviews calculator. The price of doing so would be more than worth it for shareholders.Mr. Redstone, a nonagenarian tax lawyer-turned-media mogul, is chairman of the owner of CBS, home to “The Big Bang Theory” and “60 Minutes,” and its subscription-based cable network Showtime. He holds 80 percent of Class A voting shares through his National Amusements vehicle. The Class B shares, representing more than 90 percent of the economic interest in CBS, get no vote.Since splitting the company from Viacom a decade ago, Mr. Redstone has largely left Leslie Moonves to run CBS unfettered. It is positioned well in the face of rapid changes in viewing habits. Holding rights to broadcast National Football League games and many of the most popular shows on TV, CBS should be able to keep securing new revenue as viewers migrate to digital streaming packages.AdvertisementNevertheless, Mr. Redstone’s firm grip almost certainly lingers as a concern for investors, especially as industry consolidation prospects grow. Compared with Time Warner and the Walt Disney Company, each of which only has one class of stock, CBS trades at a lower valuation multiple. CBS fetches about 11 times expected earnings for the next 12 months compared with about 13 times for Time Warner, home to Showtime’s rival HBO, and more than 18 times for Disney, owner of the ABC network.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Assume conservatively that collapsing the CBS shares with voting power into one class of equal voting stock would enable it to be valued more like Time Warner. That would translate into a market capitalization of $26 billion, an uplift of some $5 billion.The A shares are trading at a hefty 11 percent premium to the B shares, already more than the gap at other companies with similar dual-stock structures, like 21st Century Fox and Google. Sweeten that to 25 percent and it would cost about $2 billion for CBS to buy them out. That would leave plenty of upside for today’s second-class stockholders.AdvertisementWhatever happens to Mr. Redstone, the CBS share structure shouldn’t be immortal.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »