AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The European private equity firm Cinven said on Thursday that Stuart McAlpine would serve as the company’s new managing partner.Mr. McAlpine, 48, will succeed Hugh Langmuir, 60, as managing partner, with Mr. Langmuir becoming the firm’s executive chairman.The leadership change comes as Cinven has invested about three-quarters of its latest fund, which raised 5.3 billion euros, or about $5.9 billion, in 2013.Mr. Langmuir, one of the firm’s founding partners, is expected to lead Cinven’s next fund-raising and “will remain fully involved” in the firm’s strategic direction, Cinven said. He has been managing partner since July 2009.“During almost 20 years at Cinven, Stuart’s track record has been outstanding. He has led several of Cinven’s most successful transactions, which have generated substantial capital gains for its investors,” Mr. Langmuir said in a news release.“On behalf of all the partners and staff at Cinven, I am delighted that he is stepping up to become managing partner, an appointment that is testament to his investment acumen, judgment and his leadership,” Mr. Langmuir added.Mr. McAlpine, who has been with Cinven since 1996 and has been a partner since 2003, will assume operational management responsibility and lead the medium- and long-term strategic development of the business, Cinven said.He specializes in health care investments, but also has experience investing in other sectors. Two of his deals were the medical diagnostics companies Phadia and Sebia, which generated a combined capital gain of €1.5 billion when they were sold.Before joining Cinven, Mr. McAlpine worked in the Royal Bank of Scotland’s leveraged finance group and at Ernst & Young in Boston and in London.“Cinven has a unique culture of partnership and excellence, one that has been developed over several decades - initially in Europe and today with capabilities to grow European companies globally,” Mr. McAlpine said. “We have an exceptional team, and I am privileged to have been chosen by my partners to lead the firm as it moves into its next stage of development.”On Thursday, Cinven also said that Guy Davison, 58, would retire in June 2016 after 28 years at the firm. He joined the firm in 1998 and is one of its founding partners.Advertisement