AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.08 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.23 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.01 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: MONDAYLexington and Richland Counties School District No. 5, S.C., $62.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYCherry Creek School District, Colo., $50.6 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. Clark County School District, Nev., $541.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive. WEDNESDAYFlorida Department of Environmental Protection, $90 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. Virginia Resources Authority, $52.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive. ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAnchorage, Alaska, $311 million of general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities. Burlington County Bridge Commission, N.J., $95 million of revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $377.7 million of refinancing revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $105 million of Catholic Health Initiatives revenue bonds. Bank of America.El Paso, $55.3 million of water and sewer revenue refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Grand Prairie, Tex., $74.2 million of taxable sales tax revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Board of Managers Joint Guadalupe County-Seguin, Tex., $119 million of hospital mortgage revenue refinancing and improvement bonds. Bank of America.Hawaii Airports System, $246.1 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Los Angeles Department of Airports, $304.1 million of senior revenue bonds. Siebert Brandford Shank.Los Angeles Municipal Improvement Corporation, $297 million of convention center taxable lease revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Massachusetts Transportation Fund, $450 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.New Orleans, $71.2 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $50.7 million of retirement facilities first mortgage revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets. Oceanside Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray. Pasadena, Calif., $55 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities. Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, $231.1 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Industrial Development Authority of St. Louis County, Mo., $74.1 million of senior living facilities revenue bonds. Cain Brothers.San Antonio, $100 million of electric and gas systems revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets. San Antonio, $100 million of electric and gas systems revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.San Antonio, $235 million of electric and gas systems revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, N.Y., $156.4 million of general revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Virginia Resource Authority, $120.2 million of taxable infrastructure revenue refinancing and moral obligation bonds. Raymond James.Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $63.9 million of single-family program bonds. RBC Capital Markets. West Virginia School Building Authority, $64 million of excess lottery revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Whiting, Ind., $144.5 million of environmental facilities revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Advertisement