AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — In the race among the new generation of online lenders, Prosper Marketplace is again turning to deal-making to bolster its competitive position.The Internet-based loan marketplace plans to announce on Thursday that it has purchased BillGuard, a start-up that helps customers manage their money and protect their financial identity.The transaction, which is valued at about $30 million, is the latest move by Prosper to augment its services as it competes in the popular online lending industry. The business, in which an increasingly dizzying array of lenders use computer algorithms and the Internet to connect lenders and borrowers, drew the interest of investors as an alternative to traditional banks.Yet the industry has shown signs of weakness over much of this year. Lending Club, the biggest lender in the sector, has seen its shares fall nearly 44 percent since going public. And the stock of OnDeck, a smaller Internet-based lender, has dropped 66 percent.Still, Prosper has soldiered on, adding yet another service meant to help it stand out. It has already struck deals for companies like American HealthCare Lending, which helps finance elective surgery.The deal for the five-year-old BillGuard came together in about six weeks, Aaron Vermut, Prosper’s chief executive, said in an interview.BillGuard had put out feelers that it was interested in potentially selling itself, prompting Mr. Vermut and his team to move quickly. Helping them was Itzik Cohen, Prosper’s chief business officer, who is also a former Israeli pro basketball player well-known to BillGuard’s Israeli founders.The deal is mostly in cash, with some stock included as retention incentives for BillGuard’s staff.For Prosper, adding the start-up means bolting on a new array of services, like fraud monitoring and financial management, that would give customers more reasons to visit the company’s site. Mr. Vermut said that after signing up for BillGuard’s premium service, he discovered through its fraud detection offering that his iTunes password was being traded on the black market.Over all, according to Prosper, BillGuard customers on average use the service two to three times a week.Moreover, the deal could supply the lender with more data on its customers, providing insight into additional loan products to offer.“It really takes us from being a one-dimensional marketplace to potentially a multiproduct company providing more value,” Mr. Vermut said.Advertisement