By REUTERSSEPT. 25, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The United States economy expanded in the second quarter more than had been estimated on stronger consumer spending and construction. The development strengthens the case to raise interest rates before the end of the year, despite September data that sounded a note of caution.The Commerce Department said on Friday that gross domestic product rose at a 3.9 percent annual pace in the April-June quarter, up from 3.7 percent reported last month.The data suggests that the American economy may be gaining enough strength to withstand an increase in benchmark interest rates from record low levels despite concerns about the global economy.Still, many economists expect a cooler pace of growth in the third quarter, a view supported by separate data showing slower growth in services and a drop in consumer sentiment in September.AdvertisementThe Federal Reserve held off on raising rates last week, but the central bank’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, kept the door open to an increase this year in a speech Thursday night, provided that inflation remains stable and growth is strong enough to increase employment.Advertisement“There are a lot of things to like about the domestic side of the economy for the second half of the year, despite all the global malaise,” said Jacob Oubina, a senior economist at RBC Capital Markets in New York.Second-quarter growth, which beat expectations in a Reuters poll that the third G.D.P. reading would remain unchanged at 3.7 percent, was bolstered by higher consumer spending, mainly on services like health care and transportation.The preliminary purchasing managers’ index for the services sector from Markit slipped to 55.6 in September, from a final reading of 56.1 in August. A reading over 50 signals expansion in economic activity.
            Annual rate of change in the gross domestic product, based on quarterly figures adjusted for inflation and seasonal fluctuations.        2nd quarter revisedChange at annual rate ToFrom +3.9%+3.7%+6%+4+20–2’11’12’13’14’15SEPT. 25, 2015
“The survey data point to sustained, steady expansion of the U.S. economy at the end of the third quarter, but various warning lights are now flashing brighter, meaning growth may continue to weaken in coming months,” said Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit.The University of Michigan’s final reading on consumer sentiment for September slipped to 87.2, from 91.9 in August, although it was higher than expectations.But the stronger consumer spending and smaller inventory build reported for the second quarter are good signs for growth in the July-September period.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic activity in the United States, was revised up to a 3.6 percent growth pace, helped by cheap gasoline prices and relatively higher house prices, which lift household wealth.Revised construction spending data helped to push up the headline figure, with nonresidential fixed investment expanding 4.1 percent in the quarter. Business investment on structures was revised upward along with residential fixed investment.AdvertisementThe revisions to second-quarter growth also reflected a smaller accumulation of inventories than had been estimated, reducing the chance that a sharp unwinding in inventories would drag on growth.“For the Fed, the forward-looking part is most important and the one positive takeaway is inventory contribution,” said Gennadiy Goldberg, an interest rates strategist at TD Securities.“There had been quite a bit of fear that strong inventory building in Q2 would be unwound in Q3,” he said. “It actually shows G.D.P. should be a little firmer in the next quarter, but not by a whole lot.”After-tax corporate profits were also stronger in the second quarter than previously thought. After-tax profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments showed a 2.6 percent rebound from a slump in late 2014 and early 2015.A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: G.D.P. Growth in 2nd Quarter Is Revised Up to 3.9% .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.