By BARRY MEIERSEPT. 25, 2015
When Steve Berman, a plaintiffs’ lawyer in Seattle, heard about the Volkswagen scandal, he quickly posted a video on YouTube urging vehicle owners to contact him.“We are going to launch a lawsuit on behalf of consumers against Volkswagen, and you are welcome to join,” said Mr. Berman, who has been involved in class-action lawsuits against carmakers, drug companies and the tobacco industry.Mr. Berman was one of dozens of lawyers who raced to the courthouse after Volkswagen disclosed last week that it had used rigged software to enable its vehicles with diesel engines to pass air emissions tests. Shareholders have also sued the company, and regulators have said they plan to take action against it, but legal experts said Volkswagen’s biggest test would be the steps it takes to make its customers whole.“I assume they have teams working round the clock on how to manage the litigation exposure and the P.R. exposure, and in this kind of case, the two go hand-in-hand,” said Samuel Issacharoff, a professor at New York University School of Law.AdvertisementOne part of the company’s strategy might be to offer financial compensation soon to affected consumers both to foreclose some lawsuits and to try to repair the company’s reputation. After the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010, BP started such a program to try to resolve claims brought against it.Advertisement“You sweep up folks without paying attorneys’ fees and get the low-hanging fruit,” said Francis McGovern, a law professor at Duke University.In some ways, the Volkswagen case should be straightforward, Mr. McGovern and others said. The company has already admitted liability and acknowledged that the fraudulent software was used in specific vehicles, facts that regulators or plaintiffs’ lawyers often have to spend time digging out through pretrial investigation.Also, unlike many other automotive cases such as those recently involving General Motors and Toyota, the Volkswagen episode does not involve deaths, injuries or vehicle safety. Instead, the case’s issues — and the potential difficulties in resolving it — will involve assessing the type and amount of economic damages suffered by car owners.“There are likely to be significant damage questions about the current value of these cars,” said Jerry Martin, a lawyer in Nashville who has sued Volkswagen on behalf of a client.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But experts said the types of economic damages suffered by consumers would largely be determined by the type of plan Volkswagen announces to bring the cars into compliance with federal Environmental Protection Agency air pollution regulations.For example, if the company decides to keep the software used to reduce air emissions running constantly, the vehicle’s performance and gas mileage will suffer. On the other hand, if the company finds a fix to meet E.P.A. standards that does not affect vehicle performance, it could beat back economic claims made by its customers.For now, however, Mr. Berman, the plaintiffs’ lawyer, said he anticipated making three possible financial claims as part of his lawsuit. The first claims will be that consumers overpaid for their cars because vehicles equipped with a diesel-powered engine cost several thousand dollars more than one that runs on gasoline. The second anticipated claim will be that the future costs of operating these cars will be higher because they will run less efficiently, and the third will be that the resale value of the vehicles will be lower.Mr. McGovern, the Duke law professor, said he would not be surprised if Volkswagen makes a financial offer to consumers not long after it announces its fix.Advertisement“What you are saying is that we made a mistake and are trying to rectify it,” said Mr. McGovern, who added that the offer could take the form of cash, a credit on the purchase of a new car or vouchers to be used for purchases like gasoline.Mr. Issacharoff, the professor at New York University, said he also anticipated that Volkswagen would try to get this case behind it quickly through unilateral offers to its customers, quick settlements with plaintiffs’ lawyers or a combination of the two.“Most corporate conspiracy cases involve someone doing something wrong and the company covering it up,” he said. “But this was designed to be wrong from the start.”A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Compensating Owners of Rigged Cars Will Be Big Test for Volkswagen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.