By STEPHANIE STROMSEPT. 25, 2015
When promotions for two subscription snack box services, Naturebox and Graze, popped up in his Facebook feed, Matt Feit was interested.“I’m a firm believer in snacking, having worked to completely change the way I’m eating,” said Mr. Feit, an aspiring horror and comedy writer who lives in Los Angeles. “I’ve turned lunch into two smaller meals and have a snack at the end of the day, all healthy stuff.”He placed orders to try both, first Naturebox, then Graze, and even sent his father a snack subscription as a gift.But after one or two boxes arrived, Mr. Feit had had enough. Naturebox’s online interface was “a little wonky,” he said, and both services were trying to sell him what they had on hand rather than trying to tailor the offerings to his preferences. “The snack didn’t blow me away. Ordering felt kind of like a job, and they sent samples I just wasn’t interested in,” Mr. Feit said, acknowledging that he is a picky eater. “I ended up thinking, ‘I don’t have time for this.’ ”AdvertisementSubscription snack and food box businesses are popping up everywhere, hoping to cash in on America’s insatiable appetite for novelty, convenience and munchies. Cratejoy.com, a service that helps would-be food box entrepreneurs get started, lists more than 120 subscription services under its “Food & Artisan Edibles” category.Advertisement“I think that’s going to be the challenge — can 14 companies in the United States exist selling Japanese candy in subscription boxes?” said Craig Kanarick, founder of Mouth, a subscription snack box service in Brooklyn. “I mean, how much of an appetite is there really for a monthly box of Japanese candy?”Food businesses view the subscription services as a relatively inexpensive opportunity to get new products in front of consumers — and to get feedback and data fast.“Subscriptions have been a key driver of early growth, helping lead to the first $1 million in revenue for some of the companies we work with,” said Rory Eakin, a founder and chief operating officer of CircleUp, which connects investors to small consumer and food businesses and offers them management support. “As for the model itself, I do think it’s been somewhat overinvested in, to be candid — it’s hard to answer the question, ‘Why can’t Amazon do this?’ ”In fact, Williams Sonoma, Neiman Marcus and other retailers with high-end culinary businesses have long sold food subscriptions, allowing customers to send three months of, say, cheese as a gift.But the business is not so easy or lucrative, apparently. General Mills started a subscription snack box service, Nibblr, in 2014 — and closed it down a little more than a year later. Walmart, too, tried its hand at a food subscription service, Goodies.co, for about a year before shutting it down.“The best example of how easy it is to get into this business is that I started Yumvelope in my freshman year of high school,” said Sam Gold, who shut his subscription food company to start college this fall. “There’s relatively little paperwork you have to do, and there are online tools that help you easily set up a recurring revenue type of business — in the first month, I had six subscribers and sales of $200.”Mr. Gold said would-be subscription box entrepreneurs underestimate the cost of acquiring and maintaining customers. Yumvelope’s business plan, for instance, was to charge subscribers $21 a month for one, three or six months, with $7 going to buy products, $7 for shipping and a $7 profit for Mr. Gold.Advertisement“With certain subscribers, that worked, but for a lot of other people, I would run a special where they would pay $14, which allowed me to break even — but then they’d cancel after the first box,” he said. “In theory, I had a 33 percent margin, which isn’t bad, but in reality, that was rarely ever the case.”The real business in food subscriptions may be in the data they generate on what consumers like. “So much of the tech world is looking for a signal from all the noise, and these services offer incredibly interesting insights because of the feedback they get from consumers about the products in the boxes,” Mr. Eakin of CircleUp said.Roger Jin, a tech entrepreneur who has just started Treats, a subscription business that sends a box of snacks from a different country each month, agreed that the competition was fierce.Still, Mr. Jin said, “The international snack subscription model is still new to most people and the market is wide open and growing, so we have not had too much of an issue with needing to stand out to competitors right now.”He plans to build the Treats brand through strong customer service — Yelp abounds with criticism of subscription box companies’ poor customer service — and the use of data and feedback to tailor boxes more individually.Batch, a subscription service that puts the flavors and tastes of a particular city into its boxes, is already becoming more of a retail gift business. It opened a store about a year ago in Nashville, where it has its headquarters.“We still have subscribers, but we’re tweaking the model — for us, the margins are very thin on the subscription side,” said Sam Davidson, one of the founders and the chief executive of Batch.About two-thirds of Batch’s business was gift subscriptions, which didn’t necessarily translate into continuing subscriptions, and competitors began offering boxes with tastes of Georgia or Portland, Ore., he said.Nonetheless, Batch was able to raise outside money last year, allowing it to open the retail store and revamp as a gift box company. “From Day 1, we’ve been about branding and marketing,” Mr. Davidson said. “We’ve always intended Batch to be bigger than the box.”AdvertisementAmanda Veraldi had her first taste of snack subscription during a trip to Cape Cod over a Memorial Day weekend a couple of years ago. When she got back to New York, she ordered a subscription from Graze, which is delivered to her office.“I like that it’s not a full bag, which helps with portion control,” she said. “Sometimes, though, I bring the little popcorn snacks home because my boss doesn’t like the smell of popcorn in the office.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Graze was started in Britain about eight years ago by the founders of a business similar to Netflix, and the company had $104 million in sales in the year that ended in February.Unlike many other subscription snack services, which either buy or receive free products from food manufacturers, Graze’s snacks are proprietary. Noshers choose eight snacks, most of which are high fiber, whole grain or free of artificial ingredients, of 100 to 150 calories each.Customers indicate which snacks they would like to try and which snacks they liked or didn’t, as well as their dietary preferences and restrictions, and then an algorithm helps Graze tailor a box for them.“The more the customer interacts with Graze, the more we learn about them and can tailor products to them,” said Paolo Wyatt, senior vice president for Graze’s United States operations. ”That makes a big difference in terms of getting them to stay around.”Graze products are moving into stores, and the company says the insights it has collected from consumers over the years will help it there, too. “We have these technology development and data scientists on one side, and more classic consumer product goods marketers on the other, which adds up to an exciting business,” Mr. Wyatt said.Mouth, the subscription business started by Mr. Kanarick, relies on novelty for its appeal to consumers. One subscription, for example, sends a bottle of “craft” whiskey each month — in May, recipients received a bottle of Dark Horse Reserve Bourbon; in July, it was a bottle of Breuckelen Distilling 77 Local Rye and Corn Whiskey.AdvertisementMr. Kanarick, a founder of Razorfish, one of the early successes to grow out of New York’s “Silicon Alley,” began Mouth in early 2012 after observing an explosion of new food products from tiny independent producers around his neighborhood in Brooklyn.“At the time, we thought maybe this was a somewhat local phenomenon, a Brooklyn or New York thing, but almost immediately, one-third of our orders were coming from people in California,” he said.Now, Mouth has a 6,000-square-foot warehouse in the Dumbo neighborhood, where it stocks almost 1,000 products. It sells 14 different food and beverage subscriptions for three, six and 12 months (except for its “pregnancy” subscription, which supplies a different pickle and chocolate for nine months).The company also has a retail liquor store and sells the products it stocks through its online store. In the works: a subscription that keeps on coming each month until the recipient cancels it, a strategy borrowed from Graze.“We have a fairly high rate of resubscription for individuals buying subscriptions for themselves,” Mr. Kanarick said. “For people who get a subscription as a gift, it’s a very different math.”A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Attack of the Snacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.