By THE NEW YORK TIMESSEPT. 25, 2015
Government regulators said Friday that they planned to step up the testing requirements of cars in the wake of the Volkswagen scandal.The Environmental Protection Agency, which disclosed last week that it had learned that Volkswagen diesel cars had equipment to evade smog-testing standards, said it had sent a letter to manufacturers of gasoline and diesel cars saying that regulators would be looking for so-called defeat devices in all vehicles.The agency said Volkswagen had used a device programmed to fool emissions testers into thinking that the car was emitting much less pollution than it was during regular driving.“Manufacturers should expect that this additional testing may add time to the confirmatory test process,” the E.P.A. wrote in its brief letter. The agency said that the new procedures would start immediately and that the California Air Resources Board and Canada’s environmental regulators were involved with the more stringent requirements.AdvertisementE.P.A. officials said they would not outline specifics of what the new tests will entail.“We are not going to tell them what these tests are, and they don’t need to know,” Chris Grundler, director of the agency’s office of transportation and air quality, said during a conference call with reporters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Tuesday, Volkswagen said that 11 million of its diesel cars worldwide contained the software. The E.P.A. said that the deception allowed Volkswagen vehicles to spew as much as 40 times the pollution allowed under the Clean Air Act.The company has not yet issued a formal recall for the vehicles that were affected, and the E.P.A. said such notice would come from the manufacturer and not the E.P.A. itself.AdvertisementThe agency said it was continuing its investigation.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.