
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
SEPT. 26, 2015
This interview with Jan Singer, chief executive of Spanx, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years. What were some important influences for you?A. I grew up in Brockton, Mass. It’s a shoe-manufacturing town south of Boston. My mom was a nurse in the same hospital for 51 years, and my dad was an accountant. I have two brothers, and I’m the middle child. That matters because I like connecting and bringing people together. I’m also tall, and that matters, too. When you walk into a room, you can’t hide. People notice you right away, and you have to be present and aware of that.I’ll never forget the day my aunt gave my mom a copy of W magazine. I opened it and saw $10,000 Bill Blass dresses and all these gowns. It seemed like art to me, and I became obsessed about fashion in high school. Who were these people? Where did they come from? My parents took me to New York in my freshman year of high school. When I saw the city, I said, “This is it. This is where it happens.” I remember everything about that moment. I had goose bumps the whole time.And so you studied fashion in college?I actually studied psychology and business management. I had studied a lot of psychology through high school, always trying to learn more about the people around me, and wondering, “How do I fit in? Who am I?” I read a lot about different types of therapy and about the fact that I could change my belief system, and that if I did, my actions and my consequences would change. I felt very empowered. I had this irrational belief, and I still have it, that anybody can do anything. I also figured that I could apply what I learned in psychology — how people operate, what drives them — to anything.AdvertisementAnd after college, what did you do?I went to Manhattan, but I didn’t have any contacts. I just started circling help-wanted ads. I needed a job, and I started working as a secretary for a company that was buying up real estate and converting buildings to co-ops. Then there was a glitch in the business and they started laying people off. I had to start packing up my desk.On my desk was a lease from one our clients with a return address of Chanel on the envelope. I stared at it for a day and a half. I’ve got to call this person. What’s the worst thing that could happen to me? So I picked up the phone — I can literally remember the number to this day — and told them I had their lease but I was to going to hand it off to a colleague because I was leaving the firm. He said, “Where are you going?” And I said, “Well, I came here to work in fashion and beauty, and I notice you work at Chanel. Is there anyone I can call?” And he said, “Yeah, call this person,” who was the head of H.R.I didn’t know who this man on the phone was. So I called the receptionist and asked for his title. “Oh, he’s the president of the company,” she said. I got hired. The universe sometimes throws you things, and I think you have to see it and be willing to jump.Tell me about your leadership style.I think you have to meet people where they are. I am who I am, but I can also assess pretty quickly where people are, and I can flex to them because I’m curious about them and appreciative of where they are. It’s not about you in that moment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’m also a big fan of voting. That doesn’t mean my vote doesn’t weigh more. It does. I reserve the right to swing the vote. But sometimes there’s an issue on the table and the conversations and decisions can flip-flop all around just for the sake of conversation. So I’ll be curious about where the group is in that moment. We’ll put the issues on the board, and we’ll vote. I vote last. People get very vested in the decision, and when things start to get hard about the decision we’ve made, we come back to that vote — if we want to change the vote, we can change the vote, but this was how we voted.I also hold people to their highest possibility. I think everybody has potential. Companies can fall into a trap of holding people in their past. They can’t see beyond what people have done. But that’s just a data point. If we continue to only hold people to what they’ve done in the past, you can never get them to their future. They’re stuck.AdvertisementIf someone’s not performing, the question should be, “How did they get here and where are their strengths? Did we push them too far? Do we have them in a job where they’re banging their heads against the wall?”How do you hire?I’m looking for people who can be great leaders — someone who can make the tough calls, can inspire, can tolerate the ambiguity, can give energy, has a global mind-set. At some point, it’s not about your subject-matter expertise. It’s about, can you build a team and move the needle? How have you built teams? What’s the chemistry? What’s your belief system? What frustrates you? What happens when you get frustrated? What was the biggest mistake you made and what happened after? How did you respond?If there are any question marks and concerns, I will go deep on them and unpack them to find out if it’s a real problem, or whether it might be an asset for us. It can be hard to do that when you’re interviewing and falling in love with a candidate, but you have to do it.What advice do you give to new college grads?Never stop learning. If you have it all figured out, you’re dead. You have to be open, and you have to listen and to learn. You may feel a bit exhausted from all the learning in college, but find what energizes you and keep learning.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on September 27, 2015, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Using Votes to Guide a Group.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »