
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

OCT. 2, 2015
Ian Bickley  is president of the international group of Coach, the leatherware and clothing manufacturer.Q. You set up your own business in 1986 after graduating from college. Tell me what that was like.  A. It was a business I started at university with a friend. We were selling these Bermuda-length shorts that were personalized to the clubs and fraternities with their colors and logos. They were very popular and we thought this would be a great idea to take nationwide. We moved to New York City, my partner was in charge of design and manufacturing, and I was more in charge of sales and marketing. It started well — Paul Stuart on Madison Avenue put us in their catalog — but there were so many things we didn’t know to run the business. We had lots of orders and sales, but we couldn’t ship the product on time, we had problems collecting money from people. If I knew then what I know now, we would have been very successful. We ended up winding the business down after two years. I went on to work for a consulting firm, which was setting up its first office in Munich; as I was bilingual I thought it would be a great opportunity.Q. So speaking another language fluently was a useful skill. How did you learn German? A. I was born and grew up in Bermuda, but my mother was German, so every summer we’d travel to Europe. I was fortunate in that regard because it exposed me to the bigger world that was out there. It’s something that I’ve always been curious about, and I think all the opportunities I’ve pursued have always seemed to have a sense of adventure and discovery. When I was 16 I went away to boarding school in Canada, one of the United World Colleges; there were 200 students from 50 different countries, so that was another discovery.Q. How did all that prepare you for your career?A. It’s one thing to speak the language fluently, and it’s another to understand the culture. This was my first exposure to real German hierarchy and the level of formality in communication, particularly in business, was very different from what I was used to. But this experience helped me lot when I went to Japan [for Coach in 2001], because the Japanese have a similar kind of hierarchy in business, and I understood that.Q. What else did you learn from your time in Japan?A. To be successful in Japan, building relationships with people is very important; this is vital anywhere in the world, but in Japan you need to have a tremendous amount of patience and tenacity as well. You have to spend a lot of time actively listening and you have to learn how to read between the lines. It’s almost more important to listen to what is not being said than what is said. It’s also about building consensus, so you need to spend some time introducing ideas and bringing people around. They want to have some time to think about it. The analogy I like to use is a snowball that gets bigger and bigger as you roll it: People at a company in America will start pushing the snowball, and if they don’t exactly know how big it’s going to get and where it’s going to end up, they don’t really care, they’re just going to get it moving. In Japan, they want to figure out the exact trajectory, how much snow do we have to put at the beginning, how big will it be at the end. But the beauty is, while you need to spend more time presenting your ideas and getting people on board, once it’s done, the execution is flawless.AdvertisementQ. Did you make any mistakes?A. I made some hiring mistakes in Japan. After we bought back our distribution, I found myself overnight in a situation where I had lot of open roles I had to fill very quickly and I prioritized speed over quality. I didn’t do enough due diligence on some of the candidates I was meeting. That was an incredible lesson, and today I put a tremendous focus on due diligence in the hiring process. Now I rely more on other people to test the technical skills and I focus a lot on the soft skills, which I call core competencies. I ask people to rate themselves on certain dimensions during the interview. You get a relative sense of how good they feel they are about certain things, which opens the door to a wider conversation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. So what are you looking for when you hire?A. First, smart people, but also nice people, people with humility, people who are comfortable with themselves and with a strong sense of self-awareness, people who are good listeners and can build relationships and can work in an organization where this is important. They must understand the concept of having different stakeholders and not just a boss. For me it’s not about hiring the perfect person, but knowing where the potential shortcomings are, because that we can manage against. If in the due diligence process, we discover certain things that are not perfect, it’s O.K., but we can have an open discussion with the candidate about it beforehand to manage expectations in different fields. That is a much more constructive way of bringing new people into an organization.Q. As a leader, what have you learned over the years?A. How to make the difference between what is important and what is urgent. Earlier in my career, I would spend more time doing what was urgent versus what is important. Now I have a really strong filter. Obviously, if it’s important and urgent then that’s what I prioritize the most, but I try to resist being sucked into things that might need immediate attention, but at the end of the day will not move the needle. Before, with the urgent stuff I felt, “I’m the leader, I’ve been copied on it, I need to express a point of view.” I no longer feel that way. By doing that you also disempower your team. It probably also means the team should probably think twice before I get copied on certain emails in the first place!AdvertisementQ. What would you tell your younger self?A. Don’t underestimate the importance of staffing decisions. I once received feedback that I gave the benefit of the doubt too much, suspending my critical judgment. I think that is true. Looking back at some of the personnel management decisions that I made, either I didn’t do enough due diligence or I waited too long to make the decision about someone. I think that’s something that I’ve really focused on over the years and have got much better at. I understand those decisions are important and you can’t wait too long. Today, it’s become something that I really prioritize.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »