AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelNetflix is trying to persuade TV companies that it’s a friend, not a foe.Some media executives and industry analysts are growing skeptical that licensing shows to Netflix makes sense, because it can cannibalize traditional ratings and ad revenues. So Netflix is turning up the volume on its pitch that the streaming service is a valuable partner in the fast-evolving global television industry.To that end, the company plans to announce on Monday that it has landed global streaming rights to “Jane the Virgin,” the critically acclaimed CW telenovela about a virgin who ends up accidentally pregnant; “Zoo,” the CBS thriller about violent animal attacks; and the post-apocalyptic drama “Colony” from USA and Legendary Television. The deals follow Netflix’s announcement this month that it acquired the exclusive global rights for ABC’s hit drama “How to Get Away With Murder.”“Why sell?” asked Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer. “We are a big buyer, and these guys are in the business of making and monetizing content.”There’s no question that Netflix has opened its checkbook, especially as it pushes to build its library of global rights to make its service available around the world by the end of 2016. The company has said that it expects to spend more than $6 billion in cash in 2016 on feature films, television series, documentaries, stand-up specials and other content, up about 62 percent from $3.7 billion in 2014.But after contending with steep ratings declines and an uncertain advertising market, some top media executives have said that they are evaluating how they think about licensing content to Netflix and other streaming outlets.James Murdoch, chief executive of 21st Century Fox, said during a recent investor conference, for example, that the business rules for these kinds of deals are changing. He said that while Fox has had a long partnership with Netflix, it is also doing more business with Netflix’s rival Hulu, which is jointly owned by Fox, Comcast and Disney.In the meantime, Hulu recently announced that it had landed a streaming deal with the premium cable network Epix, a joint venture of Viacom, Lionsgate and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios. (Epix previously had an agreement with Netflix, which expires at the end of this month. Its programming also is available on Amazon and cable television.)That has led some analysts to predict that media companies will hold back their content from Netflix and instead distribute it on their own apps or Hulu.“The industry is wising up,” said Ken Sena, an analyst with Evercore. “It means Netflix moves more into the role of production.”Netflix’s original productions — such as its new “Narcos” drama, about the Colombian kingpin Pablo Escobar, and its first feature film, “Beasts of No Nation” — have captured most of the attention, especially as the company devotes a larger share of its content budget to originals.But the company’s deals for “Jane the Virgin,” “Zoo, “Colony,” and “How to Get Away with Murder” underscore the vital role that programming from other outlets continues to play for the service in the United States and, increasingly, around the world.While original productions help Netflix distinguish its service, popular movies and television shows keep subscribers happy with more viewing options.“Every piece of content has a value,” said Richard Greenfield, a media analyst with BTIG Research. “For Netflix, it is about figuring out the proper mix.”Mr. Sarandos said media companies are cautious about the future, but he disputed the notion that networks and studios would stop selling content to Netflix, pointing to the recent string of deals. He questioned how media companies would have fared had they stopped selling movies for distribution on TV or DVD.“Every revolution has had the naysayers,” Mr. Sarandos said.One new complexity is that Netflix is increasingly seeking the global rights for movies and shows. That changes the calculation for studios, which need to evaluate whether they will make more money by striking a global deal with Netflix or making individual deals market by market with the streaming services that are proliferating across the globe.Armando Nuñez, chief executive of the global distribution group at CBS, said that each show requires careful consideration. Beyond price, the company also evaluates how a streaming deal could affect a show’s success on the traditional television network. (CBS owns both “Zoo” and “Jane the Virgin.”)“We don’t have a cold, hard-and-fast rule of, this is the way we are going to monetize all of our content,” Mr. Nuñez said.For its global offering, Netflix is focused on scooping up the rights to top programming, both from the United States as well as international outlets, Mr. Sarandos said.He said that the company had found that tastes in TV and movies were similar across the globe and that several common preconceptions, such as the idea that American comedies do not travel well, were false.“Television gets in the way of itself,” Mr. Sarandos said.Advertisement