By THE NEW YORK TIMESSEPT. 27, 2015
On Monday morning, the Commerce Department will report the latest data on consumer spending and personal income in August. Wall Street is looking for healthy gains for consumers, with income up 0.4 percent and consumption rising 0.3 percent.As unemployment continues to slowly decline, and with energy prices lower, consumer activity is expected to remain relatively robust through the end of the year. —NELSON D. SCHWARTZAfter 10 months of late-night hosts being shuffled in and out of jobs (In: Larry Wilmore, Stephen Colbert and James Corden; Out: Jon Stewart, David Letterman, Craig Ferguson and Stephen Colbert), this week the final piece will be put into place. Trevor Noah, above, the 31-year-old South African comedian, will take over Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show” on Monday.As Mr. Noah introduces himself to an American audience that is mostly unfamiliar with his work, his first-week guests will include the comedian and actor Kevin Hart, the musician Ryan Adams and the Republican presidential candidate and governor of New Jersey, Chris Christie. —JOHN KOBLINAdvertisementOn Tuesday, Tesla Motors, the maker of electric cars, will finally release its much-anticipated sport utility vehicle, the Model X. The new S.U.V. is crucial to Tesla’s plan to increase its sales of electric vehicles around the country, and the company has said it particularly hopes the Model X will bring in more female buyers.AdvertisementTesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, is expected to officially unveil the S.U.V. at a lavish event on Tuesday night at the company’s factory in Fremont, Calif. —AARON M. KESSLERThe release on Tuesday morning of the latest data for the Standard & Poor’s/Case-Shiller Home Price Index for July should provide clues to the health of the housing market. After big gains in the last few years, home prices have stabilized but remain robust. Economists expect the index to show prices up about 5 percent from the same month a year ago.Some have questioned whether the recent volatility on Wall Street would hurt the housing market. But that should not be evident until next month — the numbers to be released on Tuesday will reflect conditions in July, before Wall Street tumbled in August. —NELSON D. SCHWARTZOn Tuesday, the Senate Finance Committee will examine the predicament of Puerto Rico, which is struggling with huge debt and a shrinking economy. Although the island has home rule, the United States Constitution gives Congress the ultimate power to “make all needful rules and regulations.” Opinions in Congress vary widely on what should be done.Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Republican from Utah who is the committee’s chairman, said it would “explore how the territory manages its finances” and consider “the interplay between federal entitlement and tax programs,” in hopes of finding a way to avoid a default. —MARY WILLIAMS WALSHBank of America has until Wednesday to resubmit its capital plan to the Federal Reserve. Earlier this year, the Fed gave the bank provisional approval for a multibillion-dollar share buyback. But the regulator found weaknesses in how the bank projected losses and revenue on certain parts of the test.Bank of America will try to address these deficiencies when it resubmits its plan this week. The Fed is expected to decide whether to approve the revised plan toward the end of the year. —MICHAEL CORKERYPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, two Uber executives in France are expected to stand trial on charges of running an illegal taxi organization in the country. The trial, which may still be postponed, is linked to a recent French court ruling that upheld an earlier decision that outlawed Uber’s low-cost service from operating in France. —MARK SCOTTAdvertisementThis week will be a busy and important one for the auto industry. On Thursday, Volkswagen will disclose its first monthly sales figures since news of the emissions-cheating scandal broke. The firestorm has consumed the company, outraged consumers and led to the resignation of the automaker’s chief executive, Martin Winterkorn. (Mr. Winterkorn’s replacement, the Porsche chief, Matthias Müller, was named on Friday.)Consumer backlash has been fierce, and since roughly half of the company’s September sales would have occurred after the cheating became public, analysts will be watching to see if consumers stayed away from Volkswagen dealerships. —AARON M. KESSLERVoting by members of the United Automobile Workers union on a new proposed contract with Fiat Chrysler will continue this week. The voting is taking place plant by plant, and the deal has already run into opposition. U.A.W. members in Kokomo, Ind. — where nearly 5,000 work at the automaker’s transmission plants — voted last week to reject the proposed four-year contract. Workers in Perrysburg, Ohio, also voted against the deal.If the deal fails to pass over all, it would mean the U.A.W. would have to decide whether to resume negotiations with Fiat Chrysler or consider a strike. The union could also decide to focus instead on General Motors or Ford, and then come back to Fiat Chrysler afterward to attempt a deal. —AARON M. KESSLERChina’s sprawling but struggling manufacturing sector is expected to have continued to slump in September. On Thursday, two surveys — one published by the government, the other by Markit Economics — are expected to show China’s manufacturing sector contracting at a sharper pace.Last week, an early reading of the so-called purchasing managers’ index for the month came in worse than expected at 47 points, the weakest reading since 2009. (Anything below 50 signals a contraction.)The manufacturing decline, along with housing construction activity, has been a major drag on China’s economy, which is expected to grow this year at its slowest pace in a quarter-century. —NEIL GOUGHOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to announce whether the nation’s official jobless rate continued inching down in September after dropping to 5.1 percent in August. If it falls below the 5 percent level, that will strengthen the argument that the economy is reaching full employment and unemployment cannot keep dropping without igniting inflation.Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the Federal Reserve, said last week that the central bank remained on track to raise interest rates from their near-zero levels before the end of the year — barring surprises.AdvertisementAt the moment, the Fed is assuming that labor market conditions will continue to improve. But she said bank officials were also keeping an eye on the disappointingly low participation rate (a sign that many workers remained on the sidelines without being lured back into the work force), the large number of part-time employees who would prefer full-time jobs and long-stagnant wages. —PATRICIA COHENA version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.