SEPT. 27, 2015
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was –0.01 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.07 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was –0.02 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week.TUESDAYCollierville, Tenn., $93.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYWashington State, $905.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hayward, Calif., $72.5 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKColorado Health Facilities Authority, $100 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementConnecticut, $840 million of special tax obligation bonds for transportation infrastructure purposes. RBC Capital Markets.Contra Costa Transportation Authority, Calif., $180 million of sales tax revenue and refunding bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Energy Northwest, Wash., $110 million of electric revenue refunding bonds. Bank of America.Erie County, N.Y., $57 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Greater Orlando Aviation Authority, Fla., $215.2 million of airport facilities revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Illinois Finance Authority, $60 million of Columbia College Chicago revenue refunding bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $57.1 million of Plymouth Place revenue bonds. Ziegler.Kentucky Asset/Liability Commission, $106 million of federal Highway Trust Fund project notes. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.King County Public Hospital District, Wash., $55 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Maine Municipal Bond Bank, $70 million of refunding bonds. Bank of America.Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, $332.1 million of senior sales tax bonds. Ramirez.Miami-Dade County Educational Facilities Authority, Fla., $650 million of revenue and revenue refunding bonds. Barclays.AdvertisementPennsylvania Economic Development Financing Authority, $130 million of revenue bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Rappahannock Regional Jail Authority, Va., $60.1 million of revenue and refunding bonds. Raymond James.Riverside County, Calif., $88 million of debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Sacramento City Financing Authority, $183.5 million of refunding revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.San Diego Unified School District, $154.2 million of general obligation bonds. Goldman Sachs.San Joaquin Delta Community College District, $140 million of general obligation refunding bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Southern Minnesota Municipal Power Agency, $93.3 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.State Public Works Board, Calif., $551.6 million of revenue refunding bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Tarrant County Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $50.5 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.University of North Texas System, $221.6 million of revenue refunding and improvement bonds. J.P. Morgan Securities.Wyandotte County/Kansas City, Kan., $73.5 million of special obligation revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.A version of this article appears in print on September 28, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.