
SEPT. 29, 2015

Related Article
Ralph Lauren, who first used the name “Polo” to give his company line an English feel, has transformed his brand and his company into a quintessential American label with its ubiquitous logo of a mounted polo player holding a raised mallet.Born Ralph Lifshitz in New York City on Oct. 14, 1939. His parents were Ashkenazi Jewish immigrants from Belarus. Mr. Lauren marries Ricky Low-Beer in 1964. They are still married 50 years later and have three children: Andrew, David and Dylan.Ralph Lauren persuades his employer, the tie manufacturer Beau Brummel, to let him start his own tie line, which he names Polo. He works out of a single drawer in a showroom in the Empire State Building. He later gets an in-store boutique at Bloomingdale's. In a 1983 interview with The Times, he says he used the name Polo because it “had that vaguely English sense to it.”Mr. Lauren is awarded the Coty Award in 1970 for his menswear designs, garnering recognition for his fashions. In 1972, Mr. Lauren attaches his signature pony and rider to a polo shirt. Also in 1972, the first stand-alone Polo shop opens on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, Calif. The fragrances Lauren for women and Polo for men go on sale. Mr. Lauren and his wife buy property in the Colorado uplands. It is later named the Double RL Ranch and sits on 17,000 acres. Oprah Winfrey narrates a video tour of the ranch in 2011.The company acquires a lease for the Rhinelander Mansion at 867 Madison Avenue and renovates it to make it the label's flagship store.Ralph Lauren undergoes surgery for a benign brain tumor.Mr. Lauren looks to expand and Goldman Sachs invests a minority stake and takes a seat on the company's board. The firm later takes the company public. Polo Ralph Lauren becomes publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange on June 11. Mr. Lauren sells 17.9 million shares, valued at $465.4 million, though he retains a majority of voting rights on the board. The company today has a market value of $8.8 billion.The first RL restaurant opens adjacent to the Ralph Lauren Chicago store on Michigan Avenue. In 2010, Ralph's opens in the courtyard and converted stables of the company's Paris store on the Boulevard Saint Germain. In January 2015, the Polo Bar, adjacent to the New York City Polo flagship store, opens.The Pink Pony campaign starts to fight against cancer. The Pink Pony Fund of the Polo Ralph Lauren Foundation supports programs for early diagnosis of cancer, education, treatment and research. The Ralph Lauren Center for Cancer Care and Prevention is established in Harlem in 2003 in partnership with the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to serve uninsured and underserved communities in New York.Forbes puts  Mr. Lauren's net worth in February at $7 billion.Advertisement