By MARY M. CHAPMANSEPT. 28, 2015
The tentative contract deal between Fiat Chrysler and its autoworkers union is encountering stiff resistance in early voting, with several plants rejecting it outright and endangering an agreement that would serve as a template for talks with General Motors and Ford Motor.With voting at some of the biggest plants set to begin Tuesday, the fate of the proposed four-year pact will become evident by midweek. At issue is a proposal that many lower-paid workers say falls far short of closing the pay chasm with veteran workers.The proposal, opponents say, offers no clear path for lower-tier workers to reach the highest levels of hourly pay. Some workers are also upset that the proposal fails to cap the number of entry-level workers, set at 25 percent in 2007 but not in 2011, even though many workers expected it would be maintained. No cap is included in the 2015 proposal. Fiat Chrysler declined to comment.Ford Motor and General Motors, by comparison, have a cap of about half as many lower-tier workers. And Ford moved employees into the higher tier over the course of the just-expired contract.Advertisement“I will absolutely vote this down,” said Scott McGinnis, a Tier 2 worker who has worked at Sterling Heights Assembly in Michigan for five years. He added that he expected the cap would be maintained in the last contract. “There is no visible progression gap between the two tiers,” he said.AdvertisementThe proposed contract calls for entry-level pay to immediately rise to $17 to $24 an hour, depending upon seniority level, maxing out at $22 to $25 an hour in 2018. The raises would diminish the gap with more-senior workers, who earn $28 an hour but will earn raises increasing their hourly pay to nearly $30 by the contract’s third year.The proposal also includes profit-sharing, $3,000 in ratification bonuses and $5.3 billion in plant investments. In addition, the contract establishes an entity that would cooperatively handle purchases of medical care and prescription drugs for Fiat Chrysler’s hourly workers, salaried workers and a trust for retirees.Union officials have been holding informational meetings at local chapters of the United Automobile Workers Union throughout the country to rally support.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But early results have shown a string of defeats. The thriving Jefferson North plant on Detroit’s east side, for example, rejected it, as have the Sterling Stamping Plant in Sterling Heights, Mich., and the Kokomo Casting Plant in Indiana.Among those plants still to hold votes are Sterling Heights Assembly Plant, the Warren Stamping Plant and Warren Truck Assembly Plant, all in Michigan; Toledo Assembly Complex in Ohio; and Belvidere Assembly in Illinois.Alex Wassell, a skilled trades worker at Warren Stamping, is poised to reject the proposal.“I feel like the company has been extremely profitable, and because we made concessions when things were tight, we deserve fairness when things are good,” he said. He also said that he objected to the lack of a cap on entry-level workers and hoped that union leaders would return to the bargaining table.Gary Chaison, a professor of industrial relations at Clark University in Worcester, Mass., said the international union representatives had not adequately persuaded workers to vote for the proposed contract.“I think the union didn’t fully gauge the expectations of membership properly,” he said. “They didn’t convey to the membership that this was a transitional agreement, and the membership wanted everything all at once.”If the contract is not ratified, Mr. Chaison said there will most likely have to be some kind of limitation on the number of Tier 2 workers, or the elimination of that wage scale entirely.AdvertisementIf the contract is voted down, negotiators could either return to the bargaining table, call a strike or delay talks, a U.A.W. spokesman said. If it is ratified, the union has not said whether it will turn to Ford or G.M. next.A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Fiat Chrysler Union Contract Faces Hurdles .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.