AdvertisementSupported byStocks & BondsBy Peter EavisStocks fell sharply on Monday as investors added new fears to the list of concerns that have weighed on global markets in recent weeks.In addition to worrying about the world’s largest economies, investors are now grappling with problems facing some of the world’s most prominent companies. On Monday, a nearly 30 percent decline in the shares of Glencore, a large Swiss mining and trading firm hit hard by the plunge in commodities prices, sent fear through the markets.“They are one of the victims of the commodities decline — a very big one and very high-profile one,” said Timothy M. Ghriskey, a co-founder of the Solaris Group. “It’s all related to global growth.”At the same time, investors are trying to assess the impact of the Volkswagen emissions-testing scandal on the broader auto sector and determine the outlook for biotechnology companies, which have sold off in recent days as politicians expressed their frustration with increases in drug prices.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index plunged 49.57 points, or 2.57 percent, to close at 1,881.77. The benchmark is now only marginally above the low that it sank to in August, when heavy turbulence interrupted a long ascent for United States stocks.The Dow Jones industrial average fell 312.78 points, or 1.92 percent, to 16,001.89. The sell-off in biotech shares battered the Nasdaq index, which was down 142.53 points, more than 3 percent, to 4,543.97. European shares, as measured by the Stoxx Europe 600 index, fell 2.21 percent. The sell-off continued Tuesday in Asia at the start of trading, with the Nikkei in Tokyo and the Hang Seng in Hong Kong dropping more than 3 percent, and the main index in Shanghai falling 1.5 percent. The nervousness showed up in other indicators. The Vix index, which measures investors’ expectations of volatility and is known as Wall Street’s fear gauge, spiked nearly 17 percent on Monday. Investors sought the relative safety of government bonds. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note, which falls as its price rises, declined to 2.10 percent on Monday after closing at 2.17 percent on Friday.“The action since late August has been pretty poor,” said Dan Greenhaus, chief global strategist at BTIG, a brokerage. “I don’t think there are many people who are pretty excited about stocks right now.”The S.& P. 500 index is now down nearly 12 percent from the benchmark nominal high it reached in May. A market that is down more than 10 percent from a peak is said to be in correction, in Wall Street parlance. A decline of 20 percent or more is a bear market. The last bear market in United States stocks ended in 2009.Much of the recent weakness in the markets can be attributed to concerns about the strength of the global economy. China’s economy, the second-largest in the world after that of the United States, appears to be slowing. China’s sluggishness could lead to slower growth in other countries, and its decision to allow its currency to trade more freely appears to have prompted China’s trading rivals to devalue their currencies to gain an advantage in global export markets. On Monday, new data showed that industrial profits in China declined by almost 9 percent in August from a year earlier.The outlook for interest rates is also adding to uncertainty. Stocks have fallen since the Federal Reserve, after its Sept. 17 monetary policy meeting, announced that it was holding back from increasing rates. The Fed’s policy statement was not particularly upbeat on the strength of the economy, which unnerved some investors. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, suggested Thursday evening that the Fed would raise rates this year, which helped send stocks higher on Friday. But when William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said more or less the same on Monday, stocks fell.Now, though, problems within big companies are adding to the bearishness on the economy.In the case of Glencore, the challenges are directly related to weakness in the global economy and commodities markets. Glencore’s shares are now down nearly 90 percent from the price at which they went public in 2011. Trading firms like Glencore depend on constant access to cheap credit to finance their bets. But creditors may cut back their loans to a trading firm if its prospects appear to be dimming. Glencore has recently taken steps that aim to strengthen its balance sheet, like reducing debt and selling new shares, but the continued decline in its shares suggests that investors may think the company has to do more. Glencore declined to comment.Some of the biggest losses on Monday occurred within the health care and biotech sectors. The Nasdaq biotechnology index lost 6 percent of its value, continuing a rout that was in part set off by a tweet from Hillary Rodham Clinton on Sept. 21. Commenting on a New York Times article about Turing Pharmaceuticals, a company that raised the price of a drug by many times, Ms. Clinton tweeted: “Price-gouging like this in the specialty drug market is outrageous.” The next day she announced a plan that would aim to limit drug prices in some cases.The ire among some politicians toward drug companies appears to be spreading. On Monday, Democrats on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform pressed the panel’s chairman to subpoena Valeant Pharmaceuticals, a Canadian drug maker, to obtain documents relating to the increase in the price of two of its drugs. Valeant’s shares fell nearly 17 percent, to $166.50.The direction of the stock market in part depends on the strength of corporate earnings. Many companies will soon be reporting their quarterly results for the period ending Sept. 30. Nike surprised investors last week with strong results that seemed to quell fears that the global economy would drag down its performance.  “It’s not all terrible — look at Nike,” said Mr. Greenhaus. “Hopefully, over the next few weeks we’ll see more of this.”Advertisement