By JEFFREY CANE and BEN PROTESSSEPT. 28, 2015
A top lawyer at the Treasury Department will soon join Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, bolstering the firm’s litigation practice in Washington.Roberto J. Gonzalez, a former deputy general counsel of the Treasury Department, will become a partner of the firm, representing banks and other financial clients that face scrutiny from prosecutors, regulators and Congress.Recently named one of 40 “rising stars” in Washington by The National Law Journal, Mr. Gonzalez worked for the Obama administration since its earliest days, serving as an associate White House counsel and special assistant to President Obama. And before joining the Treasury in 2013, he was principal deputy general counsel at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, where he vetted rule-makings and enforcement cases.At the Treasury, he supervised more than 100 lawyers responsible for financial regulation, anti-money-laundering and cybersecurity. He also helped oversee the defense of a lawsuit from MetLife, the insurer that challenged its designation as a systemically important financial institution.Advertisement“Paul Weiss obviously has a great financial institutions practice and they were interested in further building it out with someone who had a broad range of government experience,” Mr. Gonzalez said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Gonzalez, 37, is the latest government lawyer to spin through Washington’s revolving door. Christopher Meade, the former top lawyer at the Treasury, was recently hired by the giant asset manager BlackRock.AdvertisementMr. Gonzalez, a graduate of Duke, received his J.D. from Stanford Law School, where he was senior articles editor of the Stanford Law Review. He clerked for the Supreme Court justice John Paul Stevens and, before that, for Judge Guido Calabresi of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.He recently left the Treasury and is expected to join Paul Weiss in the coming months.Mr. Gonzalez will be the 12th partner in the firm’s Washington office. And his arrival, firm officials said, signals a broader expansion of that office.“We are delighted to welcome a lawyer of Roberto’s experience and expertise to our firm,” said Brad S. Karp, the chairman of Paul Weiss.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.