
Breakingviews By                     
REYNOLDS HOLDING

SEPT. 28, 2015
Volkswagen picked the wrong market for its emissions trickery. The German carmaker has come up against the United States legal system, which extracts bigger fines and more guilty pleas from overseas companies than from their American counterparts. Differences in the cases may explain the discrepancy. But any prosecutorial bias may attract as much scrutiny as VW’s dirty tricks.The company should, of course, expect a painful reckoning. Rigging 11 million diesel-powered automobiles worldwide to fool environmental tests is a serious offense, no matter the jurisdiction.Yet VW and other foreign corporations have reasons to be wary of Uncle Sam. Criminal fines in the United States from 2001-12 were on average more than seven times the size for overseas entities than for American companies, according to research from the University of Virginia Law School. While most American companies settle cases under deferred prosecution agreements and other arrangements, about 80 percent of foreign enterprises prosecuted during the study period were convicted or pleaded guilty. The largest penalty ever in a corporate criminal case was the $8.9 billion levied last year against the French bank BNP Paribas for violating United States sanctions against countries that included Sudan, Syria and Iran.It’s possible that overseas companies end up paying huge penalties because they don’t initially see their conduct as unlawful. Decades of paying bribes abroad – a practice that was legal in Germany until 1999 – made Siemens ripe for a record anticorruption fine in the United States in 2008. And UBS got squeezed between Swiss bank secrecy laws and American demands for client information in a 2009 tax evasion case. It ended up paying out $780 million.AdvertisementForeign wrongdoers may also believe they won’t be pursued. Gathering evidence overseas is difficult and costly, and influence at home can sometimes keep American enforcers at bay. BAE Systems deflected bribery charges for years by persuading British authorities that investigating their largest defense contractor went against “the wider public interest.”AdvertisementThose obstacles may, in fact, make only the most egregious cases against the biggest offenders worth pursuing, which could account for the disparity in outcomes for American and foreign perpetrators.Foreign companies may sometimes lack the insider awareness and lobbying power of their domestic rivals. It could also be that they haven’t mastered the art of nicely timed contrition. Prosecutors in the United States, unlike their European counterparts, have broad discretion to file and settle charges. The likes of Goldman Sachs and Citigroup have learned that early cooperation and a prompt apology can forestall or mitigate costly cases. That playbook probably helped General Motors avoid criminal charges and negotiate a relatively modest $900 million fine for hiding deadly flaws in ignition switches – $300 million less than Toyota paid in 2014 for an accelerator problem that killed fewer people.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BNP Paribas, meanwhile, didn’t help itself by joining French officials in publicly criticizing the American sanctions case. And Tony Hayward, the former chief of BP, put the company on the back foot by calling its 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill “relatively tiny” compared with the “very big ocean.” Even a later apology and an immense effort to reverse the environmental damage couldn’t shield BP from an $18.7 billion government fine.VW seems to have noticed. True, the company dissembled until United States regulators put it on the spot. But before resigning last Wednesday as chief executive, Martin Winterkorn apologized publicly and ordered an investigation, promising to make things right. His executives in the United States joined in the chorus. It’s a start, and one that might even diminish the penalties demanded in the United States. Even so, the company’s legal liability will probably exceed the $7.3 billion it has set aside to cover initial losses from the scandal.The penalties under the United States Clean Air Act alone could top $18 billion, or $37,500 for each of the almost 500,000 offending cars sold in America since 2008. That’s a maximum that VW can probably negotiate down, maybe to as little as a few billion dollars. But the company will also have to reach a criminal settlement that could include a guilty plea and charges against individuals, though almost certainly not Mr. Winterkorn or his most senior colleagues.Unlike in GM’s case, for example, no one died as a direct result of VW’s conduct, even if there’s an argument for linking higher pollution levels to deaths. But with large penalties specified in the relevant law – a factor in inflating BP’s penalty – the German company will probably have to pay more than the Detroit carmaker’s fine or even the record amount paid by Toyota. State attorneys general will also demand their cut.Then there are the private lawsuits. Vehicle owners will want compensation for the lost value of their Passats, Jettas and Audis. VW shareholders will seek to recover the amount the company’s stock price dropped after the scandal broke.VW’s timing was also bad. The Justice Department recently said that companies must identify individual wrongdoers to get credit for cooperation. And corporate penalties generally have skyrocketed in recent years. That brings the prospect of both a record fine and the rare spectacle of employees going to prison. Rightly or not, that would provoke accusations of unequal treatment. Given the legal record, United States enforcers may need to make examples of a few more homegrown offenders, too.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »