AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe Securities and Exchange Commission has been pestered with complaints over its move to file more administrative proceedings before in-house judges, including proceedings involving complex matters like insider trading and accounting fraud that used to be brought in federal district courts.The agency recently announced amendments to its rules of practice to tweak administrative proceedings and make them a little bit more like litigation in federal court.But the S.E.C. did not acknowledge that the proposed changes were in any way related to criticism that its use of administrative proceedings gave the impression it was seeking a “home court advantage” through truncated procedures to help get the outcome it wanted. Its proposal blandly notes that it was “intended to introduce additional flexibility into administrative proceedings” — ignoring questions about the fairness of the process.A recurrent complaint about administrative proceedings has been the absence of any meaningful avenues for defendants to obtain evidence apart from what the S.E.C. gathers during its investigation before filing charges.In a federal court, there is extensive discovery through subpoenas for records and depositions of witnesses. Litigators have a hard enough time dealing with the opposite side, so limiting their case to only what the S.E.C. provides while it is seeking a penalty sows great mistrust.The proposal would allow each side to take depositions in administrative cases, rather than forcing a defendant to rely on a transcript of a witness’s testimony obtained by the agency’s staff during the investigation. But unlike a federal court action, which gives the parties broad authority to depose almost any witness with relevant information, the S.E.C. would limit the number of depositions to three if there is a single defendant, and five when there are multiple defendants.Not only is that a small number, but figuring out which witnesses to depose may involve a large degree of guesswork if the agency took testimony from a number of people in its investigation, as is often the case. In some cases, it may not be apparent to the defense who is important enough to use one of the three (or five) precious slots, especially if the S.E.C. staff lawyer questioning a witness did not pursue areas of inquiry that might be helpful to the defendant.Picking out a number is always going to involve a measure of arbitrariness, but allowing only three – or at most five – depositions seems like an artificially low limit that will not do much to aid those accused of a violation in a complex case.The S.E.C. wants to stay away from the free-for-all of federal court discovery that drags out cases for months, and even years, as parties fight over what should be produced and who can be deposed. But the agency may want to give its administrative judges a bit more flexibility by authorizing them to allow additional depositions if a party can show good cause for questioning more than the proposed maximum, at least as long as it does not delay the process unnecessarily.Another bone of contention is the speed with which an administrative proceeding unfolds. The Dodd-Frank Act allows the S.E.C. to bring almost any case before an administrative judge, including matters that have multiple defendants and may involve hundreds of thousands of pages of documents related to numerous clients and transactions. Under the current rules, even the most complex matter must be decided within 300 days, with the hearing to begin only four months after filing the charges. In the world of securities litigation, and indeed in any complicated case, this is the epitome of what has been called the “rocket docket.” The time frame for resolving administrative charges would be lengthened under the S.E.C.’s proposal. Rather than requiring a hearing start within four months, it can now begin eight months after the proceeding commences. This expands the time available to take depositions and decide prehearing challenges to the evidence. The deadline for an administrative judge to issue a decision can also be extended an additional 30 days.Even with these amendments, the time in which an administrative case would be completed is still fairly short, about one year. Federal court actions usually take two to three times as long because of the broader discovery rights, and protests about the short window to prepare a case will continue because lawyers always want more time.The proposed changes are also unlikely to satisfy the agency’s legion of critics who have pushed for a broader restructuring of the administrative process, or even giving defendants the right to remove their case to a federal court.Many in the securities defense bar fall in the category of “give them an inch and they’ll take a mile” when representing clients, so we can expect them to point to issues that the amendments do not address, like the absence of a jury and how an appeal goes to the five S.E.C. commissioners before ever reaching a federal appeals court’.Other critics, like the billionaire Mark Cuban, are unlikely to be mollified. Mr. Cuban, who has been feuding with the S.E.C. since emerging victorious in an insider trading case in 2013, called the procedures in administrative proceedings “woefully inadequate” in a friend-of-the-court brief g filed in a case involving another challenge to administrative charges for insider trading.It should not come as a surprise that the S.E.C. tucked in a few goodies for itself in the proposal that are sure to draw the ire of its opponents. One amendment would expressly permit the use of hearsay evidence in the proceeding as long as it “bears satisfactory indicia of reliability so that its use is fair.” That is not the standard for admitting evidence in federal court actions in which the rules of evidence bar the use of hearsay unless it comes within a clearly prescribed exception. Under the S.E.C.’s proposal, some out-of-court statements, like the investigative testimony of witnesses, could be considered without having to call them to attend the hearing, which avoids the risk they might say something different or lose credibility on cross-examination.A separate proposal issued by the S.E.C. would require the parties to file all documents electronically “to enhance the accessibility of administrative proceedings.” That also gets the word out to the public more quickly about accusations of securities violations, enhancing the publicity surrounding the S.E.C.’s charges before any finding of a violation.In the end, there is not much that can be done beyond heaping criticism on the S.E.C., short of getting Congress to revamp the process – an unlikely possibility in the current political environment. So although the proposed changes will be assailed as falling well short of being even half a loaf compared to litigating in a federal court, at least the S.E.C. showed a willingness to give a little ground to protect its authority to pursue cases in an administrative proceeding.The proposals will not blunt the criticism of administrative proceedings, and may draw even more fire for how hearsay could be used to prove a violation without having to call the witness to testify. So the amendments will do little to turn down the volume of criticism being directed at the S.E.C.Advertisement