By REUTERSSEPT. 28, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Consumer spending in the United States grew briskly in August, and a key measure of inflation firmed a bit, according to economic data released on Monday.The Commerce Department said consumer spending increased 0.4 percent after an upwardly revised 0.4 percent increase in July. The figures give a bullish sign for economic growth in the third quarter.“These data underscore the ongoing health of the consumer sector,” said John Hoff, an economist at RBS Securities.The report could help convince investors that the economy is strong enough to warrant a rate increase this year, the view that the Federal Reserve’s chairwoman, Janet Yellen, most recently expressed on Thursday. President William Dudley of the New York Fed also said on Monday that an increase was likely this year and could come as soon as October.
            Total personal income before taxes, at a seasonally adjusted annual pace.        $16 trillion1514131211’14 ’15 Personal income and spendingIn trillionsCHANGEFROM JULYAUG.$15.4012.39+0.3%INCOMECONSUMPTION+0.4SEPT. 28, 2015
Economists polled by Reuters had forecast that consumer spending would rise 0.3 percent last month. Consumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of American economic activity.AdvertisementIt was the latest report indicating momentum in the economy as it confronted recent global turbulence, kindled by concerns over a slowing Chinese economy. Those concerns pushed the Fed to hold off raising rates earlier in September.AdvertisementLast month, spending on long-lasting goods like automobiles increased 0.9 percent. Outlays on services like utilities rose 0.5 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Personal income increased 0.3 percent in August.Overall inflation remained muted, reflecting low oil prices. Inflation, which has persistently run below the Fed’s 2 percent target in annual terms, rose just 0.3 percent in August from the month a year earlier.However, prices were up 1.3 percent when excluding food and energy, a crucial metric used by the Fed to gauge the trend rate of inflation. In July, core prices rose 1.2 percent year-over-year.Despite the positive signals for consumer spending, the housing market in the United States appeared to lose a step last month. Contracts to buy previously owned homes fell 1.4 percent.A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumer Spending Jumps, in a Bullish Sign for Economic Growth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.