
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

SEPT. 28, 2015
Thirty-one years ago, the estimable William E. Geist — not to be confused with his son Willie, of “Morning Joe” and “Today” show fame — spent a day or so following Donald Trump around New York and wrote about it in a memorable New York Times Magazine cover story. Mr. Geist’s tale has a certain familiar quality to it. “Spending a day with Donald Trump is like driving a Ferrari without the windshield,” he wrote. “It’s exhilarating; he gets a few bugs in his teeth.”One of the bugs involves his academic record at the prestigious Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. Another involves his net worth. Both issues are central to his identity as a successful businessman and in both cases he has been less than fully transparent.Mr. Trump transferred to Wharton after two years at Fordham University in the Bronx, and he graduated in 1968 with an undergraduate degree in economics. Mr. Trump is understandably proud of graduating from Wharton, and the presidential candidate talks about it all the time.“I went to the Wharton School of Finance,” he said in a July 11 speech in Phoenix. “I’m, like, a really smart person.” On Aug. 16, he told Chuck Todd, on “Meet the Press,” about the school: It’s “probably the hardest there is to get into,” and, “Some of the great business minds in the world have gone to Wharton.”AdvertisementMr. Geist pointed out that “just about every profile ever written” about Mr. Trump — including stories in The New York Times in 1973 and 1976 — journalists say that he graduated first in his class at Wharton. “Although the school refused comment, the commencement program from 1968 does not list him as graduating with honors of any kind,” Mr. Geist wrote.
                In 2006, Donald Trump sued a writer for libel because he had written that Mr. Trump’s net worth was far less than the $4 billion to $6 billion he was claiming back then.            In August, The Daily Pennsylvanian, the University of Pennsylvania newspaper, tried to get to the bottom of whether Mr. Trump did in fact graduate first in his class at Wharton. The paper cited a 1985 Trump biography, by Jerome Tuccille, that said Mr. Trump was not an honor student and “spent a lot of time on outside business activities.” Gwenda Blair, another Trump biographer, wrote that he was able to get into Wharton only because a “friendly” admissions officer knew his older brother, Fred Trump Jr., and did him a favor. A classmate of Mr. Trump’s, Steven Perelman, told the paper, “He was not in any kind of leadership. I certainly doubt he was the smartest guy in the class.” Unless Mr. Trump releases to the public his Wharton transcripts — which he has declined to do — we won’t know for sure, of course, whether he was an all-star at Wharton or not.Then there is the question of his wealth. In 2006, Mr. Trump sued the writer Timothy L. O’Brien and his publisher, Warner Books, for libel because he had written in an October 2005 New York Times article and in his book, “TrumpNation: The Art of Being Donald,” that Mr. Trump’s net worth was far less than the $4 billion to $6 billion he was claiming back then.AdvertisementMr. O’Brien put Mr. Trump’s net worth at $150 million to $250 million. Mr. Trump objected to the characterization of his wealth as so minuscule. He wanted $5 billion in damages. In July 2009, a judge in southern New Jersey dismissed the case, finding that Mr. O’Brien did not act with reckless disregard for the truth. The court did not make any determination about Mr. Trump’s wealth. Mr. Trump appealed. In September 2011, he lost the appeal, although he told me a few years ago in an interview that he still believed that Mr. O’Brien had libeled him and that the libel laws were unfair to public figures like him. “Essentially, the judge just said, ‘Trump is too famous,’” he told me. “‘He’s so famous that you’re allowed to say anything you want about him.’ Well, I disagree with that.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Trump now puts his net worth at $10 billion. But in a deposition he gave in 2007 in connection with the O’Brien lawsuit, it was clear that Mr. Trump gave himself a lot of latitude in calculating his wealth. Mr. Trump explained that he tries to be “truthful” about his net worth, but then he acknowledged: “My net worth fluctuates, and it goes up and down with markets and with attitudes and with feelings — even my own feelings — but I try,” he said, adding that he was no different from “a politician running for office. You always put the best foot forward. So you don’t want to say negative things.”He also demonstrated a surprising lack of knowledge about a basic fundamental principle of corporate finance — called net present value — that bankers and traders the world over use to value assets or companies, especially private ones like Mr. Trump’s for which there are no publicly traded stocks. Whether Mr. Trump understood this basic valuation concept arose in the context of questions about how he valued his golf courses. (Net present value, by the way, compares the value of receiving a dollar today with the value of receiving a dollar in the future, taking into account a variety of risk factors.)The deposition wasn’t a finance exam and not every successful businessman has to be conversant in the arcane terms of the discipline.But Wharton teaches the concept of net present value in its introductory finance courses. A top Wharton graduate who excelled in finance would probably remember that.Now that Mr. Trump is a front-runner in the race for the Republican presidential nomination, I was unable to talk to him directly about how he gets to his $10 billion net worth calculation. But a spokeswoman answered some of my questions on Wednesday. She said she couldn’t speak to his knowledge of net present value in 2007, but she said he knew the meaning of it now “as anyone would.” She put his 2014 income at $600 million, although his Federal Election Commission form says it was $362 million. (He told Rolling Stone magazine a few weeks ago that he makes “between $400 and $600 million a year.”)I asked her to share with me the Trump Organization’s five-year financial projections so that I could begin to calculate how to value Mr. Trump’s business. His spokeswoman said she doubted he would agree to share those projections with me, although on Thursday morning she sent me a one-page document showing his net worth at $8.7 billion as of June 2014. His most valuable asset on this document was his “brand,” at $3.3 billion. She did not provide any backup to these calculations, and, of course, a balance sheet at a point in time is not the same as five-year projections that bankers use to value private companies such as Mr. Trump’s. She also did not respond to later attempts to get clarity on whether Mr. Trump was first in his class at Wharton.C’mon Mr. Trump, be a sport. Since you’ve boasted so openly about being so rich and so smart, reconsider on both counts. What’s the harm in letting us see those Wharton grades and sharing your company’s projections so we can begin to figure out if your $10 billion net worth is accurate? It’s a teachable moment.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »