AdvertisementSupported byBy Jack Ewing and Bill VlasicFRANKFURT — The potential damage to Volkswagen from an emissions cheating scandal grew again on Monday, as prosecutors said they were investigating the former chief executive, and the company disclosed that more than two million Audi-brand cars — a crucial source of Volkswagen’s profit — were among the affected vehicles.German prosecutors said on Monday that they had begun an investigation of Martin Winterkorn, who until he resigned last week was the chief executive of Volkswagen. The inquiry is based on complaints from unidentified people asserting that Mr. Winterkorn should be held responsible for a widening scandal linked to diesel emissions.Also on Monday, Volkswagen’s Audi unit said that about 2.1 million of its vehicles, almost all of them in Europe, contained software that could be used to trick emissions testers.The Audis are among the 11 million vehicles that Volkswagen has said contained the deceptive software. But until this disclosure it was not known how broadly Audis were implicated.The software was in a broad range of Audi vehicles, which could be devastating to a brand that generates outsize profit for its parent company.Volkswagen admitted that 11 million of its vehicles were equipped with software that was used to cheat on emissions tests. This is how the technology works and what it now means for vehicle owners.“The Audi brand has been one of the biggest success stories of the decade, and the emissions scandal promises to slow its momentum,” Jack R. Nerad, executive editorial director and analyst at Kelley Blue Book, an auto research organization in California, wrote in an email. Mr. Nerad said, however, that he expected Audi to survive the scandal because of its excellent design.Audi accounted for 15 percent of the vehicles that Volkswagen sold in the first half of this year, competing with Mercedes-Benz and BMW in the so-called premium segment. Because of its high profit margin, Audi generated more than 40 percent of Volkswagen’s operating profit of 7 billion euros, or $7.8 billion, in the first half of 2015.While only about 13,000 Audi vehicles in the United States are affected because most of its American sales are gasoline-power vehicles, the damage to the brand’s image could be much greater. In contrast to Volkswagen-brand cars, Audi sales in the United States had been surging.From January to August, they rose 12 percent from a year ago, to 130,000 cars, the company said this month. Sales of Volkswagen-brand cars fell 3 percent in the United States during the same period.The Audi passenger cars affected range from subcompacts to full-size sedans with 1.6-liter or 2-liter engines, including the A1, A3, A4, A5 and A6 lines. Also affected were the TT sports car and the Q3 and Q5 sport utility vehicles with those engines, Audi said.Volkswagen had previously said that five million of the affected cars were Volkswagen-brand models. The company’s other main passenger car brands are Skoda and SEAT, neither of which is sold in the United States. The company has said that some light commercial vehicles may also be affected.About 500,000 of the 11 million vehicles with deceptive software are in the United States, where the Justice Department has opened a criminal investigation into the emissions deception, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. The software tampering is being investigated as a violation of the Clean Air Act.Trying to contain the damage, Volkswagen began a public relations offensive Monday in the United States to apologize to owners of diesel cars that contained the software.The company modified its United States website to include a prominent link to a “diesel information page,” which featured a video of Michael Horn, chief executive of the Volkswagen Group of America. “On behalf of our company, I would like to offer our sincere apologies to those affected by our violation of the carbon E.P.A. emissions standards,” he said.Sites in Germany and France provided information less conspicuously, with a small box on the site labeled “current news.” In Britain, there was no mention of the scandal on Volkswagen’s home page.In Braunschweig, Germany, a city close to Volkswagen’s base in Wolfsburg, the office of the state’s attorney said on Monday that it had begun the investigation into Mr. Winterkorn, 68, based on complaints filed by people it did not identify. Under German law, any citizen can file a criminal complaint against another person, and the authorities are obligated to investigate.The focus of the investigation is whether the sale of cars intended to manipulate emissions test results constituted fraud, and to determine who knew about it, the Braunschweig prosecutor said.Mr. Winterkorn, who resigned on Wednesday, has said several times that he had no knowledge of software that was intended to fool emissions tests. Matthias Müller, previously head of Volkswagen’s Porsche unit, was appointed chief executive on Friday.Volkswagen’s supervisory board has also said it did not believe Mr. Winterkorn was aware of the so-called defeat device in cars with diesel engines. But the company said when Mr. Winterkorn resigned that it had asked the state’s attorney to investigate possible criminal behavior by employees.The office of the state’s attorney said last week that it was investigating who was responsible for the emissions cheating, but it did not identify any suspects. In Germany, companies cannot be charged with a crime, meaning any investigation would focus on people at the company.The agency that oversees motor vehicles in Germany has told Volkswagen to present a binding plan by Oct. 7 on how the affected vehicles will be modified to meet emissions standards honestly. It remains unclear how Volkswagen will do that and how much it will cost. The company said on Sunday that it was working intensively on a solution.Mr. Horn, the head of Volkswagen in America, assured United States owners that their cars are safe and legal to drive. He said Volkswagen was working with regulators to find a “remedy” for the so-called defeat devices, which helped the vehicles produce significantly lower emissions during laboratory tests than during normal driving.While Mr. Horn said the company was dedicated to “setting things right,” he acknowledged that Volkswagen had work to do to win back the trust of its customers.“It is clear our company betrayed the trust of you, our customers, our employees, our dealers and the public,” Mr. Horn said.Jack Ewing reported from Frankfurt and Bill Vlasic from Detroit. Melissa Eddy contributed reporting from Berlin.Advertisement