By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 28, 2015
Hong Kong — Comcast said on Monday that it had reached an agreement to buy 51 percent of Universal Studios Japan for 183 billion yen.The current owners, which include Goldman Sachs, the chief executive Glenn Gumpel, the private equity firm MBK Partners and the hedge fund Owl Creek Asset Management, will retain minority stakes in the theme park in the $1.5 billion deal.The deal values Universal Studios Japan at $6.2 billion. The NBCUniversal unit of Comcast said it planned to use the acquisition to build its presence in Japan and to extend its theme park interests.“We want to expand our theme park business around the world and this investment in Universal Studios Japan fits perfectly with that strategy,” Steve Burke, the chief executive of NBCUniversal, said in a news release.AdvertisementBrian L. Roberts, the chairman and chief executive of Comcast, said, “We are excited to expand our global footprint with this wonderful theme park in Osaka and are excited by the opportunities that lie ahead in Japan and all of Asia.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Comcast announced in October 2014 that its Universal Parks and Resorts unit would build a theme park in Beijing. The 20 billion renminbi, or $3.1 billion at the current exchange rate, theme park would be jointly owned with the Beijing Shouhuan Cultural Tourism Investment Company and four state-owned companies. It was expected to open in 2019.Comcast NBCUniversal already wholly owns Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Orlando, in Florida. It has license agreements with Universal Studios Singapore.AdvertisementThe company also announced that Mr. Gumpel, who has been the chief executive of Universal Studios Japan since 2004, will retire when the transaction closes. The new chief executive officer is Jean-Louis Bonnier, who has been chief financial officer since 2005.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.