
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

SEPT. 29, 2015
A civil war has erupted among shareholders as pension funds and mutual funds fight over what constitutes good governance.In the latest skirmish, the mutual funds notched a victory in defeating a move by the pension funds to force Bank of America to split the jobs of chairman and chief executive, held by Brian T. Moynihan. That vote shows that there is widespread disagreement on corporate governance. And many times it is just one side’s opinion.The fight among Bank of America shareholders began after the bank decided nearly a year ago to discard a rule in its bylaws that required it to separate the chairman and chief executive positions. The rule was always a funny one, passed by 50.3 percent of the shareholders in 2009, when the bank was deservedly in the penalty box over its financial crisis misdeeds.Only 14 companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index require that the two posts be split, and only 38 percent have a separate chairman, according to the Spencer Stuart Board Index for 2014. That is because there is no consensus on whether splitting the positions will result in a better-run company.AdvertisementThat is the goal of corporate governance, after all, to make companies run better and produce shareholder wealth. (There may be other definitions, but that is a topic for another column.)AdvertisementAdvocates of separating the two jobs say it will produce greater wealth because it will lead to better corporate oversight and a better-run company.According to that argument, the chances that an imperial chief executive will lead the company blindly to ruin are reduced if there is a chairman to keep the executive in check.But the studies have yet to show  that a separation of the jobs increases a company’s value, and many find the opposite. This may be because simply splitting the positions does not lead to better oversight. The outcome depends on the people involved, and a new chairman may not have had much experience with the company. Would an independent chairman appointed in, say, 2005 have had the foresight to save a company from the financial crisis?More broadly, research has found no link between the number of independent directors on a board and a company’s worth.This illustrates that there is no consensus on what constitutes good corporate governance.Bank of America stepped into this gulf when it announced the change in bylaws and appointed its chief executive, Brian T. Moynihan, chairman. The bank also appointed a lead independent director to provide the oversight that an independent chairman would perform.When shareholders objected to the change, Bank of America did the right thing: It apologized and scheduled a special vote on the matter. The bank was trying to make amends for what was at worst a public relations blunder by failing to properly consult with its shareholders on the move beforehand.Still, no good deed goes unpunished in the corporate governance wars.The California Public Employees’ Retirement System and the California State Teachers’ Retirement System, the two largest public pension funds in the country, came out vocally against Bank of America. Both funds broadly contend that combining the jobs of chairman and chief executive in one person reduces the oversight of any company. Other public pension funds followed suit, as did the proxy advisory services Institutional Shareholder Services and Glass Lewis.AdvertisementSome pension funds also argued that Bank of America still needed a greater degree of oversight after its reckless maneuvers before the financial crisis led to the destruction of tens of billions of dollars of shareholder value.Other justifications were cited. One was that the lagging performance of Bank of America’s stock price justified the split. Another was that Bank of America had defied its shareholders by adopting the joint title and needed to be reminded that shareholders were in control.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pitted against the pension funds were the mutual funds. Unlike the pension funds, the mutual funds are becoming more skeptical of the corporate governance revolution. And they have supported companies that give the chairman and chief executive jobs to one person, for example, at JPMorgan Chase.Bank of America’s 10 largest shareholders are all mutual funds or other asset managers, according to the research firm Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ. The biggest is BlackRock, with 5.5 percent of the shares.These funds turned the tide for Bank of America, and the eventual vote was not even close. Sixty-three percent of the shares voted supported the current arrangement.The fury of the pension funds at the mutual funds was evident even before the outcome. In her column in The New York Times on Sept. 18, Gretchen Morgenson noted that the claim of mutual funds that they act in the best interests of their clients was questionable because “large mutual fund companies often have conflicts in their business models that are not visible,” which lead them to support the companies’ management.It is clear that there is no party line in corporate governance. Instead, what we have is a corporate governance industry in which proposals are brought by many investors, each with their own interests.Is a city or state comptroller bringing a proposal because he or she thinks it benefits the public pension fund — or a political career?Similarly, Calpers and Calstrs each have robust governance teams. Are they about to say that corporate governance does not work and push themselves into unemployment?AdvertisementThe proxy advisory services, like I.S.S. and Glass Lewis, promote governance, making a profit on their services, and even law firms often make their own governance proposals.The divisions in the corporate governance wars may make for a robust cottage industry, but they don’t necessarily help shareholders.Some shareholder proposals, like no self-dealing (officials should not put their own interests above the company’s) may be undeniably beneficial, but others lack any evidence that they produce greater shareholder value.Some investors appear simply to be caught up in the rush of exercising power. Shareholders are gleefully telling companies that ignored them for decades that they are now in charge.Perhaps it is time to call a truce. In the wake of the Bank of America vote, the pension funds and mutual funds ought to hug it out and instead focus on what works in corporate governance for a particular company by creating value, instead of just advocating whatever the conventional wisdom of the moment says is good corporate governance.It is a novel idea, but don’t bet on it happening too soon. Instead, as shareholders become more powerful, expect the next wave of corporate governance battles between mutual and pension funds to be about who has the purer form of this witch’s brew. Companies are caught in the middle.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Lack of Consensus on Corporate Governance.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »