By MARY WILLIAMS WALSH and MICHAEL CORKERYSEPT. 29, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Puerto Rican officials seeking a way out of more than $72 billion of debt were told by a Senate panel on Tuesday that the numbers they were using to make their case were too sketchy to persuade lawmakers that help was warranted — or that the money would be well spent.Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said that while he sympathized with the island’s plight, Congress needed to know more detail about the causes and structure of its debt, and whether help from Washington would benefit it in the long run.“We’d better get the right information, or nothing’s going to be done,” Senator Hatch warned.The Puerto Ricans who appeared included the head of the powerful Government Development Bank, which oversees the island’s borrowing and cash needs. They came before the Senate panel to argue for changes in various federal laws, which they said currently discriminate against Puerto Rico. It was the first such appearance before Congress since Gov. Alejandro García Padilla laid out a five-year plan earlier this month for a debt moratorium and structural reforms of the island’s economy.AdvertisementPuerto Rico has large debt payments due in November and December, and has warned it will not have enough cash to pay them while still providing an acceptable level of government services. None of the officials asked for a bailout, but they said the United States had a moral duty to help Puerto Rico, and identified a number of federal laws and programs that they said were discriminatory and ought to be changed.Advertisement“I want to help you,” Mr. Hatch told them. “I don’t think Puerto Rico is treated fairly. But we have to get really good information in order to help you.”Melba Acosta Febo, the head of the Government Development Bank, told Senator Hatch that the lack of financial data reflected Puerto Rico’s antiquated computer systems, which the government wanted to replace. She promised to gather as much information for the senators as possible.As the hearing was underway on Tuesday, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, known as Finra, took action on behalf of a group of Puerto Rican investors who had lost money in the purchase of mutual funds containing risky Puerto Rican bonds. Together, the agencies levied fines and restitution of $34 million against UBS Puerto Rico and two of its officers for their handling of the funds and failure to disclose the risks.UBS Puerto Rico was also the underwriter of the bonds, having been hired to bring them to market in 2008 in a gambit to raise money for the pension system. After struggling to sell them on the open markets in 2008, UBS packaged them in its mutual funds, which it marketed on the island as a good source of retirement income. Such a transaction would be prohibited on the United States mainland, but the federal law that governs mutual funds has an exception for mutual funds in Puerto Rico.In settling the charges, UBS did not admit any wrongdoing. “We’re pleased to have resolved these matters,” a bank spokeswoman said in a statement. “We remain dedicated to serving our customers during this difficult economic time for the commonwealth.”As part of its settlement with the S.E.C., UBS has agreed to pay $15 million into a fund for harmed investors. Finra required UBS to pay a $7.5 million fine and $11 million in restitution to investors.At the Senate hearing, the Puerto Ricans told of other federal laws they considered inequitable, particularly those that govern health care for the elderly and the poor, like Medicare and Medicaid. Puerto Rico’s population is older, and considerably poorer, than the rest of the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Acosta said she believed that amending the relevant laws would be worth an additional $1.5 billion for Puerto Rico.AdvertisementSergio M. Marxuach, policy director for the Center for a New Economy, a nonpartisan research institute in San Juan, said that the most powerful way Washington could reduce poverty and promote growth in Puerto Rico was to extend a version of the federal earned-income tax credit program to the island. The credit is for low- and moderate-income working individuals and couples — particularly those with children.He said this could be done even though residents of Puerto Rico do not now pay federal income tax — but he also said that at some point Puerto Rico’s legal status as a territory would have to be changed.Pedro Pierluisi, Puerto Rico’s nonvoting member of Congress, expressed the same idea. “We should treat Puerto Rico equally,” he said. “They are fellow American citizens. You shouldn’t be looking the other way. You shouldn’t be ignoring us. If you do so, you do so at your peril.”The only witness who was not from Puerto Rico, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, said he was skeptical that giving Puerto Rico more federal health care money would bring about the structural economic changes the island needed.“You don’t generate long-term economic growth by increasing health care spending in Puerto Rico,” said Mr. Holtz-Eakin, the former head of the Congressional Budget Office, and now president of the American Action Forum. “You might relieve some budget pressure, but so would a check for anything else.”“The primary emphasis should be on economic growth,” rather than simply finding new sources of money, he said.Senator Hatch also asked the witnesses about other types of debt that Puerto Rico owes, such as its pension obligations to retired government workers. He wanted to know which had priority in the hierarchy of creditors — Puerto Rico’s general obligation bondholders, or Puerto Rico’s pensioners.Ms. Acosta said general obligation bonds had an explicit constitutional guarantee and pensions did not.“It’s a very big problem,” she added. The pension system will probably run out of cash in 2018, she said, and at that point Puerto Rico would have to pay retirees directly from its general fund, straining the government’s budget to the breaking point.Advertisement“This is one of the reasons that we’re saying that we have to restructure the debt,” she said. “The idea is to use some of that money to put into the pension plans, because they badly need it.”Mary Williams Walsh reported from Washington and Michael Corkery from New York. A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Panel Seeks More Details About Puerto Rico’s Debt and Long-Term Needs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.