By EMILY STEELSEPT. 29, 2015
Two media measurement companies, comScore and Rentrak, on Tuesday announced plans to merge, seeking to challenge the longtime industry leader Nielsen in tracking how people consume media in an era of rapid change.ComScore was founded in 1999, measuring people’s use of online media, and it has recently made a push to analyze television viewing. Rentrak uses data from set-top boxes to measure what people are watching on television. Combined, the two companies are seeking to create an industry force that will provide a stronger competitor to Nielsen by measuring how people consume media across a proliferation of screens — mobile, desktop, television and more.“We are at an inflection point right now,” Serge Matta, comScore’s chief executive, said in an interview on Tuesday. “Look at how viewers are interacting with television,” he added. “It is no longer just on the television set in the living room. It is on mobile. It is on V.O.D. They consume content wherever they want it, whenever they want it.”The deal calls for Rentrak, founded under a different name in 1977, to become a wholly owned subsidiary of comScore. Mr. Matta will be chief of the combined company, and Bill Livek, chief of Rentrak, will be executive vice chairman and president.AdvertisementExpected to close in early 2016, the transaction values Rentrak at about $827 million on a fully diluted equity basis. Together, the companies have an equity value of about $2.4 billion, based on the share price at the close of trading on Tuesday. Nielsen has a market capitalization of about $16.7 billion. Some advertising and media executives cheered the merger as a viable alternative to Nielsen.AdvertisementSince the 1950s, Nielsen has dominated television ratings with its measurement based on a panel of viewers. Its statistics are the basis for nearly $70 billion in advertising sales each year in the United States. Still, industry executives continue to criticize Nielsen’s methods as outdated, saying that the company has failed to adapt to changing consumer habits like delayed viewing and viewing on mobile devices and streaming services.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When we have a monopoly, we don’t see much innovation,” said Kate Sirkin, who oversees measurement at Starcom MediaVest Group, part of the Publicis Group. “I’m not thinking as much about who is going to win, but how the competition is going to get hotter and drive innovation.”WPP, the advertising giant, stands to benefit from the merger because it took stakes in both companies in recent years. After the merger, WPP will own about 16 percent of the combined company, with the option to increase that stake to 20 percent. To preserve the company’s independence, WPP will not have a board seat or a board observer, Mr. Matta said.Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP, advocated in recent months for comScore and Rentrak to come together. “It’s an ideal combination to deal with the offline and online measurement issues our clients and both legacy and new media owners face,” he said in an email on Tuesday.In a statement, a Nielsen spokeswoman, Laura Nelson, said: “There are myriad analytics options for the media industry, but Nielsen’s focus is on delivering the actual currency ratings data used for trading billions of dollars in advertising. This requires superior quality, industrial-strength delivery and gold-standard audited processes and methods.”A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2015, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Merger Deal for comScore and Rentrak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.