
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

SEPT. 29, 2015
The Business Insider boss Henry Blodget is living up to his company’s name.He has struck a deal to sell the business and tech news website to the German publisher Axel Springer at a $442 million valuation. That implies an implausibly long run of improbably fast growth. The lofty expectations evoke Dresdner Bank’s acquisition of Wasserstein Perella.Landing Business Insider is a consolation prize for the $5.7 billion Axel Springer, whose brands include the popular tabloid newspaper Bild. It was knocked out of the July bidding for The Financial Times at the 11th hour by Nikkei. The Japanese company offered $1.3 billion, or a little more than two-and-a-half times The Financial Times’s sales last year.Axel Springer is paying 13 times Business Insider’s 2014 sales of $34 million, based on comments that Mr. Blodget made this year. Business Insider, the producer of things as diverse as stories about luxury watches on eBay and tips from the bond investor Jeffrey Gundlach, may be on track for a top line of $50 million this year, making the multiple more like nine times.Even so, at the minimum 30 percent annualized growth that Axel Springer projects for Business Insider, it would take another five years to generate $190 million in revenue, roughly a third of The Financial Times’s top line in 2014. That’s a long time to wait for a purchase to grow into the same price-to-sales ratio. The Financial Times sells subscriptions, but for now at least, Business Insider largely depends on the less reliable online ad revenue. And The Financial Times is profitable, while Axel Springer doesn’t expect Business Insider to break even until 2018.Another German company once spent over the odds to buy an American company with a business based on rehashing ideas using a series of slides. In 2000, at the peak of a market cycle during which Mr. Blodget was a tech analyst at Merrill Lynch, Dresdner Bank paid $1.4 billion for the investment bank Wasserstein Perella. In a deal that wound up a colossal flop, Dresdner paid less than four times revenue and used its own overvalued stock. Axel Springer is spending cash.Mr. Blodget became a financial celebrity by accurately predicting ludicrous valuations, such as a huge run-up in Amazon stock, in the late 1990s. Now he and Business Insider investors, including the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, who is keeping a small stake, are taking full advantage of them.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »