AdvertisementSupported byBy Clifford KraussPresident Rafael Correa of Ecuador has a small voice in the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, but he gave a big warning to the oil markets on Tuesday: If petroleum prices remained low for too long, they could soar again to new heights.The collapse in oil prices over the last year has put the economy of Ecuador, along with other OPEC countries like Venezuela and Algeria, under extreme stress. Mr. Correa’s government has projected that oil export earnings this year will plunge as much as 50 percent from last year, representing a decline of $7 billion for a country of only 16 million people.With oil prices well below $50 a barrel, oil companies in Ecuador are cutting exploration and production. The same is happening in the United States; around the world, oil companies have cut exploration investments 20 percent this year. On Monday, Royal Dutch Shell ended its expensive effort to explore for oil in Alaska’s Arctic waters.Unless there is a global recession that cuts oil demand, the current glut of crude could vanish by the end of 2016, some experts warn, and prices could climb higher.While in New York, Mr. Correa met with the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, and he said they discussed developing a “common strategy to protect oil prices.” But he expressed little optimism that OPEC, which is effectively run by Saudi Arabia and its Persian Gulf allies, would cut production significantly any time soon.“Low oil prices are harmful for everybody,” he said in an interview between meetings with world leaders at the United Nations. “For a while, consumers can enjoy it, the low oil prices, but if they continue like this, you could have a barrel at $200, and that is a problem. In the interest of everybody, it is convenient to stabilize the oil market.”Mr. Correa did not predict when oil prices might rise to that level, which would be well above the record of nearly $150 a barrel in 2008 and more than four times as high as prices are now. But the logic of his remark follows the historical ups and downs of oil prices. Whenever prices fell, as in the 1980s and 1990s, oil producers cut investments in exploration and production fell. Low prices at the pump encouraged consumers to drive more.That squeeze inevitably led to a new cycle of high prices, although predictions on market direction are often off by years.“Any forecasts about oil prices are wrong,” Mr. Correa said, smiling. “In 2008, all the experts said higher prices will be forever, and the next year they fell a lot. In 2009, people said they will stay low forever, and then they increased.”Until recently, Ecuador had one of the fastest-growing economies in Latin America, but this year Mr. Correa forecast a growth rate of 0.4 percent.“I have lots of problems,” Mr. Correa conceded. Expecting another year of low oil prices, he said, “We are preparing important adjustments.”He said much of the developing world was facing mounting economic challenges because of the end of the commodity boom of recent years that funneled so much money to the poorest nations for their oil, copper and agricultural production, much of it destined for China.“With some exceptions, everybody is worried,” he said of his fellow leaders of the developing world.Advertisement