By STANLEY REED and AMIE TSANGSEPT. 29, 2015
LONDON — Stocks fell in Asia on Tuesday, a day after a sell-off in the United States and Europe, as concerns about global growth and weaknesses in commodity prices continued to rattle investors.But Europe seemed ready to take a breather on Tuesday, with major indexes flat or up slightly in the early afternoon. And shares of Glencore, the Swiss mining and trading company, whose plummeting stock price had been a big part of the downdraft, were rebounding on Tuesday, up around 9 percent through midday in London.Fears about commodity prices and an oversupply of raw materials have been reflecting broader weaknesses in global growth, said Frederic Neumann, the co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC. Glencore, which owns mines but also actively trades commodities, has been hit doubly hard lately.Glencore’s stock had plunged nearly 30 percent on Monday in European trading. And that selling continued on Tuesday, with its Hong Kong-listed shares falling 29 percent.AdvertisementThat is why Glencore’s shares were being closely watched on Tuesday in London.Glencore has taken the worst beating of the major mining stocks in recent months, in the face of plunging commodity prices and worries about the economy of China, which has been the major global customer for iron ore and other metals. The company’s stock price has fallen about 80 percent over the past year.Advertisement“We believe the market response is overdone,” Heath Jansen, an analyst at Citigroup, wrote in a note to clients on Monday about Glencore. Mr. Jansen also said that Glencore’s management should consider taking the company private if the stock market “continues to express its unwillingness to value the business fairly.”But some analysts worry that if prices of commodities like coal and copper fall further, Glencore may struggle to service its debt.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hunter Hillcoat, an analyst at Investec in London, estimates that Glencore has about $47 billion in debt, dwarfing its stock market value of about $16 billion. “The market is becoming increasingly concerned about the company’s being able to refinance and roll over corporate bond debt,” Mr. Hillcoat said in an interview.The company raised $2.5 billion recently at a price of 1.25 pounds a share, with the chief executive, Ivan Glasenberg, and other employees buying 22 percent. But the stock has since fallen about 40 percent since then.In Asia on Tuesday, the Nikkei 225 stock average in Japan closed 4 percent lower, and the benchmark Shanghai index closed down about 2 percent. The Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong closed down 2.97 percent, and the main index in Australia closed down 3.8 percent.Australia is exposed more than many other countries to the weaknesses in commodity prices. There are signs that other parts of its economy are doing better, but “commodity trumps everything,” Mr. Neumann said.India’s central bank cut rates more than expected on Tuesday, citing a weak economic outlook. It brought its benchmark interest rate down by 0.5 percentage point, rather than the expected 0.25, to 6.75 percent.Advertisement“Since the third bimonthly statement of August 2015, global growth has moderated, especially in emerging market economies, global trade has deteriorated further, and downside risks to growth have increased,” the central bank, the Reserve Bank of India, said in a news release.All this showed that central banks were not confident that global growth would snap back anytime soon, Mr. Neumann said.Global growth is not the only thing causing concern. Investors were also trying to assess how much the emissions testing scandal at Volkswagen was likely to affect the auto sector. On Tuesday, Volkswagen shares continued their decline, down 1 percent to 2 percent in Frankfurt.Stanley Reed reported from London, and Amie Tsang from Hong Kong.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.