AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Chris SagersIt has been an awful week for plaintiffs in antitrust cases.Not once, but twice, an appeals court has unanimously reversed judgments, in one case on the rare grounds that the panel just disagreed on the facts. They were both striking, partly because they come at a time when antitrust issues — ordinarily a sleepy area of policy as far as the public is concerned — have somehow become popular, and interestingly enough just days before the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit delivered a ringing endorsement of strong antitrust enforcement.From the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, on the other hand, we got an emphatic reversal on grounds of old-school orthodoxy, just as a range of parties — including The Economist, The Atlantic, Paul Krugman Hillary Clinton and, of all conceivable entities, the Harvard Business School — seems to think antitrust enforcement is important again.The first case was a humdinger in its own way; the court threw out a $147 million judgment in a long-running challenge to international price-fixing in vitamin C. But it was on fairly obscure grounds: Defendants proved they had fixed their prices because they were legally compelled to do it, with formal proof provided by the Chinese government itself.More significant was the opinion handed down by the appeals court on Monday in United States v. American Express. The court rejected a challenge to American Express’s “anti-steering” rules, a setback in the long effort to bring competitive vigor to payment cards. Specifically, the rules preclude merchants from either telling card users what Amex charges the merchants or offering incentives to use other cards. (The Justice Department had already sued and settled with Visa and MasterCard to end similar policies.) The court said the rules had not been shown to be harmful, because the government failed properly to define the market in which Amex competes.The opinion is striking on many levels. The problems begin with a wholesale rejection and rewriting of the facts found at the trial concerning market definition, based on nothing more than the appeals court’s own finding of facts. That is not supposed to happen as a matter of appellate procedure. As another court once memorably put it, fact findings should be reversed only when they “strike us as wrong with the force of a five-week-old, unrefrigerated dead fish.” That appellate courts nevertheless reverse on market definition fairly often, and more or less always in the defendants’ favor, shows just how far they view antitrust issues as different from other laws. The courts have reversed market definitions in cases involving computers, hospitals, health care supplies, retail distribution and many others.But put that aside. The court’s new fact findings seem wrong in substance. The opinion boils down to the judges’ finding that Amex does not have power to raise the fees it imposes on merchants because it must maintain a large network of them to preserve its appeal to consumers, and if it loses consumers, it will have trouble securing merchants, and so on and so on. Judge Richard C. Wesley, who wrote the opinion, was obviously bothered by this intuition. As he said during oral arguments, a card network’s need to sign up merchants and its need to sign up card holders are “extraordinarily interrelated.”In principle, that seems perfectly plausible, and no doubt there is interdependence between the two sides of a payment system. But for no evident reason, the court elevated that impulse to what is effectively a finding that Amex could not have power over merchants. Among other claims that seem wrong, the court offers several seemingly plain statements of a mistake so well known in antitrust that it has its own name: the Cellophane Fallacy, or the claim that a company must not have market power because it cannot raise its prices any higher, when that might just be because it is already maxing out the market power it has.More generally, the decision in the Amex case is emblematic of how antitrust enforcement came to be so hamstrung in the last 40 years. One experiences an opinion like this in stages. It is initially just overwhelming, because of the industry’s factual complexity. You dig through it, though, and realize that what bothers the court has a common-sense ring of plausibility — that payment networks are “two sided,” and there is probably interdependence.But then, as the court turns that plausible but otherwise largely undefended intuition into a strong rule against liability, one arrives at a final “this is just conservative orthodoxy” stage.Amex must be allowed to overcharge merchants, says the court, so that it can give consumers incentives, like cash-back awards and airline miles, or else it would not be able to attract enough consumers to make itself attractive to merchants. But that just implies the court’s own deep lack of faith in free markets.The court supports its claims with only the barest references to the evidence offered at trial, and they seem to just reflect another of Judge Wesley’s intuitions: Amex must be competing for cardholders, he said, because “I wouldn’t get any mail if they didn’t.”In the end, the opinion reflects an irony throughout conservative antitrust policy. It combines its purported foundation in free-market zeal with a certainty that competition alone cannot be trusted to set price and output properly. And despite its appeal to scientific rigor, it tends to prefer simple, strong, heuristic rules — like that plaintiffs must lose if they lack extraordinary evidence of market power.That makes it easy to throw cases out on impulses. Mind you, the court found Amex powerless on instincts like those, and it said it was better for society if Amex could unilaterally decide to fund consumer freebies with merchant overcharges, despite overwhelming traditional evidence of power. Amex controls nearly a quarter of a market with high barriers to entry in which the top three companies have about 95 percent of the business, and evidence showed that it was able to impose a series of systematic rate increases on merchants without loss of charge volume.Chris Sagers is the James A. Thomas Distinguished Professor of Law at Cleveland State University.Advertisement