By DANIELLE IVORY and HIROKO TABUCHINOV. 2, 2015
This slow-motion footage, courtesy of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, shows a test of a Takata airbag. During the test, the airbag inflater ruptures, sending metal fragments flying.As automakers struggle to repair millions of cars with airbags made by Takata that might explode and spew metal fragments, the recalls continue to widen and now extend even to the newest models.Two automakers have recently announced recalls for 2015 and 2016 models. Honda announced on Friday that it would recall 515 CR-V vehicles from the 2016 model year after Takata informed the automaker that a front driver-side airbag had failed in tests. That recall came on the heels of a General Motors recall for 400 cars from the 2015 model year, initiated after side airbags failed in tests. And this summer, regulators asked Volkswagen to provide information about the rupture of a Takata-made side airbag in a Tiguan from the 2015 model year.The young age of the cars has raised concern among lawmakers about the scope of the problem. In the United States, more than 19 million cars made by 12 automakers have already been recalled since Honda first recalled cars with Takata-made airbags in 2008. Millions more have been recalled abroad.“This recall, along with the recall of fairly new G.M. vehicles with defective side airbags, may indicate more serious safety issues with Takata inflaters,” said Senator Bill Nelson of Florida, the top Democrat on the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, which has been examining the Takata case. “And it raises the question, are any of the Takata airbag inflaters safe?”AdvertisementRegulators have been casting an ever-widening net in their investigation of Takata. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, following the G.M. recall and Tiguan incident, announced that it was expanding its inquiry to include vehicles from all model years that contained Takata-made airbag inflaters using a certain chemical compound.AdvertisementStill, officials at the agency said that they had not determined the cause of the explosions.For years, automakers pointed to isolated manufacturing problems, rather than the design of the airbags. But recently regulators have been examining the safety of the airbags’ propellant, known as ammonium nitrate.Honda said in a statement on its website that it initiated its recent recall after a driver’s side airbag inflater ruptured during testing at a Takata plant in Monclova, Mexico, on Oct. 10. Takata notified Honda and regulators two days later, according to government documents.According to Takata’s preliminary analysis, Honda said in the statement, the rupture may have occurred as a result of a structural failure in the inflater casing, not because of a problem with the propellant.Jared Levy, a spokesman for Takata, said: “The investigation at this time is focused on a structural component of the inflater, and not the propellant. We believe the issue is limited to a small number of inflaters, but the investigation continues.” He added that Takata was cooperating with the safety agency.Gordon Trowbridge, a spokesman for N.H.T.S.A., said that preliminary evidence suggested that the ruptures in newer-model Honda, Volkswagen and G.M. vehicles “may be linked to manufacturing weakness in the inflater housing, rather than the degradation of propellant exposed to prolonged heat and humidity.”But he added that the regulator had “included all Takata-made inflaters using ammonium nitrate propellant within the scope of its investigation in order to ensure that every American has safe airbags in their vehicle.”Whatever the cause, lawmakers are expressing increasing exasperation. Representative Frank Pallone Jr., the top Democrat on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, which has also been investigating the Takata recall, lamented the “slow drip of information regarding potentially deadly defects.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are just now learning that newer models may also be dangerous, unbeknownst to American drivers and passengers,” he said in an email.AdvertisementNissan Motor disclosed on Monday that a Takata airbag in a 2006 X-Trail sport utility vehicle had exploded, injuring a female passenger in the head and wrist.The latest rupture occurred on Oct. 28 in central Japan, the Japanese business daily Nikkei reported. Nissan believed it was “highly likely” that a Takata defect was to blame, the paper said.The 2006 X-Trail had been included in a recall in May, the Nikkei said, and had been inspected at a dealership in August. But the vehicle was not deemed a priority and no inflater replacements were made.Takata, which has struggled to produce replacement airbag inflaters, has said that cars driven in areas of high humidity should be a top priority, because exposure to moisture is thought to play a role in triggering the ruptures. But most of the Japanese archipelago experiences humid weather.Steve Yaeger, a spokesman for Nissan North America, would confirm only that the passenger-side airbag “did not deploy properly and caused an injury.”“This incident is still under investigation, and we have no further information regarding the situation at this time,” he said.Automakers including Nissan, Honda and Toyota have so far recalled 9.7 million cars in Japan. The ministry of transportation is aware of six rupture cases in the country so far, the Nikkei said.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Wave of New-Car Recalls Raises Questions for Takata Airbags .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.