OCT. 1, 2016
“Football Team at the Obamacare Buffet,” by Margot Sanger-Katz (The Upshot, Economic View, Sept. 25), looked at the difficulty the health insurance markets have with pricing to account for healthy and sick customers — a problem likened to that faced by an all-you-can-eat buffet when a high school football team arrives.The article attracted 116 comments on nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.You almost got the restaurant analogy right, but not quite. The actual analogy is that patients are diners who are given a menu with no prices on it. You don’t know the cost or value of what you’re buying. Doctors know the more they order for you, the more money they make. You don’t really care because you think your insurance company is going to pay for it.Steve, New YorkBasically, we need to give up on the for-profit insurers. There is no place, except among a niche, to have our entire system held hostage by this parasitic middleman.bmack, KentuckyIt is amazing that the whole article never talks about cost controls. With the hospitals and doctors charging exorbitantly, why would you expect the insurance rates to be lower, whether it is a single-payer system or multipayer system?AdvertisementGandhian, New JerseyIt is blatantly obvious that Big Government “solutions” don’t work. Big Government drives up costs and reduces quality. So let’s get the single-payer fantasy off the table right now; Big Government Obamacare is a train wreck, and bigger government is not the answer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Larry, ChicagoThe solution is simple: Open Medicare to folks as they turn 60 and then gradually lower that age till everyone is in the national plan. If the insurance companies want out, let them go.AdvertisementDavid G. Sutliff, St. Joseph, Mich.Without ever drawing the conclusion, this article explains why single payer makes the most sense. Put everyone in the same insurance pool so that all medical risk is covered and spread most broadly. At present, we have the worst possible combination of private and public insurance, with all sorts of gaming and cost-shifting on the sides of both producers and consumers.Earl W., New Bern, N.C.The truth is that many good, even essential, things are not profitable. Is it at all reasonable to compare health care to an all-you-can-eat buffet?AMR, Emeryville, Calif.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 2, 2016, on Page BU5 of the New York edition with the headline: Comments.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.