AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Cindy Whitehead, chief executive officer of the Pink Ceiling, which finances and supports innovations for women, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like?A. I had a nomadic childhood. I moved every year from the fourth grade through my senior year of high school. My father was with the State Department. We spent some time in upstate New York, where I was born. We bounced back and forth between there and Washington, D.C., and then overseas in both the Fiji Islands and in Italy.How did you feel about moving around so much?I went kicking and screaming every time because I’d finally get established and then we would move again. But in hindsight, it’s made me good at observation, pretty good at appreciating different points of view and hugely adaptable.Tell me more about your parents.They have very strong personalities. My mom is the quiet power, with a lot of compassion for others. She has always found a way to give back. My dad has a strong will to challenge the status quo. He was deeply a public servant who believed it was his duty to instigate change.What was your first formal management role?I had a sales team at Dura Pharmaceuticals. It was fun. The people in the group were very quirky, and they all were self-made. If someone is self-made, the skills they used to get to that point are going to ultimately make them successful in a team-based environment.How do you determine if they’re self-made?I’ll explore it in a conversation. How did you grow up? What did you do to first make money? I’m listening for whether they created their own destiny. If they’ve got that, they have that passion and that drive to pave their own path. Those are my kind of people. Other lessons you learned early on?I learned to speak up. I talk to a lot of women about that today. They often use all these qualifiers — the apology before they ask a question, or they’ll say, “Can I ask a question?” You just did. Ask the question. I learned to push myself out of my comfort zone, because if I had something to say and didn’t say it, I would stew on it.You’re on your fourth company that you’ve started. Have you noticed big changes to the culture as they’ve grown past certain milestones, in terms of employees or revenues?I have this wish to never go above 50 employees. Above that, there is a shift in the personal interaction you have with them. Below that, I can still remember your dog’s name and whether you just had a baby. At a certain size, you lose some of that.I love knowing everybody. My quirk is that I nickname everybody who works for me, and I don’t know if I can nickname 250 people the same way I can with 50.How do you come up with the nicknames?Through the stories they tell over time. There will be something that is very memorable that totally captures them. It becomes a big thing the day you are nicknamed, and everybody knows the story behind why you get that nickname. You can literally go to company events and we only call each other by our nicknames.I assume you have a nickname.It’s H.B.I.C., which they have promised me stands for Head Betty in Charge, but I’m pretty sure that’s not what the B stands for. But it’s out of love. My business card says Head Betty.You built up Sprout Pharmaceuticals to bring Addyi, a drug to treat low sex drive in women, to market. Was it hard to watch your grand plan go south after you sold the company to Valeant?In a word, it’s disheartening, maybe heartbreaking. Exits for founders are often unsatisfactory in that you have this baby, and the baby will probably live its best life through adoption. The goal was that women around the world would have access to the drug. But the adoptive parents don’t always have the same vision.Tell me more about how you hire.I’ll have them give me their three-minute commercial — tell me about yourself, soup to nuts — to see where they start. They may start when they were born, or in their résumé. I also love to hear what their favorite business is and why. It’s probably not a question they’re commonly asked, but those who will fit in with our culture will find it pretty quickly. And it will probably not be a formulaic answer. It will probably be about some mom-and-pop store that they grew up going to and why it was great.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I tell people to walk into your boss’s office in the first week and say, “I want to be great at this. I’m here to add value. I’d love any opportunity to learn.” If you’re sitting in front of me and telling me that you want to be great, I’m going to believe you.Why don’t more people do that?Because when you show up out of college, you think you’re there to learn the rules, and what you’re really there to learn is how to contribute. But you’re in an unfamiliar environment, you’re sort of feeling your way, and you would never have the audacity to say that to your boss.But I think it will be a defining moment if you decide that you are there for a reason and you have a lot to offer. You need to declare that you’re ready to offer it.Given your work advising female entrepreneurs, what’s a key lesson you try to pass along?At the Pink Ceiling, we give really candid feedback to women who pitch us. I think we’re having a great moment around women. What I fear is that if we do too much cheerleading and not enough straight talk, we’re going to set up a lot of young women for failure. They were brave enough to start a business from scratch and we congratulate them for it without telling them candidly that their business plan isn’t scalable or sustainable.It’s not about raining on their parade. It’s about setting them up for long-term success. That’s what is not being said right now.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement