AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.28 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.44 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.20 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.St. Petersburg, Fla., $51.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Minneapolis, $120 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Wisconsin, $325 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Mukilteo, Wash., School District No. 6, $52.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Arizona Board of Regents, $178.7 million of University of Arizona System revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.California Department of Veterans Affairs. $167.1 million of home purchase revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank, $50.6 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.California Public Works Board, $527.5 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Charlotte, N.C., $111 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Coachella Valley, Calif., Unified School District. $50.3 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Delaware County, Pa., Regional Water Quality Control Authority, $53 million of sewer revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Dickinson, Tex., Independent School District, $85 million of unlimited tax schoolhouse and refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Garland, Tex., Independent School District, $154.3 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.Georgia Housing and Finance Authority, $117 million of single family mortgage bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Grand Prairie, Tex., Independent School District. $52.5 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Honolulu City and County, $222 million of tax-exempt general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Honolulu City and County, $361 million of taxable general obligation bonds. Bank of American Merrill Lynch.Iowa Finance Authority, $161 million of state revolving fund revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Kalamazoo, Mich., Hospital Finance Authority, $112.4 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Lancaster County, Pa., School District, $53.1 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Lexington-Fayette Urban County, Ky., Airport Board, $58.3 million of general obligation revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Los Angeles County, Calif., $66 million of Whittier Union High School District general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Maricopa County, Ariz., Industrial Development Authority, $766.1 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $1.5 billion of Harvard University revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $195 million of Boston University issue revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts School Building Authority, $604.3 million of senior dedicated sales tax refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Michigan Strategic Fund, $50 million of limited obligation revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Michigan, $55 million of Ferris State University general revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $78 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Dormitory Authority, $1.1 billion of personal income tax revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $672.1 million of transportation revenue bonds. Jefferies.North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $59.2 million of retirement facilities first mortgage revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Ohio Housing Finance Agency, $147.2 million of residential mortgage revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Oklahoma Water Resources Board, $90 million of drinking water program revolving fund revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Port Arthur, Tex., Independent School District. $83 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank.Rhode Island Commerce Corporation, $250 million of Rhode Island Department of Transportation grant anticipation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Rock Hill, S.C., $89.8 million of combined utility system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Round Rock, Tex., Independent School District, $92.1 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank.San Antonio Water System, $303 million of junior lien revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.San Diego County, Calif., $250 million of Palomar Health revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.San Francisco City and County Public Utilities Commission, $859.3 million of water revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Successor Agency to the Rancho Cucamonga Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $55 million of Rancho Redevelopment Project tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Syracuse Industrial Development Agency, $200 million of Carousel Center Project tax-exempt refinancing pilot revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $631.6 million of Texas Health Resources System revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Tennessee Housing Development Agency, $62 million of taxable homeownership program bonds. Raymond James.Texas Transportation Commission, $599.7 million of Texas Highway Fund first tier revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Texas Transportation Commission, $90 million of State Highway Fund first-tier revenue refinancing PUT bonds. Jefferies.Tomball, Tex., Independent School District, $101.1 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Utah Municipal Power Agency, $116.6 million of power supply system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.West Basin, Calif., Municipal Water District, $112 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wildwood, Fla., $56 million of Village Community Development District No. 12 special assessment revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Advertisement