AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersA Texas businessman, Sam Wyly, has agreed to pay $198.1 million to resolve claims by federal securities regulators that he engaged in a long-running securities fraud to hide trades in companies he controlled using offshore trusts, according to a court filing.Mr. Wyly is also in talks to resolve tax claims by the Internal Revenue Service after he was ordered to pay $1.11 billion, the papers filed on Friday by the Securities and Exchange Commission in federal court in Manhattan show.The settlement is subject to approval by the S.E.C. commissioners and a federal bankruptcy judge in Dallas, where Mr. Wyly filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 2014 as the S.E.C. pursued him for monetary sanctions.Under the settlement, Mr. Wyly, now 81, and his family agreed to take steps to have offshore trusts in the Isle of Man make payments to satisfy a judgment that the S.E.C. obtained in 2015.The S.E.C. will cooperate with ensuring that Mr. Wyly receives a credit against his federal income tax liabilities of nearly $181 million.Neither the S.E.C. nor a spokesman for Mr. Wyly responded immediately to a request for comment on Saturday.The S.E.C. sued Sam Wyly and his brother, Charles Wyly, in 2010, claiming that they earned $553 million in undisclosed profits by trading in four companies they controlled using trusts in the Isle of Man.Both denied wrongdoing. Charles Wyly died in a car accident in 2011, and his estate was substituted as a defendant.After a jury in May 2014 found them liable for securities fraud, a federal judge ordered Sam Wyly to pay $198.1 million and Charles Wyly’s estate to pay $101.2 million.Sam Wyly, who last appeared on Forbes magazine’s list of the 400 richest Americans in 2010, with a net worth of $1 billion, and Caroline Wyly, Charles Wyly’s widow, subsequently filed for bankruptcy protection.The I.R.S. in bankruptcy court took both to trial, accusing Sam and Charles Wyly of committing tax fraud by shielding much of their wealth in offshore trusts.Judge Barbara J. Houser of United States Bankruptcy Court in Dallas found Sam Wyly liable earlier this year and ordered him to pay $1.11 billion in back taxes, interest and penalties.Advertisement