AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelIt looked as if the world was coming to an end across the media business three months ago.Major media stocks crashed suddenly as panic spread that the number of people canceling or paring their cable and satellite subscriptions was accelerating. Eroding television ratings and dismal advertising sales prompted apocalyptic forecasts about the role of traditional television in the digital future. This week, as media giants including Disney, 21st Century Fox and Time Warner are scheduled to report quarterly earnings, the short-term outlook for the industry appears brighter.Fears of a rapid acceleration of cord-cutting, consumers canceling subscriptions to traditional pay television services, were overblown based on the recent results from cable and satellite providers, analysts said. And while ratings remain challenged, the advertising market appears to have been somewhat stronger in the third quarter. But while the sky has not fallen yet, questions about the long-term future of the industry remain pressing. Investors are looking for media executives to show how they are adapting for survival. That includes providing innovative offerings in the traditional cable and satellite bundles and exploiting new digital distribution outlets, like streaming and mobile.“Nobody standing still will be O.K.,” said Brian Wieser, a media analyst with Pivotal Research Group. “But I don’t think they are standing still.”All eyes will be on Disney, the world’s largest entertainment group, which is scheduled to report its fiscal full-year and fourth-quarter results after markets close Thursday.The company ignited concern across the industry when it reported results in August and issued reduced growth expectations for its large cable network division. The group contributes about half of Disney’s operating income and is anchored by the sports network ESPN, long considered one of the industry’s strongest performers.In part because of subscriber losses attributable to cord-cutting and more tailored programming bundles, the company said then that its Disney Media Networks group would achieve “midsingle digit” operating income growth between 2013 and 2016, instead of the previously expected “high single-digit” growthThe comments scared investors, who worried that the rest of the industry was in peril if even ESPN, with its valuable sports programming, was not immune to the threat of cord-cutting. On Aug. 5, eight major media stocks crashed, wiping out a combined $37 billion in market value. Since then, shares in the Walt Disney Company, 21st Century Fox and Time Warner have all been down.“ESPN has the most subscription fees, so has the furthest to fall with cord-cutting,” said Anthony DiClemente, a media industry analyst with Nomura. “At the same time, for a lot of households, ESPN is one of the most important networks.”ESPN has made several moves in recent months to shift its business to the new way people watch its programming. They include an announcement in October that the network was laying off about 300 employees, or nearly 4 percent of its work force. ESPN’s subscriber base has fallen to 91.8 million, from 98.9 million in October 2013, according to Nielsen. The second quarter of 2015 was the industry’s worst for pay television subscription losses. That downturn is bad news for the media companies that sell programming to cable and satellite distributors.However, initial third-quarter results from cable and satellite companies, including Comcast, Time Warner Cable and Charter, indicate modest subscriber declines, analysts said. The satellite provider Dish Networks will report earnings next week, which will make the cord-cutting snapshot more clear.“The United States is a slowly melting ice cube,” Mr. DiClemente said. “It is just a question of how quickly the ice cube melts.”One big question media executives are likely to face this week is whether people are signing up for the slimmer bundles of channels that cable and satellite companies are introducing. The television companies could come under pressure if they are not included in those bundles.“The bigger issue here is not just whether people cut the cord, but who has the bigger negotiation leverage: the distributors or the media companies,” said Kannan Venkateshwar, a media analyst with Barclays. He noted that Comcast recently reduced its forecast for the amount of money it would have to spend on programming for the second year in a row.“Whatever is the upside for cable is the downside for media,” Mr. Venkateshwar said. “Some of the negotiating leverage seems to be moving to the distributors.”This week, media executives are likely to highlight their ventures in streaming as potential new revenue sources; those efforts include creating stand-alone streaming services and selling their programming to streaming services and mobile providers. Time Warner’s HBO, and CBS Corporation’s CBS and Showtime, for instance, have introduced stand-alone services outside the traditional cable subscriptions. Verizon’s Go90 free ad-supported mobile streaming service offers popular shows from ESPN and Viacom’s Comedy Central.Another important topic is whether Netflix is a friend or an enemy. The service, which now counts 70.4 million paid global subscribers, has come under fire in recent months by some media executives who question whether they should license their shows to Netflix, and potentially send viewers somewhere else to see the content. The fear is that even though the license fees help prop up revenue, the deals with Netflix cannibalize traditional ratings and advertising revenue.James Murdoch, the chief executive of 21st Century Fox, said in an investor conference this fall that business rules were changing. He added that while the company had had a long relationship with Netflix, it was also working more with Hulu, the streaming service that Fox owns with Comcast and Disney.“Should media companies trade near-term pain for long-term gain?” Mr. DiClemente asked. “Some companies are continuing to sell to Netflix, but some are taking a more militant position.”Advertisement