By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 3, 2016
A business financed by Cantor Fitzgerald that became one of the biggest sports book runners in the country has agreed to pay about $22.5 million to settle allegations of illegal gambling and money laundering, authorities announced on Monday.The settlement, a nonprosecution agreement, resolves a yearslong investigation into the gambling affiliate of Cantor Fitzgerald, a financial firm that over the last decade moved deeply into the gambling business by applying Wall Street technology.It was an unusual push for Cantor, best known as a bond-trading powerhouse. But the business that it spawned, then known as Cantor Gaming, became one of the biggest sports book runners around. It ran the sports betting operations in seven major casinos in Las Vegas, including the Venetian, the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino and the Cosmopolitan.Cantor has since distanced itself from the business, saying in 2014 that it owned no equity in the gambling unit.AdvertisementNow, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn have accused the business of embarking on illegal operations. Cantor Gaming set higher betting limits for its large-scale bettors, whom it also gave preferred treatment. That included direct contact with the business’s director of risk management, Michael Colbert, who set odds and lines for bets.AdvertisementProsecutors accused Mr. Colbert and others of breaking federal and state laws, including by allowing bets made by proxy, a practice known as messenger betting that is illegal in Nevada. Cantor Gaming also allowed bettors to make wagers from out of state, aiding at least two customers in what the government said were money-laundering schemes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Colbert, whom prosecutors said was involved in the “Jersey Boys” gambling ring based in New Jersey and Queens, pleaded guilty two years ago to conspiring to take part in illegal gambling. He faces up to five years in prison. His lawyer, Murray Richman, was not immediately available for comment.Earlier this year, the head of the gambling unit, Lee Amaitis, resigned as part of a settlement with the Nevada Gaming Control Board.Under the terms of the agreement, the affiliate — now known as CG Technology — agreed to pay $16.5 million to settle the investigation by United States attorneys in Brooklyn and Nevada and a number of federal and local investigations. Separately, CG Technology agreed to pay $6 million to the Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. Cantor Gaming avoided criminal charges by signing the nonprosecution agreement, which is akin to corporate probation.“Cantor Gaming quickly grew into one of the largest race and sports book operators in the United States,” Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, which includes Brooklyn, said in a statement. “Unacceptably, this growth came at the expense of compliance with the law, and as a result Cantor Gaming became a place where at least two large-scale illegal bookmakers could launder their ill-gotten proceeds.”A spokeswoman for CG Technology declined to comment.A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cantor Fitzgerald Gaming Affiliate Reaches Settlement.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.