AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonDid Donald J. Trump have a fiduciary duty to keep the amount he personally owes in taxes to a minimum?That was the argument made by the Trump campaign when asked about documents indicating Mr. Trump had declared a $916 million loss on his 1995 income tax returns, possibly shielding him from paying any taxes for 18 years. The campaign said Mr. Trump has “a fiduciary responsibility to his business, his family and his employees to pay no more tax than legally required.”Simply put, a person who is a fiduciary must act in the best interests of another person, putting that person’s interests ahead of his or her own. But in the context of Mr. Trump’s personal tax returns, legal experts said, the argument that he has a fiduciary duty to others is, well, laughable.In the absence of any disclosures from Mr. Trump, The New York Times and other news outlets have attempted to fill in the gaps.“There is no such thing as a fiduciary duty as a businessman to oneself,” said Richard W. Painter, a professor of corporate law at the University of Minnesota and former chief ethics lawyer in the George W. Bush White House from early 2005 to mid-2007. “That’s called greed. And greed is not a component of the law of fiduciary duty anywhere.”The response from the Trump camp did seem to channel Learned Hand, a federal judge who famously said, “Anyone may arrange his affairs so that his taxes shall be as low as possible; he is not bound to choose that pattern which best pays the treasury.”But it is ridiculous to add the element of a fiduciary duty to a desire to reduce a personal tax bill, said Tamar Frankel, a professor at the Boston University School of Law.“We don’t owe a fiduciary duty to ourselves,” Ms. Frankel said in an interview. “There is no such thing. We owe it to others whose money and power we hold for their benefit.”The tax records obtained by The Times show that Donald J. Trump claimed a $916 million loss that could have allowed him to legally avoid paying federal income taxes for up to 18 years.Still, there was something exceedingly familiar about Mr. Trump’s contention that he had a duty to others to keep his taxes low. Indeed, it sounded an awful lot like the logic that corporate officials employ when they move their operations to foreign countries where tax rates are lower.These moves, known as corporate inversions, have become immensely popular in recent years. And when companies make them, their leaders often proclaim that they are doing so out of a responsibility to their shareholders because profits will rise as a result.This, too, is questionable, and the Obama administration has been working to curtail this type of corporate behavior.“I’ve never heard a court say that a corporate officer or director has a fiduciary duty to move operations out of the U.S. to reduce taxes for the publicly held company,” Mr. Painter said. “Companies that move overseas saying they had a fiduciary duty to shareholders to do it are just wrong.”In addition, academics have found that not all shareholders do well in tax inversions. Chief executives, like Mr. Trump, however, do typically benefit. Which may be why they too choose to lay claim to a fiduciary duty in an act that winds up benefiting themselves.Advertisement