AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranNutanix, the cloud data-storage firm that made its market debut last week, has jammed open the window for initial public offerings.The firm’s stock popped a whopping 131 percent on its debut on Friday, for a market capitalization above $5 billion. The warm welcome that was extended to new companies in September, combined with decreased venture-capital funding, may lead others to pull the trigger. The coming presidential election means they had better hurry.Nutanix got lucky. A general market rally on its first day of trading – partly on the back of reduced concern about the stability of Deutsche Bank as the German lender negotiates a big settlement with American prosecutors – put the wind behind stocks. But Nutanix’s business, selling cheap and easy ways to expand data centers, is also at the center of the latest tech wave.Over all, it has proved a tricky year so far for new and risky companies to sell shares to the public. Only about half as many businesses have floated as in the same period last year, according to Renaissance Capital. To attract investors, solid firms have been priced attractively. The valuations of the networking firm Acacia Communications and the cloud voice and messaging firm Twilio both trade at more than four times where their I.P.O.s priced earlier this year. And Nutanix can claim the best first-day gain of all.Performances such as these have helped bring on a thaw. Sixteen companies floated last month. That is more than twice as many as in September 2015, and it is the first month this year with more I.P.O.s than last year.Another incentive to go public now is a tightening of purse strings at private investment firms. The amount of venture capital invested in the second quarter was down 11 percent from the same period in 2015, according to Thomson Reuters data. And it was the third-straight quarter showing a double-digit decline.Firms may, however, have little time to take advantage. Later in October, investors will be preoccupied with the election, which takes place on Nov. 8, and thereafter they will be trying to figure out what the new president and congressional makeup mean. Nutanix has created the opening, but it may be brief.Advertisement