By LANDON THOMAS Jr.NOV. 2, 2015
The billionaire hedge fund investor George Soros has withdrawn $490 million from a new investment fund set up by William H. Gross, according to investment filings.Mr. Soros was an early investor with Mr. Gross when he moved to the fund company, Janus Capital Group, after being forced to leave Pimco late last year. The investment gave the man known as the bond king a welcome boost as he started anew after 40 years at Pimco.Like many large institutional investors, the funds connected to Mr. Soros did not invest in Mr. Gross’s main mutual fund, the Global Unconstrained Fund, which is aimed at smaller retail investors.Instead, his money was managed in a so-called separate account. As of the second quarter of this year, Mr. Soros had $490 million invested with Mr. Gross, said people who were briefed on the matter.AdvertisementBut in a filing for the quarter that ended in September, that money had been withdrawn from Janus, according to data from eVestment, a research firm that tracks investor flows and performance. The removal brought the total amount managed in these accounts to $1.6 billion, down from $2.1 billion.AdvertisementA representative from Janus declined to comment. A representative for Mr. Soros did not respond to a request for comment. The withdrawal was reported earlier by Pensions & Investments.On the face of it, the withdrawal of one investor, even one of that size, should not in any way spell disaster.Over the last six months, with global markets suffering sharp swings up and down, many large institutions — from state pension funds in California to sovereign wealth funds in Asia and the Middle East — have yanked significant sums from their managers. Few if any asset management firms have escaped this trend.This has been especially true for unconstrained bond funds, which take on more risk than most of their peers and generally experience significant investor outflows in uncertain times.But for Janus, which bet big that Mr. Gross would bring in a wave of new money, the exit of Mr. Soros carries more weight, especially in light of the fairly small amount of money that Mr. Gross is overseeing.Over the last year, Mr. Gross has struggled to replicate the stellar returns that he produced at Pimco while managing the Total Return Fund.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the year to date, his fund is down 1.4 percent, a record that trails the main benchmark index, which is up 1.1 percent, according to the fund tracker Morningstar.The fund is also lagging its peers, with 74 percent of similarly themed funds having a better record than Mr. Gross’s this year.AdvertisementThe mutual fund’s current size is $1.4 billion, and its fairly small size reflects the difficulties Mr. Gross has had in attracting investors to his new enterprise.By comparison, the Total Return Fund, which under Mr. Gross became the largest mutual fund in the world, has delivered better results.Year to date, the fund, which now manages $95 billion, down from near $300 billion at its peak, is up 1 percent, beating 70 percent of its peers.Mr. Gross has also filed suit against his former colleagues at Pimco, claiming that they conspired to force his departure and deprived him of money that he was owed.While the suit highlighted the bitter relations between the famous investor and his onetime investment partners, for those investing with Mr. Gross it may well come across as a distraction.Since moving to Janus, Mr. Gross has adopted a lower public profile, appearing less on television and at investor conferences.He has, however, kept up with his tradition of writing punchy investment letters, and if he is not writing about his late cat (as he did at Pimco), he still is prone to offbeat tangents, such as his praying habits as a child.In terms of Mr. Gross’s investments, he has warned of the risks of German government bonds with their superlow investment yields as well as the volatility in the Chinese stock market.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Soros Takes Back $490 Million From Gross at Janus Capital.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.