By AMIE TSANGOCT. 3, 2016
Based on his track record, Robert A. Iger, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, is long overdue for a shopping trip.There was Pixar, then Marvel, then Lucasfilm. All have been considered triumphant deals.But Wall Street has a short memory and Disney is struggling to assure investors that ESPN can be its growth engine in the long term.At the same time, rumors of another acquisition continue to fly. There have been hints about Vice Media, Spotify and Netflix.Last week, it was Twitter.It could actually be a sound strategic investment. Sporting events account for almost half of all Twitter conversations about TV, and the social network has been shifting into live-streaming sports and news events.AdvertisementBut the rumor has prompted its fair share of negative responses, too.For one, there could be a conflict in their images. As Farhad Manjoo notes, “Disney is the happiest place on earth; Twitter is for the worst people on the planet.” (Twitter is struggling with the challenge of making sure people can speak freely without being harassed on its platform.)AdvertisementWhile it remains unclear what Disney’s next move might be, Laurene Powell Jobs, a major investor in Walt Disney, has taken a firm step deeper into Hollywood. She took a substantial minority stake in Anonymous Content, the production and talent management company behind the film “Spotlight.”Now we know that Donald J. Trump racked up losses so huge in the 1990s that he would not have had to pay federal or New York state income tax on nearly a billion dollars in income.But that has not crimped his lavish lifestyle.It’s hard to imagine a starker contrast with those Americans struggling to pay taxes and make ends meet, or a more damning indictment of a tax code that makes that possible, James B. Stewart writes.It undermines a system where every citizen supposedly pays their fair share.Is it the case, as the hotel owner Leona Helmsley once said, that “Only the little people pay taxes”?Qualms about Deutsche Bank have lessened since last week, especially as it has become clearer that it is in much better shape than Lehman Brothers was.But it is still levered at a much higher ratio than many other banks.“What makes Deutsche Bank systemic is their sheer size combined with the leverage that is required to stay in the flow and be an intermediary,” said Anthony J. Perrotta Jr., an expert in the structure of financial markets at TABB Group, a consulting firm. “But as capital becomes more scarce, this becomes a fragile equation.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And many of its assets are of the most illiquid variety. So investors are still playing it safe and asking for their money back.AdvertisementIt, and other European banks, still look very risky.70 percent: the amount by which Tesla deliveries rose in the third quarter with the help of production improvements, cheaper lease deals and discounts, according to Reuters.• Automakers will report new car sales for September. It is expected to be the second disappointing month in a row.• On Thursday, Nov. 10, The New York Times will host its fifth annual DealBook conference, Playing for the Long Term, at Jazz at Lincoln Center in New York City.Just two days after a new United States president is elected to office, some of the world’s most influential leaders in business, technology and policy will come together to assess the challenges and opportunities that will define the global economy.To request an invitation to attend, please go to nytdealbookconference.comAmong the confirmed speakers: (more coming soon)• Eric Schmidt, executive chairman, Alphabet (formerly Google)• Lloyd Blankfein, chairman and chief executive, Goldman Sachs• Indra Nooyi, chairman and chief executive, PepsiCo• Howard Schultz, chairman and chief executive, Starbucks• Mark Bertolini, chairman and chief executive, Aetna• Roger Goodell, commissioner, N.F.L.• Richard Plepler, chairman and chief executive, HBOAdvertisement• Thomas M. Rutledge, chairman and chief executive, Charter Communications• William Ackman, chief executive, Pershing Square• Bernard J. Tyson, chairman and chief executive, Kaiser Permanente• Clayton M. Christensen, Harvard Business SchoolWe hope to see you there.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.