By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 5, 2016
Last year, a big American hedge fund took aim at plans to revamp a part of Samsung, the South Korean giant that dominates many of its home country’s industries.Though it lost that battle, the hedge fund now has its sights on the crown jewel of the Samsung empire.Elliott Management proposed in a letter on Wednesday that Samsung essentially split its electronics business into two separate companies as part of a broader reshaping of the business.It is one of the most ambitious efforts yet by a foreign investor to inject American-style activist investing into the world of Asian business, where families often retain control of huge publicly traded companies.AdvertisementAmong the most powerful of those dynasties is the Lee family of South Korea, whose Samsung conglomerate — known as a chaebol — oversees a daunting array of businesses like Galaxy smartphones, home appliances and shipbuilding.AdvertisementSome hedge funds have found success on a smaller scale. The investor Daniel S. Loeb succeeded in persuading Fanuc, a Japanese robot maker, to double its dividend — though his campaign there came after an unsuccessful run at Sony, an effort that included a partial listing of its entertainment arm.Elliott, which is run by the billionaire Paul E. Singer, tried last year to disrupt Samsung’s efforts to merge two of the empire’s affiliates, Samsung C&T and Cheil Industries. The move was meant to transfer more power to Jay Y. Lee, the son of the ailing chairman, Lee Kun-hee.The activist hedge fund argued that the merger sharply undervalued Samsung C&T, and it won the backing of international investors. Still, the investment firm narrowly lost the vote.Now, Elliott is taking on Samsung Electronics, the most prominent part of the Korean conglomerate internationally. At the same time, the hedge fund — branded as a vulture capitalist during its last fight with the family — is trying to take a softer tone, arguing that the business’s current setup has led to it being undervalued in the stock markets.It is unclear whether Elliott, which owns 0.62 percent of Samsung Electronics’ shares, will fare better in this effort.Samsung is still reeling from the worldwide recall of its Note 7 smartphone over a problem with batteries igniting.But the hedge fund suggested in its letter on Wednesday that the roots of its campaign lay not in the recall but in the opaque, densely cross-linked holding structure of the Samsung kingdom.Advertisement“Simply put, the remarkable achievements of Samsung Electronics are not being properly reflected in the market’s valuation of its shares,” Elliott wrote in the letter.Meanwhile, Jay Y. Lee, who was nominated for a board seat at Samsung Electronics last month, is expected to lead a restructuring of his family’s company as he gains more control.Elliott has proposed that Samsung Electronics divide itself into two publicly traded businesses: a holding company that would function as the Lee family’s main ownership vehicle, and a separate company that would hold the electronics maker’s operating businesses.As part of that plan, the hedge fund proposed that the holding company merge with Samsung C&T, which now serves as the Lee family’s holding company for the entire Samsung empire.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the event that the elder Mr. Lee dies, Korean law would require the family to pay a huge amount of inheritance taxes. They could then sell shares in the holding company to raise money for those payouts, Elliott is likely to argue.To reduce what the hedge fund called excessive cash reserves, Elliott also called for a special dividend of 245,000 won, or nearly $220, a share of Samsung Electronics, amounting to roughly $27 billion worth of payouts. The plan also proposed that 75 percent of the new operating company’s cash flow be paid out as dividends.The holding company could remain traded on the Korean stock exchange, but Elliott called for the operating company to be listed on Nasdaq as well to provide greater visibility into the business.The hedge fund also called for each of the new companies’ boards to add at least three independent directors.Representatives for Samsung did not respond for comment.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Fund Wants Unit of Samsung Split in Two.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.