AdvertisementSupported byBy Randall SmithMaurice R. Greenberg, a former chief executive of the insurance giant American International Group, said on Tuesday that he was not aware of certain repayment terms in a reinsurance deal that lies at the center of his civil accounting fraud trial.In Mr. Greenberg’s fourth day of testimony in New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, a lawyer for the state asked about the Sept. 14 testimony of the former A.I.G. executive Christian M. Milton, who described a mechanism under which A.I.G. would repay General Reinsurance Corp. a fee for the reinsurance.Asked if he was aware that Mr. Milton had arranged for the return of the premium Gen Re would supposedly pay under the contract, Mr. Greenberg said twice on Tuesday that he could not recall being told about what one state attorney had described as a “secret side agreement.”Mr. Greenberg and the former A.I.G. chief financial officer Howard I. Smith are accused of bolstering the insurance giant’s reported results with bogus transactions some 16 years ago. New York filed charges in 2005, led by Eliot Spitzer, then the state attorney general. Defense lawyers have argued that their clients intended to comply with accounting rules.The state has charged that A.I.G. entered into a sham reinsurance deal with a supposedly independent reinsurer that it actually controlled. The arrangement effectively converted insurance losses into investment losses, leading to accusations of misleading A.I.G. investors.And in the deal about which Mr. Greenberg was quizzed on Tuesday, the state said that A.I.G. struck two other sham reinsurance deals with General Reinsurance that increased its reserves by $500 million at a time when some analysts and investors were concerned about A.I.G.’s declining reserve levels.On the stand on Sept. 14, Mr. Milton said that Mr. Greenberg had told him A.I.G. would get $500 million of reserves for the reinsurance by paying a $5 million fee to Gen Re. But Mr. Milton acknowledged that the deals’ official contracts indicated that Gen Re would pay A.I.G. $10 million for the reinsurance, but did not include what he called an “offset provision,” in which A.I.G. would repay the $10 million to Gen Re plus the $5 million deal fee.Mr. Greenberg said on the stand on Tuesday that he was not aware of the repayment plan.At one point, a state attorney, David E. Nachman, confronted the 91-year-old Mr. Greenberg about his account of the Gen Re deals in his 2013 book, “The A.I.G. Story,” written with Lawrence A. Cunningham. In the book, Mr. Greenberg suggests his role was limited to one phone call to Ronald Ferguson, then Gen Re’s chief executive. But evidence had just been introduced in the trial indicating that Mr. Greenberg had talked about the deals twice with Mr. Ferguson.“You wrote that you explained the proposal to Ferguson,” Mr. Nachman said, and “then ‘had nothing else to do with the deal.’” He added, “You were seeking to minimize your involvement with this deal in this book, were you not?”When Mr. Greenberg said he was trying to be factual, Mr. Nachman asked, “Where does it refer to the second conversation?” After Mr. Greenberg said he had the two contacts with Mr. Ferguson and “then that was it,” Mr. Nachman said, “We’ll see whether that was it.”Mr. Nachman took Mr. Greenberg through earnings reports and analysts’ comments, focusing on a decline in A.I.G.’s reported reserves on a day in October 2000 when A.I.G.’s stock price fell 6 percent based partly on such concerns.In its quarterly report before the Gen Re deals, A.I.G. did not highlight reserve levels in its earnings announcements. But after arranging the Gen Re reinsurance, A.I.G. highlighted its rising reserve levels in the next two announcements, Mr. Nachman said.If A.I.G. had not struck the reinsurance deals with Gen Re, Mr. Greenberg was asked, would its reserves have declined for three consecutive quarters? “Assuming we did nothing else,” he replied.Advertisement