
Another View By                     
R. FOSTER WINANS

OCT. 4, 2016
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s 40-year campaign against insider trading faces another big test on Wednesday when the Supreme Court is scheduled to hear oral arguments in an obscure case that challenges the enforcement of what the petitioner correctly describes as a “judge-made law.” Congress, as it turns out, has never defined the crime of insider trading, leaving it to the courts and the regulators to draw the line between what is legal and what isn’t.I’m not a lawyer or a constitutional expert, but I have been part of this debate. In 1987, the Supreme Court — which was, like now, short one justice — was deadlocked over whether I committed securities fraud when I was a columnist at The Wall Street Journal. In exchange for $31,000, I had passed on tips to a stockbroker about articles that were going to appear in the paper’s Heard on the Street column, which I wrote at the time. The broker profited from the effect the columns often had on stock prices once they were published. The court voted 8 to 0, however, that I had committed mail and wire fraud by stealing the newspaper’s publishing schedule and using it for my own benefit.The government’s campaign against insider trading has been tortuous with mixed and murky results. In an early case in the 1970s, against the insurance analyst Ray Dirks, the Supreme Court handed the S.E.C. a legal drubbing when it overturned his conviction for aiding and abetting insider trading. In 1973, Mr. Dirks uncovered a pyramid scheme at a publicly held insurance company. Today, instead of being prosecuted, he would have earned a whistle-blower’s bounty instead of penalties.Another case, Chiarella v. United States, resulted in a big loss when the court ruled that an employee of a printing company that produced legal documents about coming mergers was not guilty of securities fraud for trading based on what he learned, overturning his conviction. Most recently, the court refused to hear an appeal in the overturned convictions of two hedge fund managers, Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman, who made more than $72 million trading on information they received from a chain of analysts who got it from an insider.AdvertisementThe case to be heard on Wednesday, Bassam Yacoub Salman v. United States, is similar to the issue in the Newman case — Mr. Salman was convicted of trading on confidential information that he received from an intermediary who got it from an insider. Mr. Salman apparently did not know or speak with this insider or know if the insider had received any benefit. Among Wall Street cognoscenti, interest in the Salman case is high as shown by supporting briefs filed by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the Cato Institute and the businessman Mark Cuban, who won his own six-year battle over civil insider trading charges. Mr. Cuban’s lawyers argue in his brief that “no one should be prosecuted for conduct that Congress is either unwilling or unable to define.”AdvertisementHaving studied a number of these cases in some detail, and having participated in numerous legal panel discussions over the years, I will be surprised if Mr. Salman loses his appeal. The “tell” is the court’s willingness to let stand the reversal of Mr. Newman’s and Mr. Chiasson’s convictions and its willingness to hear a similar case with only eight justices. I doubt the court would take Mr. Salman’s case if there was a chance of another tie or a decision inconsistent with the appeals court decision in the Newman case. Tha ruling said that to be convicted, a trader must know that a benefit of “pecuniary or similarly valuable nature” had passed between tippers and recipients, known as tippees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For more than 40 years, the S.E.C. and the Justice Department have frequently overreached in their zeal to impose on noninsiders the same obligations as true insiders — officers and directors, lawyers, investment bankers and journalists — who steal confidential information from their employers or defraud their customers. The government’s rationale is the need to protect the public’s confidence in the markets and maintain a level playing field. Both are absurd notions.Inside information is to Wall Street what blood is to a vampire — the essence of its existence. Every trader at every hedge fund and on every trading desk at every Wall Street firm knows where the bright line is between legal and illegal trading. They also know how to finesse that line. As the author Michael Lewis pointed out in his book “The Big Short,” to cheat someone in the stock market, “you really had to work at it. Bond traders could exploit inside information without worrying that they would be caught.”The idea that the securities markets should be level is fairy-tale morality in a business where traders earn obscene bonuses for finessing that line and customers are referred to as muppets. I suspect that the sum of all the money made by people accused of insider trading would constitute a fraction of the profits made on the trading desks of big Wall Street banks based on knowledge unavailable to the rest of us.Although Congress never defined the crime itself, in 1984 and again in 1988, it did enact legislation that increased the penalties for violations of S.E.C. regulations and made the recipient of insider information as guilty as the tipper. In light of the government’s checkered record in court, many of these cases would seem to violate the Supreme Court’s Vagueness Doctrine, which provides that a statute is “void for vagueness if a legislature’s delegation of authority to judges administrators is so extensive that it would lead to arbitrary prosecutions.”Hmmmm.An earlier version of this column misstated the status of two hedge fund managers, Anthony Chiasson and Todd Newman, before their convictions were overturned. They had been granted bail pending appeal; they had not begun serving prison sentences.Foster Winans is author of “Trading Secrets” and a ghostwriter living in Doylestown, Pa.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »