By ADAM LIPTAKNOV. 2, 2015
WASHINGTON —  A case about false information on the Internet gave rise to a vivid and occasionally personal argument on Monday at the Supreme Court.The question in the case was whether companies that say false but seemingly benign things about consumers may be sued under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. Justice Sonia Sotomayor said that many sorts of apparently harmless misinformation could cause damage.She said, by way of example, that she knew single people who searched the Internet to find out if prospective dates were married or not. “So if you’re not married and there’s a report out there saying you are, that’s a potential injury,” Justice Sotomayor said.Justice Anthony M. Kennedy suggested that the ubiquity of questionable information in the digital age may require a fresh approach. “On the Internet, in this cyber-age that we have where all this information is out, there has to be some real injury” caused by misinformation, he said, suggesting that mass dissemination of falsehoods may warrant different treatment than neighborhood gossip.AdvertisementThe case concerned Spokeo, a company that sells personal data online. It distributed a profile of Thomas Robins that was riddled with errors.AdvertisementThe profile said he had a graduate degree, though he did not; that he was employed and in good shape financially, though he was out of work; and that he was married and had children, though neither was true. The profile included a photograph of a different man.“These are not unimportant details,” Justice Elena Kagan said. “They basically got everything wrong about him. You know, they got his marital status wrong. They got his income wrong. They got his education wrong. They basically portrayed a different person.”Mr. Robins sued under a part of the credit law that provides damages of up to $1,000 without proof of direct harm, and he sought to represent a class of people with similar claims. Spokeo responded that Congress did not have the power to create a legal right to sue for plaintiffs who have suffered no direct and concrete injuries.The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit last year disagreed. “A plaintiff can suffer a violation of the statutory right without suffering actual damages,” a unanimous three-judge panel ruled.Justice Kagan said that false statements may be damage enough. “Why isn’t the dissemination of false information about you in a credit report,” she asked, “perfectly sufficient if Congress says that’s a concrete injury?”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Andrew J. Pincus, a lawyer for Spokeo, said suits should be allowed only if plaintiffs can show the concrete injury generally required to establish standing to sue. He gave two examples: harm to credit or a missed job opportunity.Justice Kagan responded that people almost never know why a bank or potential employer turned them down. “I mean,” she said, “it’s actually the quintessential kind of injury that you will never be able to detect and surely not to prove.”But Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. asked, “Is there anything here to indicate that anybody other than Mr. Robins ever did a search for him” on the Spokeo site?AdvertisementWilliam S. Consovoy, a lawyer for Mr. Robins, said there was nothing in court records to show that.Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. gave examples of what he said were harmless falsehoods. He asked, for instance, whether someone with an unlisted phone number could sue Spokeo for giving an inaccurate one. Mr. Consovoy said Congress could allow suits over that misinformation.Malcolm L. Stewart, a lawyer for the Obama administration, argued in support of Mr. Robins, a stance that seemed to surprise Chief Justice Roberts.“I would have thought that the president would be concerned about Congress being able to create its own enforcement mechanism,” he said. “I thought that you would be concerned that that would interfere with the executive’s prerogative.”Mr. Stewart said he could imagine a law presenting that problem. The credit law, however, was appropriate and valuable, he said.Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said the lurking issue in the case, Spokeo Inc. v. Robins, No. 13-1339, was the possibility of a class action involving “millions of plaintiffs and billions of dollars.” But both she and Justice Kagan suggested that class certification might not be appropriate for claims under the credit law like the one pressed by Mr. Robins.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Debates Suing Firms for Inoffensive Falsehoods.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.