By SAPNA MAHESHWARIOCT. 5, 2016
Richard J. Schwartz, who at 25 took over the dressmaker Jonathan Logan from his father and built it into an even more successful enterprise, died on Monday in Upper Nyack, N.Y. He was 77.His wife, Sheila Schwartz, said the cause was complications of pancreatic cancer. He had homes in Upper Nyack, in Rockland County, and in Nassau, the Bahamas.In later years Mr. Schwartz turned to philanthropy and the arts, serving as chairman of the New York State Council on the Arts for almost a decade.Mr. Schwartz joined Jonathan Logan, which was owned by his father, David, shortly after graduating from college in 1960 — the same year the company became the first devoted exclusively to the dress business to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.AdvertisementHe became the company’s president in 1964, and later its chief executive, and built it into an even larger women’s clothing concern over the next 20 years or so, selling moderately priced dresses and handbags at department and specialty stores under labels like Etienne Aigner and Modern Juniors.Jonathan Logan, based in Manhattan, was best known for selling juniors’ dresses, marketed to young women. It also employed the designer Liz Claiborne for more than a decade before she created her own brand.“Every issue of Seventeen magazine, you’d open the cover, and there would be a Jonathan Logan dress,” Ms. Schwartz said in an interview. “All over America, young women were wearing them.”Richard Jay Schwartz was born in Manhattan on Dec. 29, 1938. His mother, the former Irene Krugman, was a homemaker. He received a bachelor’s degree from Cornell University, where he studied government.Mr. Schwartz’s father, who had grown up among Jewish and Italian immigrants in Harlem, entered the apparel manufacturing business in the early 1920s after leaving school to help support his family. By the time Richard Schwartz became president of Jonathan Logan after three decades of his father’s leadership, the company was reporting more than $100 million in sales a year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By the early 1980s, that figure had grown to more than $400 million.Ms. Schwartz said her husband had been part of a generation of businessmen whose success with their public companies gave more respectability to the garment industry. “They used to call it the rag trade,” she said.AdvertisementThe industry drew unwanted attention, however, during a period of corporate raiding on Wall Street in the 1980s. In 1984, a company called United Merchants and Manufacturers Inc. seized control of Jonathan Logan after a monthslong fight, buying it for about $168 million.By then, the company was moving away from juniors’ dresses and toward women’s sportswear and the mass merchandise market. Mr. Schwartz resigned in 1985. His father died later that year.In addition to his wife, Mr. Schwartz is survived by a son, John Stephen; a daughter, Jenny Schwartz Stone; a sister, Lois Zenkel; and two grandchildren.Mr. Schwartz went on to have a second career as a private investor and philanthropist. He cultivated a passion for American art, particularly from the early 20th century.He was a longtime member of the New York State Council on the Arts, a government agency that distributes grants to arts organizations, and was its chairman from 1999 through 2007. After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, he was part of an advisory committee charged with dispensing grants to arts groups as part of a revival of Lower Manhattan.He was also a trustee of Lincoln Center and Cornell University and served on the boards of many cultural institutions, including the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington and the Buffalo Bill Center of the West in Cody, Wyo.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Richard J. Schwartz, 77; Led Jonathan Logan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.