AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Robert CyranThe hedge fund Elliott Management’s attack on Samsung Electronics of South Korea may have staying power. Elliott wants the Samsung to restructure, pay a $27 billion special dividend, pledge to return at least 75 percent of free cash flow to investors and agree to appoint some independent directors.Foreign activists often do poorly in Asia. But Elliott nearly won a battle with Samsung, a family-run conglomerate, over the summer.Samsung is a textbook example of what pushy activists look for. Its stock trades at a 40 percent discount to a basket of its peers’, according to Thomson Reuters’s estimated earnings for the next 12 months. It is also facing problems with one of its flagship products, the Galaxy Note 7 smartphone, which had to be recalled after its batteries were catching fire. And the Lee family, which controls the sprawling group of Samsung companies through cross-shareholdings, may be distracted. Inheritance laws in South Korea may leave its members facing a several-billion-dollar tax hit when Lee Kun-hee, the patriarch, who is ill, dies.Elliott hopes its call for a split of Samsung Electronics into listed holding and operating companies will help get the Lee family onside. The activist wants the holding company to start a tender offer for shares of the operating company, using its own treasury shares, then merge the holding company and Samsung C&T in a share-for-share merger on fair terms. All in, that may allow the family to gain increased control over the operating company with some tax advantages.That could make Elliott’s financial and governance demands, which will appeal to independent shareholders, easier to swallow. And it is a different tack than the one Elliott took during the summer, when it opposed a $9 billion merger of the family’s de facto holding company, Cheil Industries, and Samsung C&T. The transaction barely secured the two-thirds approval required, despite tactics like the target company selling shares to friendly parties. The deal increased the family’s control over Samsung Electronics because C&T owned shares.Of course, the Lee family may reject Elliott’s latest assault out of hand, and nationalist chest-thumping might play a role, too. But the proposal may have surprisingly good chances of at least being entertained.Advertisement