By RANDALL SMITHOCT. 6, 2016
The six-day courtroom confrontation between Maurice R. Greenberg and lawyers for New York State accusing him of orchestrating sham transactions as chief executive of American International Group 16 years ago ended Thursday without any knockout blows.The transactions in the civil fraud case, first filed in 2005, have already been litigated by two federal agencies, but Mr. Greenberg, 91, has continued to fight the state on the charges. David E. Nachman, the state’s attorney in the trial in New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, took Mr. Greenberg methodically through his active participation at some stages of the two reinsurance deals at the heart of the case. Mr. Greenberg denied any fraudulent intent or awareness.Stepping down from the witness box just before noon on Thursday, after about 15 hours on the stand over two weeks, a smiling Mr. Greenberg paused before a half dozen reporters to say he thought it went “pretty good.” He added, “You do what you have to do.”Before he left the courtroom, he shook hands with Mr. Nachman and a few other members of the state’s legal team. The case is being tried before State Supreme Court Justice Charles E. Ramos without a jury.AdvertisementMr. Greenberg and former A.I.G. chief financial officer Howard I. Smith are accused of two sham reinsurance deals aimed at duping investors — one that converted auto warranty insurance losses into investment losses, and another that pumped up A.I.G.’s reserves by $500 million.AdvertisementOn the witness stand, Mr. Greenberg has said he either did not remember certain documents or was not involved in the details of deals. Mr. Greenberg’s assertions that he left details of the two transactions to other A.I.G. executives fly in the face of his reputation “for being a detail-oriented micro manager,” said David Schiff, a former insurance analyst who followed A.I.G. stock in the later Greenberg years. “These were awfully big items to dismiss and not pay attention to.”Because most of the other witnesses have yet to testify, the trial is expected to continue into 2017.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under brief questioning Thursday by David Boies, the defense lawyer, Mr. Greenberg said he agreed with one analyst’s 2001 report that said growth in A.I.G.’s core insurance business was paramount and other issues, like reserve levels, were just “noise.” He also said A.I.G. had other ways to increase reserves, like tapping its capital or selling assets.And, referring to evidence that A.I.G. had returned funds to General Reinsurance Corporation in a roundabout manner for one of the deals — which the state said was evidence that a phony fee was being repaid — Mr. Greenberg said it was “perfectly normal” for two insurers to settle accounts that way.In his rebuttal questions for the state, Mr. Nachman asked whether some of the alternative means to increase reserves, like selling a division, “would have shrunk the size of the company, right?” Mr. Greenberg said they might have.And, referring to Mr. Greenberg’s assertions that he was not involved in assessing the risks of the Gen Re deal, Mr. Nachman presented — over lengthy objections from Mr. Boies — a new exhibit in the form of a September 2001 memo in which Mr. Greenberg questioned another deal based on its risk.The lack of direct evidence connecting Mr. Greenberg to knowledge of the possible impropriety of the deals is a common issue in white-collar trials, said Lynn Stout, a professor of corporate and business law at Cornell Law School. The lack of a “paper trail” often gives executives “plausible deniability,” she said.However, because the case is being tried as a civil matter under New York State law, the state does not have to prove fraudulent intent.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Unbowed, A.I.G. Ex-Chief Leaves Fraud Trial Stand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.