AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryFormer bank tellers and angry customers. Democrats and Republicans in Congress. State treasurers in California and Illinois. Even Hillary Clinton. They have all lambasted Wells Fargo in recent weeks over the phony accounts scandal.Now, a wealthy 80-year-old businessman and philanthropist from Texas is taking aim at the besieged bank.Lacy Harber, who owns real estate in Las Vegas and numerous small banks and marinas, took out advertisements in four large newspapers on Thursday — including The New York Times — denouncing Wells Fargo.Mr. Harber’s ad describes itself as an “open letter to the Senate Banking Committee, House Financial Services Committee, Wells Fargo board of directors and the American public.”It goes on to assert: “The recent disclosures about Wells Fargo are only the tip of the iceberg.”In an interview, Mr. Harber said his complaint with Wells Fargo centers on its investment brokers. He said that on Aug. 24, 2015, as the stock market dropped precipitously, he placed orders for about $34.8 million worth of stocks through his brokers at Wells Fargo Advisors.Working from his kitchen counter at home in North Texas, Mr. Harber said he went on the buying spree to take advantage of the dropping prices, snapping up shares of blue chip companies like Apple and Exxon Mobil.Like many active investors, Mr. Harber bought the stocks “on margin” which typically means putting down some money and borrowing the rest from the broker. But given the extreme volatility in the market that morning, Wells Fargo, he said, demanded that he pay for the stocks in full.Mr. Harber said that even though he told Wells he could wire $19 million that day and deliver the balance the next day, the bank said it needed the total amount.At the end of that day, he said, Wells sold all of the shares he had bought that day, resulting in a $5 million loss. Adding insult to injury, he said, he was charged about $480,000 in broker fees.In a statement, a spokesman for Wells Fargo Advisors said: “Mr. Harber is a highly sophisticated, experienced investor who routinely made his own investing decisions. We executed his transactions on a day of extraordinary market volatility that included a 1,000-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average. Mr. Harber’s trades were done on margin. Unfortunately, his trading was affected by adverse market conditions. We’re in litigation with Mr. Harber and are strongly defending against his claims.”The statement added that “Mr. Harber has chosen to use the current media focus on Wells Fargo as a means to draw attention” to his case.Mr. Harber’s dispute differs from those of the thousands of customers whose financial information was used by Wells to create illegal bank accounts and issue unauthorized credit cards over a five-year period. The bank paid $185 million in fines and fired 5,300 employees over the sham accounts, which the bank said were uncovered in 2013.But there are similarities. Last year, Mr. Harber filed a lawsuit against Wells Fargo Advisors in District Court in Grayson County, Tex., over the stock trades.Like many of the customers who have filed lawsuits over the phony accounts in court, Mr. Harber’s claim was also sent into private arbitration, which he called a “stacked deck” that favors the bank. The arbitration is pending.Wells forces many of its customers to agree to settle any dispute in arbitration as a condition of doing business with it.Earlier this week, Mrs. Clinton, on the presidential campaign trail, said that the scandal over the fake accounts at Wells Fargo highlighted how private arbitration hurts consumers.In Mr. Harber’s advertisement, which also ran in The Charlotte Observer, The Dallas Morning News and The San Francisco Chronicle, the businessman implores the congressional committees that recently questioned the bank’s chief executive, John G. Stumpf, to “look into the activities of Wells Fargo Advisors.”“It’s time for corporate greed to end,” the ad reads. “Enough is enough.”Advertisement