
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 6, 2016
Sometimes the Supreme Court is a bit like Goldilocks, looking for a ruling that will be like a perfect bowl of porridge — not too hot, not too cold, but just right.The highly anticipated oral argument on Wednesday in Salman v. United States, which focused on the tipping of inside information, sounded like an exercise in which the justices searched for that middle ground to keep much of the law intact while tinkering with its details.The issue in the case centered on defining what kind of benefit the source of inside information must receive to violate the law when passing it on to someone else who trades on it. The defendant, Bassam Y. Salman, bought stocks based on confidential information leaked by his future brother-in-law, Maher F. Kara. Mr. Kara worked for Citigroup on health care transactions, and he passed the information to his brother, Michael, who gave it to Mr. Salman.The lawyers for both sides offered a stark contrast, with Mr. Salman’s lawyer asking for a much narrower reading of insider trading law, while the government lawyer sought to make almost any disclosure subject to prosecution if it could be shown that the tipper knew that the information would be used for trading.AdvertisementProsecutors had long pursued insider trading cases in which information was given to family and friends, taking the position that almost any personal relationship was enough to show that the tipper received a benefit. The seminal case in this area was Dirks v. Securities and Exchange Commission, which said that a violation could arise “when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.”AdvertisementThe gift theory allowed the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission to focus solely on the relationship between the source and the recipient to establish insider trading. Casual friendships between golfing buddies or fellow churchgoers could be enough of a link — at least until the theory was called into question by a decision in December 2014.It was then that the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan issued its decision in United States v. Newman, which ratcheted up the requirement for showing the benefit. According to the appeals court, there had to be “an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”In other words, just being friends was not enough, and perhaps even family members could avoid a violation if there was no evidence that the tipper received something of value.The Supreme Court rejected the Justice Department’s request to review the Newman decision. But a few months later, it took up the Salman case, which was prosecuted in California, providing a chance to explain what constitutes the necessary benefit.The lawyer arguing for Mr. Salman, Alexandra A. E. Shapiro, asked the justices on Wednesday to bless the Newman decision’s tangible benefit test, arguing that the government must prove there was an exchange that resulted in some financial gain to the tipper.She urged a narrow reading of the law by referring to the Supreme Court’s decision a few years ago in Skilling v. United States. That decision focused on a provision of the federal wire fraud statute that allowed it to be applied to a breach of the right of honest services, restricting it to those cases involving a bribe or kickback.In that case, the justices expressed concern that an overly broad interpretation of the law gave prosecutors too much discretion to charge defendants for questionable conduct that might not be illegal on its face. So the crime was limited to only the clearest types of dishonesty.AdvertisementMs. Shapiro tried to hook her case to that wagon, arguing that insider trading law was also too ill-defined to permit a criminal conviction based on something as ephemeral as a gift of inside information made between family or friends. Thus, a tangible personal benefit was needed to confine the law and give the defendants — and Wall Street — enough notice of what constitutes a violation.She immediately ran into a string of skeptical questions from the justices, mainly about her argument for a significant change in the law, which has been well settled for over 30 years. Justice Elena Kagan pointed out that “you’re asking us to ignore some extremely specific language” in the Dirks decision, while Justice Stephen G. Breyer noted that the gift analysis worked because “to help a close family member is like helping yourself.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In response to the argument that insider trading needs to be more narrowly defined because Congress has never adopted a specific statute establishing its elements, Justice Breyer referred to the antitrust law that courts have developed over the years to fill gaps in the law, much as it has done with the tipping of confidential information.Tellingly, Justice Breyer said that adopting the Second Circuit’s approach in the Newman case “is really more likely to change the law that people have come to rely upon” than to keep it as it has been since the Dirks ruling.Ms. Shapiro, the defense lawyer, would not budge, even when given the chance in a question by Justice Sonia Sotomayor about whether there was an alternative to the proposal to require a tangible benefit. “I don’t think there is any other test that the court could provide,” she responded.The lawyer for the government, Michael R. Dreeben, took a similar hard line with the justices in asking them to affirm Mr. Salman’s conviction. He argued that it is a violation any time confidential information is given for a noncorporate purpose with the expectation that the recipient will trade, without regard to the relationship between the tipper and the person receiving the tip.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. posed a hypothetical situation to demonstrate just how broadly the government’s argument reached. He asked whether it would be insider trading if a person “is walking down the street and sees someone who has a really unhappy look on his face and says, I want to do something to make this person’s day” by giving confidential information, telling that person, “you can make some money if you trade on this.” Mr. Dreeben said that would be a violation, even though the recipient is a complete stranger.Needless to say, the justices appeared to be unwilling to give prosecutors that much leeway, with Justice Sotomayor pointing out later that “you’re taking this way out of existing law.”Near the end of the argument, Mr. Dreeben gave some ground, telling the court that if it were “more at home with the language that was actually used in Dirks and wants to reaffirm it, it should do so.”AdvertisementIt seems clear that most of the justices view the Dirks case as governing law, with little appetite to change the test used for decades that recognizes gifts as one form of benefit received by the tipper for passing along confidential information.That diminishes the likelihood that Mr. Salman’s conviction will be overturned. There was evidence at his trial of a close family relationship that showed Mr. Kara benefited from revealing the impending deals learned from his investment banking position.The court was also reluctant to endorse a test that expands insider trading liability to situations in which a person just gives information to someone else without any proof that something was received in return. That means the opinion will most likely put a little more meat on the bones in the Dirks opinion, about what is sufficient to show the requisite benefit when information is given outside a family or close friendship.The devil is always in the details, so the language the Supreme Court uses to draw a line around what is enough to prove a violation will affect how prosecutors and defense lawyers proceed in future cases. I doubt there will be a radical restructuring of how tipping cases are established, but there is a good chance the Justice Department and S.E.C. will have to deal with more detailed requirements to win a case.After the decision, it will most likely not be too difficult, but also not too easy, to prove insider trading — just something that seems about right.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »