
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

OCT. 6, 2016
Wells Fargo has deprived banks of a Washington standard-bearer. Big lenders hoped to piggyback on their rival’s lack of Wall Street taint to resist proposals to curb pay and ban merchant banking. But the fake-accounts scandal weakens Wells Fargo’s ability to lead the charge.Big banks have lately been looking to do battle on several regulatory fronts after backing off for a while. One proposal they want to defeat would force senior officials to defer more than 50 percent of their pay for four years if their bank lost money after taking excessive risk.The scandal over Wells Fargo’s opening about two million potentially fake bank and credit card accounts, though, has added to the calls for harsher action. On Wednesday, several lawmakers called in a letter for stronger rules to claw back executive compensation.The industry has also been preparing to repel watchdogs’ recent surprise recommendation to Congress to repeal the banks’ ability to engage in merchant-banking activities. The Federal Reserve and other regulators think such private equitylike investments can be risky.AdvertisementWells Fargo was to be held up as a decent bank that would be hurt by such new limits — until its accounts fiasco blew up last month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank’s effective neutering as a bulwark against new regulation is a big blow to the industry. With its $1.9 trillion balance sheet, Wells Fargo may be systemically important, but its small Wall Street presence allowed it to avoid virtually all the troubles that have bedeviled its peers since the financial crisis.Jamie Dimon, the chief of JPMorgan Chase, initially took the lead in arguing against what the industry regarded as excessive regulation after the Great Recession. But when his bank lost $6 billion on derivatives trades in 2012, he was effectively silenced for a while. Wells Fargo’s chief executive, John G. Stumpf, almost by default took on some of the load.AdvertisementThe Wells scandal and Mr. Stumpf’s dismal performance in front of Congress to explain it leave the industry scrambling to get off the regulatory back foot again. With the $6 billion London Whale losses now four years behind him, Mr. Dimon may return to the hot seat.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »