
Breakingviews By                     
NEIL UNMACK

NOV. 2, 2015
The Dyax Corporation has proved easier prey for Shire than Baxalta, but it’s far from cheap.Midway through its proposed deal for Baxalta, Shire, an Irish pharmaceutical company, is offering $6 billion for Dyax, a developer of a treatment against a rare swelling disorder. The deal relies on bold assumptions and could take years to pay off.Buying Dyax, based in Massachusetts, is probably at most a distraction. Shire is struggling to persuade the management of Baxalta to accept an all-share deal. Given the falling share prices of drug companies in recent months, Shire may be willing to take a breather anyway.Shire is offering $5.9 billion up front and $646 million if Dyax’s main pipeline drug is approved by United States regulators. That’s $2.2 billion more than its undisturbed market capitalization. Shire expects to cut costs by only $50 million in 2017 and $100 million by 2019. Taxed at say 18 percent, and capitalized at 10 times, those might be worth $820 million, well below the premium on offer.Although Dyax is not presently making a profit, tax cuts could also help because of Shire’s Irish domicile. The median forecast of analysts is for the firm to generate pretax profit of $317 million in 2019, according to Thomson Reuters Eikon. Assuming Shire can bring Dyax’s rate down to 18 percent, that would create some $53 million of additional earnings. Capitalized at Shire’s historical multiple of 18 times, those would be worth nearly $1 billion.AdvertisementYet the deal is about more than ripping out costs. Shire thinks it can bolster Dyax’s main product, a drug for treating a potentially fatal swelling disorder called hereditary angioedema, or HAE, to up to $2 billion of annual sales. That’s bullish: Cowen, a broker, was estimating just over $1 billion by 2025.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shire also needs to protect its own HAE business, which is threatened by Dyax’s as-yet-unapproved drug, DX-2930. By bringing the different treatments together, Shire thinks it can create a global leader and reap benefits from a strong market position and common infrastructure. It believes that roughly 60 percent of HAE patients are not yet diagnosed.Even if the deal works, Shire does not expect to cover its cost of capital until 2019. That may be why markets are struggling to see the value of the deal: Shire’s share price fell, even as pharmaceutical stocks rose.AdvertisementShire’s track record in deal-making is solid, but a lukewarm reaction shows that market support cannot be assumed.Neil Unmack is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »