AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangNot long ago, Theranos and its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, were stars of Silicon Valley.Now, the embattled blood-testing company says that it will close its laboratory operations, shut its wellness centers and lay off 340 employees — around 40 percent of its work force — in Arizona, California and Pennsylvania.Ms. Holmes says the company will instead focus on creating miniature medical testing machines, for doctors’ offices.The announcement did not address investigations into the company, which came after a series of articles in The Wall Street Journal cast doubt on its technology.But Ms. Holmes did seem to be trying to address concerns about the company being too secretive about its technology.“We have a new executive team leading our work toward obtaining F.D.A. clearances, building commercial partnerships and pursuing publications in scientific journals,” she said.Marc Benioff, the founder and chief executive of Salesforce.com, tried on Wednesday to assuage concerns from analysts and investors about his plan to buy Twitter.Twitter could fit into Mr. Benioff’s vision of Salesforce as a company that can help enterprises with all of their customer needs. It is, after all, already used by companies to field consumer complaints and requests.“It’s a huge customer-service platform,” he said of Twitter. “It’s not a reason to buy it, but it’s a reason to look at it.”But investors have been skeptical, pushing down Salesforce shares.A deal for Twitter would be costly for Salesforce, which is unprofitable, and Mr. Benioff has admitted to having concerns about the amount of hate speech on the platform.Elliott Management lost a battle with Samsung last year, but that has not put it off taking another run.This time, it is targeting the crown jewel of the South Korean empire.Elliott has proposed splitting Samsung’s electronics business into two separate publicly traded companies — one would function as the main ownership vehicle for the Lee family (which controls the conglomerate), while another would hold the operating businesses.That’s not all.It also wants a special $27 billion dividend, and 75 percent of the new operating company’s cash flow to be paid out as dividends.Activist investing is rare in Asia, but the proposal may have a surprisingly good chance of being entertained, Robert Cryan writes for Breakingviews.What Elliott has called for may allow the family to gain more control over the operating company with some tax advantages. That would help in pushing through financial and governance changes, which would appeal to independent shareholders.Samsung, for its part, has jumped onto the artificial intelligence bandwagon by buying Viv, an artificial intelligence company founded by the core team that created Apple’s digital assistant, Siri. It is also still reeling from the worldwide recall of its Note 7 smartphone over a problem with batteries igniting. A Southwest Airlines flight had to be evacuated after a passenger’s Samsung phone, reportedly a replacement Galaxy Note 7, caught fire.“He’s no longer being pestered. Isn’t that a benefit?”— Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, as the Supreme Court heard arguments in the first insider trading case to come before the court in two decades. The case examines the question of what exactly amounts to a “personal benefit.”• CNN holds a debate on the global economy. Participants include Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Mark J. Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister, and Yi Gang, the deputy governor of the People’s Bank of China.• Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary, will discuss the state of the global economy and the coming fall meetings of the I.M.F. and the World Bank during an event at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington.• The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta will hold an event to explain how it will find a replacement for its president, who steps down in February 2017.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement