
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

OCT. 7, 2016
Twitter’s openness to being sold has set off a tweetstorm with a direct message: It will be hard for a new owner to make buying the $15 billion social network stack up.The company, led by Jack Dorsey, wants offers before the end of the month. Suitors are falling away, however, after some companies initially showed interest, according to media reports. Google, Walt Disney and Apple probably won’t bid, says the tech news site Recode reported.All the excitement has shaken up investors. Twitter shares soared as much as 35 percent in the days after a Sept. 23 report on CNBC that said the company was moving closer to a sale. They tumbled 20 percent on Thursday after the news reports that Google and others had lost interest.In the meantime, the stock of Salesforce.com has fallen more than 5 percent in a day on two occasions after being linked to the auction — and rebounded again after remarks by its chief executive, Marc Benioff, suggested that he might not be that eager. Salesforce, a $50 billion business-software maker, is short on cash, and investors probably aren’t thrilled about the idea of being diluted for Twitter. More generally, though, there is no way conventional financial analysis can help any company rationalize an acquisition of the purveyor of 140-character messages.Twitter is expected to lose about $270 million next year. Add back around $100 million of interest, then cut in half the roughly $1.7 billion of research and development and marketing costs, as a buyer might do. Twitter’s operating profit would then be about $700 million. According to Morningstar, Twitter’s weighted average cost of capital is roughly 9 percent. To generate an equivalent return on investment, even generously assuming a zero tax rate, would mean paying no more than $7.7 billion for the company, about half its current market value.Silicon Valley often prefers its own oddball math. Twitter may look cheap next to what Microsoft is paying for LinkedIn if the chosen metric is price per monthly active user. Or a company like Alphabet, the parent of Google, might think it can wring more value from Twitter’s ample data. The topic that seems to be trending, though, is that it will be hard for anyone to justify buying Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »