OCT. 8, 2016
“Wall Street fears a Trump presidency” was the main message of “Who’s Afraid of Trump? The Markets” by Justin Wolfers of the University of Michigan (The Upshot, Economic View, Oct. 2). As evidence, Professor Wolfers cited a rally in overnight futures markets during the Sept. 26 presidential debate, a rally he attributed to a reduced chance of Donald J. Trump’s election.The article drew 69 responses on nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.The market likes steady leadership without any surprises. Mr. Trump would be anything but steady. He is erratic by nature, and nothing will change that. What you see is a nightmare in action.Art, Huntsville, Ala.I don’t support Mr. Trump, but this is a ridiculous analysis by an economist — not an investment expert. Fact: Markets move wildly on a wide array of things in the very short term. That’s particularly true of futures markets, as they are thinly traded.Frederic, WashingtonWhy aren’t billionaires throwing money at a man who promises to give them huge tax breaks? The answer is simple: No matter how big those tax breaks are, they believe they would be offset by the drop in the markets.AdvertisementSteve L, MissouriMr. Trump’s die-hard supporters do not hold securities. They will be happy to see the markets burn.AdvertisementDavid Nickerson, Worcester, Mass.For me, a better election predictor is the United States Treasury bond market. Rates are stable and low. Looks like a Clinton victory from the bond market’s perspective.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John Metzger, CaliforniaThe populist policies of Mr. Trump would be a huge boost to workers’ incomes and a huge drain on profits. While many working-class people may like that, markets won’t. No surprise.Dan Barnett, New York CityI liquidated my holdings after the debate so that I would not have to endure another debate stressing about my retirement. I can always buy back after the election.ursomonie, DenverA year from now the market will reflect the realities of the economy, which may bear little resemblance to the campaign promises of either candidate.Harold, Bellevue, Wash.Who cares what the market does? I care more about the future of this country and planet than a blip in your 401(k).Ann, Ann Arbor, Mich.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Political Futures.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.