AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedTwenty-five years ago, Kenneth C. Griffin got a break when, as a newly minted Harvard graduate, he drew backers to start a small investment firm in Chicago.Since then, that firm has become Citadel, a $25 billion financial colossus that has become one of the biggest market makers around, a company that counts a former chairman of the Federal Reserve as a senior adviser.On the occasion of that anniversary, Mr. Griffin — now a billionaire seven times over, according to Forbes — has sent a letter to his firm’s investors looking back on the roots of Citadel’s success.In the letter, a copy of which was reviewed by DealBook, the hedge fund manager ascribed the firm’s rise to both technical prowess and its team of now 650 investment professionals.Citadel has been one of the better-performing hedge funds over much of its run, with its flagship Wellington fund up 12.15 percent for the year through Oct. 31. By comparison, the HFRX Global Hedge Fund Index was down about 1.6 percent for the same period.“In our first decade, I interviewed about five thousand people in pursuit of the talent that would create our future,” Mr. Griffin wrote in the letter. “As our success grew, we became known across the four corners of finance not just for our outstanding returns, but also for our outstanding people.”The beginnings of Citadel are Wall Street lore: As a sophomore at Harvard, Mr. Griffin had a satellite dish installed on the roof of his dorm room to trade the relatively arcane area of convertible bonds.“We were 19 or 20 at the time,” said Alex Slusky, the founder of the investment firm Vector Capital and a classmate of Mr. Griffin’s. “That was not something most of us knew anything about.”By the time Mr. Griffin graduated, he had turned down a lucrative offer from an investment bank — one that Mr. Slusky said was roughly twice as rich as offers their other finance-minded classmates had received — to move to Chicago with the support of several backers.Among those initial investors was Frank Meyer, a co-founder of Glenwood Partners. According to Mr. Griffin, it was Mr. Meyer who encouraged the rookie investor to dream big about what the newly minted firm could do.“Frank always encouraged me to think of the business as a platform,” Mr. Griffin said in a telephone interview from Seoul. “Having your first investor embrace you as someone they think can make that happen is really inspirational.”Citadel quickly became known as a hypercompetitive hedge fund not shy to throw elbows, capitalizing on the stumbles at Long-Term Capital Management and Enron to build its team and make money. (When asked about the reputation of his firm as having a challenging environment, Mr. Griffin said that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is a tough place to go to college as well, but is stocked with people eager for a challenge.)Yet the firm has also faced its challenges, notably during the financial crisis of 2008, when the hedge fund suffered losses of some 50 percent. Mr. Griffin took the unusual step of holding a conference call to defend the health of the financial institution he had built.Citadel has bounced back since then, with its hedge fund performing well last year in what was a tough market for hedge funds over all. (That enabled its founder to take home an estimated $1.3 billion for 2014, according to Institutional Investor.)And its market-making operation, underpinned by the firm’s traditional focus on competing with technology, has become one of the biggest on Wall Street for stocks and equity options, with an aggressive move into derivatives like interest-rate swaps.To Mr. Griffin, the growth of the market-making division is both an example of the diversity of operations that Mr. Meyer encouraged and a sign of how others at Citadel have helped build its empire.“It came down to a colleague who had the vision and me knowing he had the talent to make that happen,” Mr. Griffin said. “What’s lost in the Citadel story is how good my partners are.”Below is a copy of Mr. Griffin’s letter to investors:Dear Investor,As we mark our 25th anniversary, I want to take a moment to express my gratitude for your trust and support over the years.I’ve often thought of successful entrepreneurs as individuals who have just the right expertise — at just the right moment — to solve the emerging problems of their time. When I started Citadel 25 years ago, my expertise in software engineering and mathematics created significant competitive advantages in a world where the power of computational finance was appreciated by few.But the opportunity that was born of that fortunate positioning would never have grown into the success of today without crucial early support. Frank Meyer, co-founder of Glenwood Partners, empowered the formation of Citadel with his willingness to take a chance on an unproven twenty-year-old portfolio manager. With the tailwind of strong early returns, and the enthusiastic support of our investors, Citadel took off.In our firm’s earliest days, our understanding of the power of great software engineering and quantitative analytics helped Citadel stand out. But history is littered with companies started by entrepreneurs who failed to sustain such early bursts of success. In fact, the average lifespan for a hedge fund is just a few years. What, then, has driven our longevity and our success? The answer is simple: Our sustainable competitive advantage doesn’t just come from our technical prowess; it comes from assembling teams of extraordinary individuals who have the creativity, resourcefulness, ambition and tenacity to take on the world.The early days of Citadel had a constant rhythm: research, problem-solve, program, trade, interview. Repeat. In our first decade, I interviewed about five thousand people in pursuit of the talent that would create our future. As our success grew, we became known across the four corners of finance not just for our outstanding returns, but also for our outstanding people.Today, I’m proud that Citadel is seen as a beacon for the best and brightest. It is incredible to come to work every day surrounded by individuals whose insights and efforts place us at the forefront of finance. As I reflect upon the exceptional team that is Citadel today, I believe our greatest moments lie not in our past, but in our future.Over the past twenty-five years, I have enjoyed a remarkably challenging and rewarding career — a career defined by the extraordinary people for whom and with whom I have worked. Thank you for your continued support and for your trust in my team and in me.With all my best,KenAdvertisement