AdvertisementSupported byFair GameBy Gretchen MorgensonUnder siege for setting up thousands of phony customer accounts to generate fees, Wells Fargo has taken a beating in Congress and the court of public opinion. Several states have piled on, announcing that they are temporarily cutting their business ties with the bank.Using the power of the purse to hold a wayward behemoth to account is a good thing. But if state officials want to teach financial firms a lesson in honesty, why stop at Wells Fargo?Many other big players in finance need this kind of instruction, too. For example, securities regulators have accused some of the nation’s top private equity firms of putting their interests ahead of their clients’. Why don’t state pension officials refuse to do business with them?Consider a case involving Apollo Global Management, the private equity giant overseen by Leon Black. In late August, the Securities and Exchange Commission brought an enforcement action against the firm, contending that it had breached its fiduciary duty to investors by not disclosing specifics on fees it was extracting. The suit followed other improper fee cases filed by the S.E.C. against the Blackstone Group and KKR.In settling the case, Apollo agreed to return fees of $40.3 million to clients. By contrast, Wells Fargo returned improper fees of $2.6 million.Apollo has many public pension funds as investors, including California Public Employees’ Retirement System, the Teacher Retirement Systems of Texas and the Oregon State Treasury.I asked Apollo if it had received flak of any kind from its public pension fund clients after the S.E.C.’s findings. Charles Zehren, its spokesman, declined to comment.But in an Aug. 23 letter to clients, Apollo played down the S.E.C.’s action. It said the problematic practice was common in private equity and that it had disclosed fee specifics to advisory committees at each fund. “It is important to recognize that Apollo did not admit to any wrongdoing in this settlement,” it said.That may well be. But consider the steps being taken against Wells Fargo for its offenses.On Oct. 2, Michael Frerichs, treasurer of Illinois, stepped up, saying his state would stop doing billions of dollars worth of business with Wells Fargo. And on Sept. 28, John Chiang, the treasurer of California, suspended Wells Fargo from underwriting municipal bond deals and conducting other business with that state for a year.“I have a responsibility as a leader in the financial marketplace to take action aimed at helping you understand that integrity and trust matter,” Mr. Chiang wrote to the bank’s board.Because Mr. Chiang sits on the Calpers board, I thought he might want to suspend its business dealings with Apollo. After all, Calpers has a fiduciary duty to public employees whose retirement accounts it manages. It invested $800 million in Apollo Fund VII, a portfolio cited in the S.E.C. enforcement action.In an email to Mr. Chiang’s office, I asked whether he’d put Apollo into the penalty box as he’s done with Wells Fargo. No response. O.K. What about the other public pension fund officials who invest with Apollo? They, too, are charged with ensuring that the retirements of teachers, sanitation workers and bus drivers are managed with integrity. After Apollo’s fiduciary breaches, will they stop investing with the firm?I asked this of the 13 public pension funds that, like Calpers, had invested at least $100 million in the Apollo VII portfolio. That list included funds benefiting teachers in California, Illinois, Ohio and Texas; public employee retirement systems in Colorado, Florida, Maryland, New York state, Oregon and Wisconsin, and funds benefiting firefighters and police officers in New York City.Some funds didn’t respond; one declined to comment. And some said they had responded to the S.E.C. case by increasing their demands for fee transparency from Apollo and other investment managers. That’s not enough to move the accountability needle.Others like Calpers and the California State Teachers’ Retirement System told me they were monitoring the Apollo situation. Fine, but isn’t that their job?Matthew Sweeney, a spokesman for the New York State comptroller and overseer of the Common Retirement Fund, seemed to indicate that assessing an investment firm’s potential return took a higher priority than weighing a manager’s integrity.“The fund will continue to review all investment opportunities based on their ability to meet its standards of risk and return,” he said in a statement. Apollo says that the VII fund has had strong returns since its inception in 2008.In response to my questions, other pension officials said that some ethical flaws were to be expected or that Apollo had been transparent about its fees. “Given the size and breadth of our portfolio and our investment manager network, it is likely that there will be occasional lapses,” Dennis D. MacKee, spokesman for the Florida Board of Administration, said in a statement. “To the extent these occur, the forthrightness with which they are addressed, both to remedy any damage done and prevent recurrence, is what we focus on,” he said.The view these fiduciaries took on Apollo’s breach could not be clearer: There’s nothing here. Move along.Neither is there evidence that Apollo is having difficulty raising money. On a conference call last month, Scott Martin Kleinman, Apollo’s lead partner of private equity, said that a new fund, Apollo VIII, had been a hit with investors. “The feedback we’re getting is folks are very, very pleased,” he said. “You should assume pretty soon, we’re going to be getting ready to go with Fund IX.”So let’s recap. In the Wells Fargo case, bad behavior generated $2.6 million in improper fees that the bank had to return to customers. In the Apollo matter, bad behavior generated $40.3 million in improper fees that the firm had to return to clients. Wells Fargo was subject to a major spanking by two state officials. Apollo was subject to none.Puzzled by this passivity? So is Lynn Turner, former chief accountant at the S.E.C. and a board member of the Colorado Public Employees’ Retirement Association. He stressed that he did not speak on behalf of the Colorado pension, which holds the Apollo VII Fund. He said, “When a firm such as Apollo acts in a manner that violates a fiduciary obligation a pension fund has to its investors as well as securities law, the pension fund trustees need to find a new asset manager who puts the interest of those investors ahead of lining their own pockets.”Prosecutors have failed to hold financial firms accountable in recent years, stoking a perception that the system is rigged in favor of big and powerful entities that generate immense wealth for their executives. That pension fund officials are also failing only confirms that view.Twitter: @gmorgensonAdvertisement