
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 7, 2016
This interview with Kathy Giusti, founder of the Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in a little town called Blue Bell, Pa., a small suburb northwest of Philadelphia. My father was a physician, and my mom was a nurse. There were four of us born in three years, so I have two older brothers, and then my sister and I are twins. I was No. 3 by seven minutes, and she was No. 4.That may have made a difference in our lives. I came out more the bossy one, and she came out more the free spirit. She was also treated as the baby of the family while I was treated as a middle child. It’s kind of funny.Our house had much more tension than most, and that was probably because my father was incredibly hard-working, demanding and driven. He always said, “Never sit idle.” You did not sleep late on Saturday morning in our household. I probably got my work ethic from him.AdvertisementSo why the tension?It was that generation. You come from nothing, and he was building everything he could for his family. Becoming a physician was always his path, but as time went by, he became less enamored with his profession. It was more about insurance and paperwork and bureaucracy. The more that happened, the less happy he was, and perhaps we all felt that.And when you think about your leadership style today, do you see strands of your parents’ influence?I see the influence of both of them, in that I’m hard-working and I probably push the boundaries on everything. So that’s a little bit of my father. From my mom, I realized the importance of finding those really important moments with my family, especially since I’ve been living with cancer. I became very focused on time management.My mom was also very focused on trying to make sure we stood on our own two feet, that we had that independence. It was less important to my father. Again, it was a different generation back then.What was your first job out of college?I was at Merck for four years and started in sales. That was brilliant. I know that’s not the kind of work that everybody wants to do, but when you’re young, I recommend this to everybody. It’s so important to be able to articulate your own ideas and communicate them effectively, whether it’s a product or an entire brand. It’s a gift.AdvertisementWhat have been some of your important leadership lessons?I became a much better leader when I was given a death sentence in 1996.How so?I had always been disciplined and had this level of urgency. But then I was told I had a fatal disease and I was going to die. It was black and white — write your will. It wasn’t like there was any gray area. And I had a 1-year-old daughter. I thought that if I can stay alive until she turns 5, maybe she’ll remember me. That was my dream.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So I started taking on this foundation, and thinking, I’ve got to make some decisions, and I’ve got to make them quickly. It was just me starting out, working at a desk in our bedroom.I found that because I was told I only had three years at the most, and I wanted to get as much done as I could, I was incredibly bold. If anybody was going to be mad at me for what I was doing, I didn’t really care. And if I had to make a decision, I wasn’t going to sit there and say, well, let me do more research on that. I had to make decisions incredibly quickly.I also learned to be much more grateful. When you’re working in multiple myeloma, nobody’s ever heard of it, and it takes you half an hour to explain it. By that time, people’s eyes are glazing over. So now I had to raise money around it. When people actually responded to me and my personal story, I was so grateful. It’s 20 years later, and I’m now in remission, as are many others.How do you hire?I study the résumé. In the early years, where did you go? Did you get the strong training base I’m looking for where you honed your industry knowledge and developed your leadership skills? Did you start in sales, or did you get promoted early? What did you learn from some of those early mentors? I do think those years are incredibly formative. Then I want to see how you grew and what new experiences were you trying to take on.Then I start asking questions like, what do you want me to know about you that’s not on this résumé? Help me understand your role on a team. How did you lead?And tell me when you have faced any level of adversity, and how did you deal with it? I love people who have been through certain types of adversity. It doesn’t have to be that they got a death sentence. I just want to hear what happened and how they resolved it. If you’ve been through that, it will help you, and it will make you more compassionate with the patients we’re dealing with every day.I also love working with people who have been athletes, because they have to have time management skills, and they have to work on teams. If they’ve excelled and been captain of their team, I have an amazing appreciation for that, and I want those kinds of people on our team.What other career and life advice do you give college grads, besides encouraging them to get some sales experience?AdvertisementWhat I try to tell them is to build a foundation for your career by taking advantage of companies that offer extensive training and mentorship programs, but don’t wait. That way, no matter what happens unexpectedly in your life, you still have that foundation to be entrepreneurial. But don’t wait forever to do it, because life is very short. It’s really short.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Life Lessons From a Death Sentence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »