AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael M. GrynbaumDoes damning footage of Donald J. Trump exist from his days as host of “The Apprentice”? And if so, where is it?Those questions have consumed the media and political world since Friday afternoon, when a decade-old video from another show, NBC’s “Access Hollywood,” emerged of Mr. Trump making lewd remarks about his desire to kiss and grope women.The answers remain muddy, despite rumors swirling about Mr. Trump’s behavior on the “Apprentice” set. What’s clear is that journalists eyeing the next big political scoop — and Trump opponents eyeing another blow to the Republican nominee — are hankering for it.On Saturday, a man named Bill Pruitt, who once worked on “The Apprentice,” sent a tweet to a few thousand followers:“As a producer on seasons 1 & 2 of #theapprentice I assure you: when it comes to the #trumptapes there are far worse. #justthebegininng”By Sunday afternoon, the message had been retweeted nearly 30,000 times. Mr. Pruitt’s assertion was even cited by Senator Ted Cruz, the former Republican candidate, in a tweet on Sunday wondering why old footage of Mr. Trump had not emerged until now.On Sunday, a second tweet flew around social media, stoking more rumors. Chris Nee, a reality-TV writer and producer, wrote:Ms. Nee did not respond on Sunday to a telephone call and messages seeking comment. Later on Sunday, she appeared to suggest she had only been repeating a rumor:“Folks, I have never worked on The Apprentice. I don’t know what’s out there. Or what still exists. I’ve heard rumors. Would love to know.”In another tweet, she wrote: “I haven’t heard any actual tapes of anything. Just… people are saying.”Still, her mention of the $5 million so-called “leak fee” set off a new round of interest. David Brock, who runs a network of groups supporting Hillary Clinton, said that he would pay $5 million to anyone willing to risk the penalty by releasing footage of Mr. Trump.But it was unclear if the leak clause was the actual reason no tape has emerged. Who has direct access to the tapes is itself an open question.“The Apprentice,” which also aired on NBC, is owned by Mark Burnett Productions. So far, Mr. Burnett, the creator of the show, has not commented publicly on the matter.The entertainment conglomerate MGM acquired a majority share in Mr. Burnett’s production company in 2014. A representative for MGM did not immediately respond to a request for comment.Can Mr. Burnett — or MGM — snap fingers and release the footage? There could be legal hurdles, such as contracts with the show’s production company, and its principles, about the use of footage created for the show.NBC, which did own the old “Access Hollywood” footage of Mr. Trump, said that it does not have any “Apprentice” footage, referring inquiries to MGM.Producers at “Access Hollywood,” meanwhile, said they had combed their video archive and found no other footage of Mr. Trump “that rises to this level.”Producers at other entertainment shows like “Extra!” and “Entertainment Tonight” are also searching through past footage, but there are no indications they have located explosive material.Some crew members of the “Apprentice” recently told The Associated Press that they witnessed Mr. Trump making sexist remarks, some of which, they said, were caught on camera. Other producers and contestants have said they did not recall such remarks.Stay tuned.Advertisement