By BROOKS BARNESOCT. 9, 2016
SANTA MONICA, Calif. — In the late 1990s, still the dark ages for female executives in Hollywood, Dolly Parton invited a young woman to lunch.The woman, Gail Berman, had worked for Sandollar Productions, Ms. Parton’s company, which struck pay dirt with “Buffy the Vampire Slayer.” Over chicken Caesar salads, Ms. Parton told her former employee that she had been unhappy to discover that men at the company had given Ms. Berman a less-than-generous share of “Buffy” royalties.With that, Ms. Parton gave a startled Ms. Berman a check.It was a formative Hollywood moment for Ms. Berman — a woman going out of her way to do right by another woman — that has stayed with her through an unusual entertainment career. After a celebrated “American Idol”-fueled stint atop the Fox network, a not-so-great run at Paramount Pictures, a digital-media comeback and then a career setback, Ms. Berman’s next chapter in some ways begins this month.And, yes, it involves championing a woman.Ms. Berman’s new company, the Jackal Group, is behind the remake of “The Rocky Horror Picture Show,” which Fox will broadcast on Oct. 20. The musical, subtitled “Let’s Do the Time Warp Again,” stars Laverne Cox in the central role of Dr. Frank-N-Furter. The part went to Ms. Cox because Ms. Berman went to bat for her, persuading the hesitant network to give her a chance. In the end, Fox agreed to cast Ms. Cox, a transgender actress, as a male character who self-identifies as a “sweet transvestite from Transsexual, Transylvania.”Advertisement“Gail has a stick-to-it-ness that is inspiring,” Ms. Cox said. “I’d call it an audacity, a fierceness, mixed with sensitivity and a nurturing. I see her as a mentor.”AdvertisementMs. Berman, 60, who has made supporting female talent a focus of Jackal, tends to turn away from such praise. In an interview at her modest offices here, she gave credit for the new “Rocky Horror” to Lou Adler, the music producer, who owns rights to the cult classic. “But persistent is true enough,” said Ms. Berman, referring to herself. She is the only woman to run both a broadcast network and a movie studio.“I’ve always been a ‘pick yourself up by your bootstraps’ kind of gal,” she said.As Ms. Berman knows all too well, Hollywood is a hard business for women. By an overwhelming margin, men dominate the executive ranks, the producing ranks and the directing ranks. Over the years, even as some men have most definitely been Ms. Berman’s allies and advocates, she said she has witnessed “countless” moments of sexist behavior.“It’s constant,” she said. “Being in a room as one of the only women and suddenly the boys start discussing female attributes. Or they start talking about how certain female executives are so difficult. I guarantee you they are no more difficult than any of the dudes in this business.”Once, when she was president of Fox, Ms. Berman was in the office on a Sunday with about a dozen men; they were prepping for a major presentation and, with no assistants around, she was asked to make coffee. “It was shocking to me,” she said.Ms. Berman has succeeded in part because she has a reputation as a hit-finding machine. Along with “Buffy,” she shepherded the sitcom “Malcolm in the Middle.” Among the shows that arrived during her reign at Fox: “American Idol,” “Bones,” “24,” “House,” “The O.C.” and “Family Guy.”Ms. Berman did not have an easy time at Paramount, where she faced severe infighting. She left after less than two years. But she was the one who made it possible for Paramount to revive the “Star Trek” movie series, which remains one of the studio’s only franchises. As Ms. Parton put it in an email, “Gail is one of the smartest business people I have ever met in my life, male or female.”Even so, Ms. Berman’s recent road has again been rocky.In 2014, a seven-year partnership between Ms. Berman and Lloyd Braun, a former Yahoo and ABC executive, came to an acrimonious end. Their media company, BermanBraun, found success with digital initiatives like Wonderwall, a celebrity news site, but struggled to find TV hits. When Mr. Braun moved to buy her out — she got a reported $20 million — it left Ms. Berman feeling raw.Mr. Braun declined an interview request. Ms. Berman refused to talk about the circumstances of her departure. When pressed to describe her mind-set just afterward, she said: “I thought, ‘Well, I’ve got to pick myself up. I’ve got to dust myself off.’ I didn’t want that to be it for me, and I was worried about that.”AdvertisementMs. Berman moved to a no-frills office while serving as a producer for “Dig,” a USA Network mini-series. “And I set about starting over,” she said. “It was a lot of outgoing calls and summoning the energy and drive to do that.”She landed on her feet: Fox Networks Group, run by one of Ms. Berman’s longtime supporters, Peter Rice, agreed to fund Jackal to supply Fox, FX and other 21st Century Fox-owned channels with scripted and unscripted shows. (Jackal can also sell to outside networks.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jackal, which is partly owned by Ms. Berman (and named after her 23-year-old twins, Jacob and Alix), subsequently made a movie deal with 20th Century Fox. It also plans to produce live theater.“On a creative level, there is almost nobody better,” Mr. Rice said. “Gail has exceptional taste. She aims big. And she is terrific with talent: She manages to be really straight with people and supportive at the same time.”Even so, Jackal’s first project, a Fox sitcom called “Cooper Barrett’s Guide to Surviving Life,” was a ratings flop. For Jackal, at least in the eyes of Hollywood, that has increased the pressure on “The Rocky Horror Picture Show.”The remake, directed by Kenny Ortega, is not a sure thing. Will fans of the 1975 movie, which is still playing in midnight screenings, embrace the new cast? When Fox posted a trailer on YouTube in May, many comments were negative.“For me, Laverne gives purpose to the entire project,” Ms. Berman said. “We tried really, really hard to get it right.”Jackal has a dozen more series in development, along with six movies. Many involve female writers and directors. “Mansland,” a science-fiction drama, examines a dystopian Earth where only men appear to remain. “Love and Murder in the Hamptons” comes from the writer Theresa Rebeck. “Ridin’ Dirty,” created and written by Allyn Rachel, is a comedy aimed at FX about a female horse jockey.AdvertisementJackal’s movie slate includes “Live Fast Die Hot,” based on Jenny Mollen’s best-selling comedic memoir. (Anne Hathaway is set to star.) Jackal is also involved with rebooting “The Addams Family” as an animated movie.As Ms. Berman moves into what may be her final career incarnation, she has given a lot of thought to her start. In many ways, it was a woman who gave it to her.After attending the University of Maryland, Ms. Berman, who grew up on Long Island and in Pennsylvania, teamed up with a friend to produce theater. Rather brazenly, they set out to bring Andrew Lloyd Webber’s “Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat” to the United States. But the rights holder at the time, the music mogul Robert Stigwood, wouldn’t return Ms. Berman’s calls. (He died in January.)“His secretary, Maudey, finally said, ‘Honey, he’s never going to call you back, so let me see if I can help,’” Ms. Berman recalled.When their “Joseph” opened on Broadway, catapulting Ms. Berman into the entertainment business, guess which secretary was given the best seats in the house?A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘The Time Warp’ Again.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.