AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to expect in the week ahead:AUTO INDUSTRYNegotiators from Unifor, Canada’s largest private-sector union, and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles will not be with their families celebrating Canadian Thanksgiving on Monday. The union has set a strike deadline of midnight for its 9,750 members employed by the automaker. The union is looking for a contract similar to the one it signed with General Motors of Canada last month.Among other things, that deal traded pension benefits for shortening the time it takes newly hired employees to reach full wage rates. The automaker is balking at that provision because it is hiring about 1,200 new workers for its minivan plant in Windsor, Ontario, which just received a multibillion-dollar makeover. Ian AustenMEDIAVice Media’s daily half-hour newscast on HBO, “Vice News Tonight,” is scheduled to begin on Monday at 7:30 p.m. after a two-week delay. The company said in August that the show would begin on Sept. 26. But Josh Tyrangiel, who oversees the program, said last month that it was postponed because “we are just making sure that everything looks as good as we want it to look.” (When Vice and HBO unveiled plans for the nightly news program in March 2015, Richard Plepler, the chief executive of HBO, said that the program would make its debut that year.) The show, which will cover an array of subjects including world news, politics and technology, is part of Vice’s broad ambitions to make its programming available across the media spectrum. Sydney EmberTECHNOLOGYOn Tuesday, the Supreme Court will consider a clash between two technology giants, hearing arguments on whether Samsung, the South Korean electronics company, must pay Apple some $400 million for copying part of the design of the iPhone. A jury found that Samsung had violated an Apple design patent by mimicking the iPhone’s round corners and grid of icons. The question for the justices is whether that means Samsung must turn over all its profits from the infringing phones or just those attributable to the disputed features. The court has not heard a design patent case in over a century. Adam LiptakECONOMYThe Federal Reserve’s September meeting was unusually contentious. The Fed extended its stimulus campaign, but three officials voted to raise rates, the largest bloc of dissenting votes in several years. On Wednesday, the central bank will release an account of the meeting that may reveal more about the lines of conflict. The Fed’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, said at a news conference after the meeting that the majority of officials saw no reason to rush ahead with a rate increase. The dissenters say the Fed is playing a dangerous game by dragging its feet. On Friday, Ms. Yellen will have another chance to explain her own views when she addresses a conference in Boston. Binyamin AppelbaumTECHNOLOGYSales of high-end virtual reality headsets have been slow, but on Thursday Sony will enter the market with a cheaper product that could have a better shot at mainstream acceptance. Not only is the PlayStation VR, at $399, less expensive than other systems, but it is also powered by Sony’s PlayStation 4 console, which is owned by tens of millions of people. Ultimately, the quality of games is likely to determine whether the product sells well, and it is still not clear whether enough game makers have decided to commit to the new system. Nick WingfieldBANKINGMany of the nation’s largest banks will report their third-quarter results on Friday. Among them is Wells Fargo, which will be addressing investors for the first time since the phony accounts scandal sent the bank’s normally strong stock plunging. JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup also report on Friday, giving investors a glimpse into major industry indicators like their trading businesses and the credit quality of their loans. Michael CorkeryECONOMYThe Commerce Department will report retail monthly sales data on Friday, as stores around the country gear up for the holiday shopping season. Excluding autos, retail sales probably rose 0.5 percent in September, according to data from Bloomberg. Rachel AbramsAdvertisement