AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.46 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.24 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Irvine, Calif., Unified School District, $95 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Campbell County, Ky., Sanitation District No. 1, $138 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California Department of Water Resources, $470.2 million of Central Valley Project water system revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority, N.C., $381 million of Carolinas Health Care System health care revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Chesterton, Ind., $62 million of StoryPoint project economic development revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Cypress-Fairbanks, Tex., Independent School District, $426.8 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Duke University, N.C., $530.1 million of taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Great Lakes Water Authority, Mich., $416 million of sewage disposal system revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Great Lakes Water Authority, Mich., $899 million of water supply system revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Harris County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $83.2 million of first mortgage revenue bonds. Ziegler.Illinois, $1.35 billion of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Indianapolis, Ind., Water System, $223.5 million of first lien revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Knox County, Tenn., Health, Educational and Housing Facility Board, $105.6 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Leander, Tex., Independent School District, $190.5 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Long Island, N.Y., Power Authority, $407.8 million of electric system general revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Los Angeles County, Calif., Sanitation Districts Financing Authority, $164 million of District No. 20 and capital projects revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Maricopa County, Ariz., Industrial Development Authority, $766.1 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Montebello, Calif., $50 million of lease revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Dormitory Authority and Department of Health, $143 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Philadelphia, $192.6 million of water and wastewater revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Pinal County, Ariz., Electrical District No. 3, $100 million of electric system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.South Dakota Housing Development Authority, $54 million of single family mortgage bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.South Regional Joint Development Authority, Ga., $88.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Victoria, Tex., Independent School District, $119 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Advertisement