
Global Manager  
NAZANIN LANKARANI

OCT. 9, 2016
Jean-Christophe Babin is chief executive of Bulgari, the Italian luxury jeweler.Q. What is your personal background?A. I was born in France in 1959. Both my parents were lawyers. From a young age, I was interested in entrepreneurship, doing business and interacting with clients.While in high school, I knew I wanted to go to business school. I attended HEC Paris (Hautes Études Commerciales). I was the youngest of my M.B.A. graduating class. I never tried to be a good student. My first goal was to be admitted, that was enough for me.Q. Has education been crucial to your career?A. The lessons I learned from my parents were more precious. They taught me to be ambitious, demanding of myself and that in life I could only count on myself.AdvertisementBeyond that, it was traveling that opened my mind to different cultures, to the arts and to different ways of life. I went backpacking around the world before rushing into my first job. When you travel, you learn to respect and accept differences. It helps you to be compassionate and understanding. As a C.E.O., one of your most valuable assets is to be open-minded and to seize new ideas by being receptive to the outside world.AdvertisementI am passionate about mountaineering, skiing and sailing. I also like anything with four wheels, from car racing to go-karts. I still love traveling and have a special passion for the Far East. I appreciate Asian art and architecture, and read a lot about the arts from the East.Q. After school, you joined the military. Why?A. Military service in France was mandatory then. After completing my M.B.A., I enlisted and served for 16 months as a flag lieutenant in the French Navy. I was assigned to serve with Admiral Philippe de Gaulle, son of the former French president. I was assigned to review French operations overseas. We traveled to places like Tahiti, Guyana and the Reunion Islands. During my service, I came to meet important politicians, like the future French president François Mitterrand. Exposure to important leaders early on helped me build a network and gave me a sense that I, too, could one day be a leader.Q. What was your first job?A. I had decided that my first job would be in a large company where I could get good training. Among my top choices were Procter & Gamble, Colgate-Palmolive and Danone. In the end, I accepted P.&G.’s offer because they were the nicest people I met and they offered the highest salary.Q. After P.&G. and later Henkel, you served as C.E.O. of a watch brand before being named chief executive of Bulgari. How did you manage the transition into the jewelry industry?A. I joined Bulgari in 2013. Prior to that, I was C.E.O. of TAG Heuer for 12 years. It is true that I had to learn about the business of the company, which was jewelry, accessories, perfumes and hotels. Jewelry was a new industry for me with many different facets, its own history, values and culture, not to mention the technical aspects of crafting jewelry.I am always learning on the job. When it comes to jewelry especially, I believe that it is key to know your clientele. In a way, the world of watches is not very different from that of jewelry given that the clients are essentially the same, and prices are similar in both industries. That made it easier for me both in terms of the learning curve and the transition from TAG into Bulgari.Q. What in your view made you a suitable candidate to be chief executive at Bulgari?A. I don’t know if I was the most suitable candidate for the job, but I was honored to be considered among some very good contenders. I was lucky to be appointed to that position at a time when Bulgari had just been acquired by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton. Luck, on top of credentials, is a significant factor in any professional career.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When LVMH started looking for a new C.E.O. for Bulgari, I had already been at TAG for a few years and was potentially on the move. I was lucky that the job opportunity arose when I was ready for a move.AdvertisementQ. Bulgari is a 130-year-old Italian company with a French C.E.O. who lives in Switzerland. How do you manage teams across cultures?A. Cultural differences are not a major challenge when you work within Europe. I live in Switzerland and split my time between Rome, where the company is based, and Neuchâtel, where Bulgari’s watchmaking is located. Those two cities are not very different. Plus, I consider myself half Italian because of my Italian wife, thanks to whom I obtained Italian citizenship and an understanding of the soul of Italy.For management purposes, it is a question of logistical organization. I use technology to stay in touch with my teams even when I am far away. The important thing for a C.E.O. is to be clear strategically about the road map, trust the teams, understand the role of a leader and maintain regular contact despite the distance.Q. You said once that your most important strategy at Bulgari was inspiring confidence. What do you mean by that?A. One of the key missions of a C.E.O. is to set the right level of ambition with adequate resources — human, technological and financial — and make sure everyone understands the company’s targets. At Bulgari, I began by studying the company’s Roman origins, its history, the breadth of its expertise, and see how that expertise translated into design. That is how I discovered its incredible competitive advantage.As a C.E.O., I try to share with my teams my personal conviction that we must capitalize on our unique set of assets and on a heritage that no one can imitate. Inspiring confidence means making our teams understand that the company heritage is strong, that we have a highly creative environment and that for us, the sky is the limit.Q. What is your leadership style?A. I am demanding. I say what I believe, and I set attainable targets. But I can be impatient when it comes to reaching those targets. My door is always open, and I am accessible. I acknowledge my strengths and weaknesses, I can be contradicted, but I respect everyone in the company, from the doormen to the shareholders.Q. What is the best advice you have received?A. I am action-oriented and expect quick reactions. I am often told to be patient and take more time to reflect before making a decision. It is a good thing to sleep on a decision and revisit it the next day.Q. What makes a great leader?A. The energy and sense of authenticity a leader conveys makes all the difference. Your teams must feel that you believe in your own message.AdvertisementQ. What would you tell a younger person starting out?A. Follow your gut and intuition. Follow your dreams and realize them as soon as you can before you become too reasonable.A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2016, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: It’s up to C.E.O. to make company targets clear.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »