AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningIt is perhaps the most difficult question a defense lawyer and client have to answer in a criminal trial: Should the defendant testify?The pressure to tell your side of the story carries the risk of coming across as less than forthcoming — and perhaps even a liar — that can make the testimony the focal point of the proceeding. Especially in white-collar cases, which revolve almost exclusively around what the defendant was thinking at the time, the witness’s credibility can push the rest of the evidence into the background.Two current trials involving complex financial transactions have had defendants take the witness stand to explain their motivations. Whether they can persuade the jury that they did not act illegally is a question the defense bar will be watching carefully because it can give some indication about how this type of testimony plays in court.In the Federal District Court in Manhattan, two former London-based Rabobank traders, Anthony Allen and Anthony Conti, are on trial, accused of submitting false interest rate reports used to calculate the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, to help colleagues profit on trades. Mr. Allen testified last week that he actually rejected requests to change the Libor submissions, despite emails indicating he went along with what the traders wanted. He explained that his response — “No worries mate, glad to help” — was actually a signal that he was not going along, testifying that “I was telling him, it’s just not right.”If Mr. Allen had not testified, it would be nearly impossible to glean that meaning from his response, which on the surface appears to accede to the trader’s request. That shows one powerful reason white-collar defendants testify at trial: to give a benign interpretation to statements that would appear to be rather incriminating.Michael Coscia is on trial in the Federal District Court in Chicago in the first “spoofing” prosecution under a provision of the Dodd-Frank Act that makes it a crime to enter orders for futures contracts with the intention of quickly canceling them in order to mislead other traders. Mr. Coscia used an algorithm through his firm, Panther Energy Trading, to enter and cancel in milliseconds a number of large orders in 2011, making more than $1 million from trading in a few months. Mr. Coscia testified that he “absolutely wanted to fill every order” entered by his firm, according to Reuters, disputing the government’s core claim that he had no intention of having them filled.Getting the defense version in front of the jury by calling the defendant to testify is the easy part because counsel will prepare the client to put the case in the best light. Although courts echo the phrase that a trial is “a search for the truth,” in reality, it is far more theatrical, playing to the audience of 12 sitting in the jury box responsible for deciding guilt.The problem in calling the defendant to testify is the second act: cross-examination. Prosecutors often can hardly contain themselves at the thought of getting a shot at the defendant. Mr. Allen’s co-defendant, Mr. Conti, did not testify, avoiding the risk of cross-examination in which he might be tripped up by the prosecutor’s questions that can give the impression the witness is not being candid.Unlike an ordinary conversation, in which one can steer away from unpleasant topics, the very nature of the opponent’s questioning is to make the witness uncomfortable. As John H. Wigmore, the former Northwestern Law School dean, once wrote in his leading treatise on evidence, cross-examination is “the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery of truth” because it forces witnesses to respond to questions they may not want to answer, putting their credibility on the line.Thus, Mr. Coscia responded to one of the prosecutor’s questions by snapping, “I’m not dealing hot dogs, I’m dealing futures,” according to The Chicago Tribune. A flash of anger can be very telling after the defendant came across as measured during the direct examination.In Mr. Allen’s case, the prosecutor pressed him about whether he ever tried to stop a trader from asking for helpful Libor submissions. “I didn’t tell him to or not to,” he responded, which could come across as evasive.There simply is no checklist for deciding whether to call a client to the witness stand in a white-collar prosecution. In cases involving street crimes, many defendants have a criminal history that could be brought out if the person testifies, but will otherwise not come before the jury if the person remains silent. White-collar defendants, on the other hand, rarely have more than a minor violation in their background that might affect the jury’s perception of them, so they may feel more freedom to testify.But they also like to talk — sometimes quite a lot — as well-educated and successful people are wont to do. So white-collar defendants often have made a number of statements, whether in emails, chat rooms or on recorded conversations, that can be used against them to prove their state of mind.And, unfortunately, they make some questionable comments or use nomenclature that can make it appear the defendant cares about little more than making money any way possible, regardless of its legality. So calling a white-collar defendant to testify has its own issues by requiring the person to explain away statements that can make them look disingenuous — or worse.Nor is history much of a guide for lawyers trying to decide whether to call the defendant to testify. Jeffrey K. Skilling and Kenneth L. Lay, former chief executives at Enron, testified at their trial, and the jury returned guilty verdicts for both, although Mr. Lay’s death a few months later meant the charges against him were dismissed. In the recent prosecution of three senior executives at the law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf for accounting maneuvers before its collapse, none testified and they even declined to offer any evidence, with the jury acquitting them on a number of charges while failing to reach a verdict on others.It comes down to figuring out how well the defendant can perform on the witness stand, particularly cross-examination, as measured against the strength of the government’s case. There are no “Perry Mason” moments when the real perpetrator is unmasked in the closing moments of trial. The risk is that the defendant could end up making a borderline prosecution even stronger if the jury decides the person is not telling the truth, resulting in a conviction.Jurors will always speculate about why a defendant did not testify, especially if the person claims innocence. Courts routinely instruct jurors not to consider the defendant’s decision to remain silent and not take the witness stand in reaching a verdict, but the inference remains, even subconsciously, that someone claiming to be innocent would scream that from the rooftop. So the defendant who chooses not to speak risks letting the government’s portrayal of what happened be the primary evidence on which the jury decides the case.Whether Mr. Allen and Mr. Coscia made a good decision by testifying remains one of the great unknowns in the criminal process. That may be why it is such a difficult choice to make, because there is never any sure way to know whether it was the right one.Advertisement