By JOHN KOBLIN and BROOKS BARNESOCT. 10, 2016
In a potential blow to Crackle, the fledgling Sony Pictures Entertainment streaming service, Jerry Seinfeld’s hit online series “Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee” is on the market.“Comedians in Cars,” introduced in 2012 on Crackle, features Mr. Seinfeld having free-form conversations with pals like Tina Fey and Jon Stewart. It was nominated for best variety series at the Emmys this year, and Sony has said the show — which has roughly 50 episodes — has generated more than 100 million streams. In the process, it put Crackle on the map.But Mr. Seinfeld’s contract is expiring, and he has lately felt adrift at Sony, especially since June, when the studio parted ways with Steve Mosko, its television chairman and one of Mr. Seinfeld’s longtime allies, according to multiple people briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to protect relationships. As a result, the people said, representatives for Mr. Seinfeld have been in talks with the likes of Netflix and Hulu about taking over distribution of “Comedians in Cars.”In a statement, Sony said, “‘Comedians in Cars’ has been a great part of Crackle’s programming lineup for years, and we look forward to continuing our relationship with Jerry Seinfeld.”AdvertisementBecause it produces the series in partnership with Mr. Seinfeld, Sony would continue to make money under any of the options being discussed. (Under the current setup, Sony effectively sells the show to itself.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two new possibilities are under discussion, according to the people briefed on the plans. Under one deal, the library of old “Comedians in Cars” episodes would be sold to Netflix or another outside network, and new episodes would continue to make their debut on Crackle. Another option would be to move new and old episodes away from Crackle. The next season of “Comedians in Cars,” which will be its ninth, will have its premiere on Crackle in the coming months.Netflix, Hulu and a representative for Mr. Seinfeld declined to comment.The loss of “Comedians in Cars” would hurt Crackle. The show is its biggest hit. It could have a hard time persuading other top talents to sign on if Mr. Seinfeld decided to go elsewhere.AdvertisementThe willingness of Mr. Seinfeld to pursue outside deals carries weight for Sony because of its history with him. “Seinfeld” reruns have minted money for Sony over the years. As recently as April, the studio sold old episodes to Hulu in a deal valued at $160 million.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Seinfeld’s ‘Comedians in Cars’ Is on Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.