
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 10, 2016
When companies are caught up in an investigation, the question is almost always about how much they will have to pay the government to resolve the case. The negotiations can seem like a poker game, with one side throwing out a number while the other claims it would rather fight than agree to such a sum.Of course, federal investigations are far more important than any card game, but recent efforts to settle cases have all the hallmarks of the kind of posturing seen at a table covered with green felt.It was reported in late September that the Justice Department wanted Deutsche Bank to pay $14 billion to settle an investigation into how it packaged and sold residential mortgage-backed securities during the run-up to the financial crisis in 2008. This would be in the range of multibillion-dollar settlements reached with Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase in the last few years.Deutsche Bank confirmed the opening bid by the Justice Department and, like any good negotiator, flatly rejected the offer. A statement by the bank proclaimed that it “has no intent to settle these potential civil claims anywhere near the number cited. The negotiations are only just beginning.”AdvertisementThat posturing failed to quell concerns about the viability of the bank, and shares dropped more than 40 percent at one point. James Stewart’s Common Sense column in The New York Times ran with the headline, “Deutsche Bank as New Lehman Brothers: Far-Fetched but Not Unthinkable.”AdvertisementWas the government serious about seeking $14 billion? It is a negotiation, after all, so there are always feints and “final demands” that are far from the final amount.If agreements with the Justice Department by other global banks are any indication of how much it will cost to settle, Deutsche Bank can expect that at least some of the final figure will be paid out over the next few years to help distressed homeowners and cities hard hit by the financial crisis, with at least of portion of the amount deductible from of its tax bill. Although the $14 billion initial demand spooked the markets, its main use appears to be to soften up the bank to agree to pay a large — but not crippling — settlement.Even if it was just an opening salvo, it shows that Deutsche Bank is facing a hefty payment regardless of the final number. It has set aside approximately $6.2 billion to cover the costs of various investigations, and that is likely to be used up quickly even if the two sides can agree on a resolution of the investigation.Another opening bid by federal prosecutors caused similar resistance from Walmart. Bloomberg reports that the retailer has rejected an offer to pay $600 million to resolve an investigation of violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in its operations in Mexico and China. If the final agreement is near that amount, it would rank among the largest penalties ever imposed for violating the overseas bribery law.The push back by Walmart may just be a gambit to get the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission, which share oversight of the law, to drop their price. Prosecutors are reported to be gathering additional evidence to strengthen the case, a message to the company that they will not drop their demands quietly.The posturing raises an interesting question about whether a company would ever draw the line and decide to take a case to trial rather than pay an amount it felt was too draconian.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Proving that a corporation violated the law requires showing only that the actions of an employee involved criminal conduct, and the knowledge of various employees can be aggregated to prove the collective intent of the organization. That means it would be difficult to defend a case if Walmart employees gave bribes to aid its operations, even if senior management was ignorant of the payments.The greater danger of going to trial is the cascade of negative publicity a company would face during the drawn-out process of getting into a courtroom to decide its guilt. Each pretrial hearing would result in a recapitulation of the charges in the media, bringing back to the surface the allegations of misconduct. The trial itself would be a nonstop cavalcade of damaging information, so that even if the company was able to avoid a guilty verdict, it would still pay a price by being portrayed publicly as a wrongdoer.AdvertisementThat does not mean every company settles with the government, however. Pacific Gas and Electric went to trial for safety violations related to a 2010 gas pipeline explosion outside San Francisco that killed eight people and caused millions of dollars of damage by destroying a neighborhood. The jury convicted the utility of six of the twelve counts, and it faces a fine of $3 million after federal prosecutors dropped a request before trial for a $562 million penalty if it were found guilty.As a public utility, Pacific Gas and Electric is not subject to the same consumer pressures that a company like Walmart is, so it may have been more willing to fight charges because of the lower impact the adverse publicity would have on its operations.In addition to the public opprobrium criminal charges can bring, the cost of dealing with an investigation can be enormous, and may even exceed any penalty the government might seek. Companies are expected to conduct an internal investigation of possible wrongdoing anywhere in their operations and then report back to the Justice Department about what was uncovered.Walmart has spent more than $600 million since the revelation by The New York Times in 2012 of its bribery in Mexico, including $95 million in its most recent fiscal year, according to its annual report. If it decides to fight any charges that might be brought by going to trial, those costs could easily increase by another $50 million to $100 million.There are risks for the government if it is unwilling to drop its demands for a high penalty because no one can predict how a case will play in front of a jury, regardless of how strong prosecutors think the evidence is. So it is in the Justice Department’s interest to reach a settlement at an amount not too far below the opening bid, lest it appear to be going soft on a company that claims it is willing to fight.It is not always the government that makes an initial offer. JPMorgan Chase said it would be willing to pay $3 billion to settle the investigation of its sales of mortgage-backed securities in 2014, an offer the Justice Department rejected with a threat to file a lawsuit. Jamie Dimon, the bank’s chief executive, then went to Washington to meet with top officials and worked out a $13 billion settlement.A lowball offer can provoke a negative reaction as much as a high opening bid from the Justice Department, and each side knows that it will have to give up some ground to avoid being pushed into litigation, which brings greater risks. The final amount often seems to have little to do with assessing the harm from the actual underlying violations and more about how hard each side is willing to push before reaching an agreement.For Deutsche Bank and Walmart, the opening bids are just that — a start, and certainly not the final figure that will come out of the negotiations.The headline on an earlier version of this article misstated the type of investigation that the Justice Department is pursuing into how Deutsche Bank packaged and sold residential mortgage-backed securities. It is a civil case, not a criminal case.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »