
Breakingviews By                     
GEORGE HAY

OCT. 10, 2016
Deutsche Bank’s sliding share price and capital shortfall call for some creative solutions. And they do not get much more out of the ordinary than an idea that Germany’s corporate titans might take stakes in the lender to help it manage the impact of a potential $14 billion fine from American regulators, as Handelsblatt reported on Oct. 6. It is a less nutty concept than it sounds.German companies are swimming in cash, which is currently earning little on deposit. The members of the DAX, a stock market index of 30 blue-chip German companies, had $80 billion of cash and short-term investments at the end of the last financial year, according to Eikon data — excluding financial companies and carmakers, whose cash levels are flattered by big finance arms. A big chunk of this corporate liquidity is no doubt on deposit at Deutsche Bank, so it carries the low but real risk that it could be eroded were Deutsche Bank subject to the kind of ferocious “bail-in” rescue inflicted on Cypriot banks in 2013.Deutsche Bank is not facing anything like that kind of situation, but it might need to raise capital. Shareholders of companies like Siemens and SAP would, or at least should, balk at the idea of putting money into an institution hit by huge legal and operational risks. Customers owning big stakes in banks can create the risk of biased lending policies.Still, if German corporations decided freely to help Deutsche, it would relieve Berlin of a politically toxic situation ahead of federal elections in 2017. A private, nontaxpayer solution might also protect Germany from taking the highly embarrassing step of flouting European Union laws that make it hard for governments to bail out banks until creditors have taken losses first.More surprisingly, it might not be totally bad for German companies. First, the survival of Deutsche Bank is a useful counterbalance in a global capital market dominated by American banks. It could even be argued that at 0.25 times book value, a Deutsche Bank that does not collapse would enable an investor to double its money or more.The support could wind up being largely symbolic. German blue-chip companies could agree to underwrite a bigger rights issue, picking up the so-called rump left behind if Deutsche Bank shareholders opted not to participate. It would still be a strange and suboptimal way for Berlin to dodge a bullet — but better than many of its alternatives.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »