By RAVI SOMAIYANOV. 2, 2015
The publisher of The New York Times, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., said on Monday that the company intended to name a deputy publisher, a role that has traditionally been a steppingstone to succeeding the publisher, within two years.Mr. Sulzberger, 64, whose family has controlled The Times since 1896, made the comments at an annual address. Though much has changed in the last year, he said, his family remains committed to the publication.“I’ve been in my role as publisher for more than 20 years,” he said, “and I’ve hit my mid-60s, so it should come as no surprise that the task of choosing my successor has begun.”Mr. Sulzberger added later that a committee would be involved in the succession planning, which he called a formal process, and that it would consist of two members of the company’s board, two members of senior management, and two members of the family trustees. He himself will not be on the committee, he said.AdvertisementHe added: “It is our intention to be as transparent as we can as this unfolds.”Mr. Sulzberger’s father, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, stepped down as publisher when he was 65, in 1992. He followed a company rule and stepped down as chairman at the age of 70, marking the end of a 34-year tenure. His son succeeded him in both roles.Mr. Sulzberger noted in his address that “six members of the fifth generation of the family” currently work at The Times and that each “is actively engaged in initiatives that are tied to our future.”AdvertisementThe next publisher will take over at a critical moment for the paper, as it works toward a recently stated goal of doubling its digital revenue from $400 million a year to $800 million a year by 2020.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Times Says It Will Name a Deputy Publisher Within Two Years .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.