
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

OCT. 11, 2016
Wells Fargo is circling the stagecoaches around a top deputy.The lender handed more power to its president and chief operating officer, Timothy J. Sloan, with three new senior executives and an expanded financial-technology group reporting to him. That ostensibly puts Mr. Sloan in even better position to succeed the company’s chief executive and his boss, John G. Stumpf. It is not clear, however, why an executive so closely linked to the fake-accounts scandal should lead the company.Mr. Sloan has been a member of Wells Fargo’s operating committee for most of this decade, including the period when the bank started to fire 5,300 people for their roles in opening two million bogus bank and credit card accounts. His involvement might have been somewhat excused had he stayed head of commercial or wholesale banking, where he spent most of his career.As chief administrative officer from 2010 to 2011, however, Mr. Sloan’s role included overseeing Wells Fargo’s human resources and reputation management. He then became finance chief for three years. And one of his direct reports when he was promoted to chief operating officer last year was Carrie Tolstedt, who ran the offending community-banking division until earlier this year.That makes Mr. Sloan a member of the inner circle that would have known about the wrongdoing from its early days and tried to deal with it. This group hardly covered itself in glory: It was still handing out pink slips in 2016, five years after the first bankers were shown the door. Mr. Stumpf and Ms. Tolstedt have already ceded compensation for the mess. Investigations by the board and regulators may yet implicate Mr. Sloan and others.Mr. Stumpf has no more than two years left at the helm, based on the company’s retirement-age rules. If it sticks with its internal heir apparent after all the dust settles on the rot at Wells Fargo, the bank will have to make the case for him.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »