By BEN SISARIONOV. 2, 2015
When “Serial,” the blockbuster podcast, returns for its second season later this year, it will have a powerful new online outlet: Pandora.“Serial,” whose first season last year was downloaded about 100 million times, will continue to be available as a podcast through its website, and through podcast platforms like iTunes and Stitcher. But the deal with Pandora, announced Monday, will give “Serial” access to an enormous audience and also give its producers a new opportunity for revenue.While “Serial” — a spinoff of the long-running public radio show “This American Life” — includes advertising spots in the version most people hear, Pandora will be able to insert its own ads in the version it will stream. “Serial” and its producers will share in that ad revenue.Starting next year, Pandora, the Internet radio giant, will also stream episodes of “This American Life,” which remains popular on public radio stations and is one of the top podcasts.Advertisement“For people already listening to ‘Serial’ and ‘This American Life,’ nothing will change,” Ira Glass, the host of “This American Life,” said in a statement. “But we believe lots of people who’d like our shows simply haven’t heard of them, or haven’t started listening to podcasts.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Pandora reaches millions of people who never listen to public radio or download podcasts,” Mr. Glass continued. “This’ll get our shows to them.”Pandora has more than 78 million regular listeners, and in its most recent quarter sold $255 million in ads. While the first season of “Serial” was available on SoundCloud, the free streaming site that is popular for music, its second season will not be released there.AdvertisementThe second season of “Serial” is said to be focused on the case of Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, the Army soldier who was held prisoner by the Taliban, although the producers of the show have not confirmed that. Nor have they confirmed when the new season will be released, other than that it “will be coming sometime later in 2015,” according to a statement on the show’s website.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Serial’ Podcast From Public Radio Will Stream on Pandora .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.