AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam LiptakWASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Tuesday seemed inclined to let Samsung have a fresh shot at arguing that it does not have to give up all of its profits for copying a part of the distinctive look of Apple’s iPhone.“It seems to me that the design is applied to the exterior case of the phone,” said Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. “It’s not applied to all the chips and wires.”It followed, he said, that “there shouldn’t be profits awarded based on the entire price of the phone.”Several justices seemed to agree that the damages Samsung must pay may well be less than its total profits of about $400 million on several phones. They said the right award might be limited to profits attributable to the protected features, including the iPhone’s rounded corners and grid of icons.But the justices seemed frustrated about how to articulate the right legal standard. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy said he did not know what jurors should be told in deciding how much companies that infringe design patents must pay.“Neither side gives us an instruction to work with,” he said.Justice Sonia Sotomayor echoed the point. “How do we announce the right test?” she asked.Kathleen M. Sullivan, a lawyer for Samsung, said jurors could, for instance, hear expert testimony from accountants.Justice Kennedy responded that such evidence could not place a value on a “stroke of genius” like the design of the Volkswagen Beetle. That analogy came up throughout the argument, with some justices arguing that the car’s design provided much of its value.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. disagreed. “I can’t get over the thought that nobody buys a car, even a Beetle, just because they like the way it looks,” he said. “What if it, you know, costs, I think, $1,800 when it was first sold in the United States? What if it cost $18,000? What if it got two miles per gallon? What if it broke down every 50 miles?”Justice Stephen G. Breyer said jurors could be given examples. “You know, wallpaper, you get the whole thing,” he said, referring to total profits. “A Rolls Royce thing on the hood? No, no, no. You don’t get all the profit from the car.”Design patents are far less common than utility patents, which cover how products work. The Supreme Court has not heard a design patent case in over a century.Ms. Sullivan, Samsung’s lawyer, argued that design patents are poorly suited to complex devices with many features, adding that they can give rise to disproportionate penalties.“A smartphone is smart,” she said, “because it contains hundreds of thousands of the technologies that make it work.”Design patents once covered household items like spoons and fireplace grates — whose design was central to the product — and a finding of infringement required the defendant to turn over all of its profits.Several leading technology companies, including Facebook and Google, filed a brief supporting Samsung. Their brief said that “the availability of disproportionate profits from accused infringers of design patents would reduce innovation.”Companies that sell products with distinctive designs, including Tiffany and Adidas, filed a brief supporting Apple. “The total profits rule,” the brief said, “helps to ensure that designers have the appropriate incentives and rewards to make investments in innovative designs.”Last year, Samsung agreed to pay Apple $548 million in damages in the case, but it reserved the right to appeal to the Supreme Court. The company now hopes to recover as much as $399 million of that, representing its total profits from various models of phones that Apple said, in a lawsuit filed in 2011, infringed on its design patents.The case before the Supreme Court is just one challenge faced by Samsung. The firm is killing its troubled Galaxy Note 7 smartphone after struggling to address reports that the device can overheat and catch fire because of a manufacturing flaw.The three design elements at issue in this case, Samsung Electronics Co. v. Apple Inc., No. 15-777, are, in Samsung’s description, “a particular black rectangular round-cornered front face”; “a substantially similar rectangular round-cornered front face plus the surrounding rim”; and “a particular colorful grid of sixteen icons.”Last year, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, a specialized court that handles patent appeals, ruled that the governing statute “explicitly authorizes the award of total profit from the article of manufacture bearing the patented design.”The court appeared to acknowledge the possibility that “an award of a defendant’s entire profits for design patent infringement makes no sense in the modern world.” But it added that “those are policy arguments that should be directed to Congress.”“We are bound by what the statute says, irrespective of policy arguments that may be made against it,” the court said.The design patent law says that infringers “shall be liable to the owner to the extent of his total profit” from the sale of “any article of manufacture.”As the case reached the Supreme Court, the two sides and the Obama administration all focused on that last phrase, agreeing that the “article of manufacture” at issue could be a component of the product rather than the entire product sold to consumers.“The parties, actually, and the government are fairly close,” Justice Breyer remarked.But Ms. Sullivan said the appeals court had not allowed it to make its case on what was the “article of manufacture.” Seth P. Waxman, a lawyer for Apple, responded that Samsung had litigated the case on the understanding that the entire phone was the relevant product and that it could not change its mind now.The justices did not seem inclined to adjudicate that last dispute. “We have a hard enough question trying to figure out what the standard is,” Justice Breyer told Mr. Waxman. “Now, why can’t we just ask the lower courts to listen to your arguments and theirs, and work it out.”Follow Adam Liptak on Twitter @adamliptak.Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.videoAdvertisement