AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinHerbert Irving, a co-founder of the food services giant Sysco Corporation and a philanthropist who donated more than $300 million to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center, died on Oct. 3 at his home in Manhattan. He was 98.A representative of the medical center confirmed his death.Mr. Irving’s philanthropy was fueled by the fortune he made at Sysco, which he founded in 1969 with John F. Baugh and Harry Rosenthal. The company first sold shares to the public in 1970 and became a major food distribution conglomerate, with sales in the last year of around $50 billion.Mr. Irving stepped down as vice chairman in 1992 and remained on Sysco’s board for two more years.He and his wife, Florence Irving, began donating to the Columbia University Medical Center and NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in the late 1980s. He was the single largest benefactor to the medical center, funding the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center there. Beginning in 1987, Mr. Irving also provided grants to enable students, so-called Irving Scholars, to do clinical research.More than a half-dozen facilities at the medical center and hospital bear Mr. Irving’s name. This year, a medical center campus in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan was renamed in honor of Mr. and Mrs. Irving.In a 1997 interview with The New York Times, Mr. Irving said he directed his donations to cancer care and research because he saw that as New York City’s greatest medical need.The cancer care center at Columbia is one of just three comprehensive cancer centers in New York State.Dr. Lee Goldman, chief executive of Columbia University Medical Center and dean of the faculties of health sciences and medicine, said the medical center and hospital were like Mr. Irving’s “adopted family.”“He’s been in it for the long haul,” Dr. Goldman said. “He has truly transformed the place.”Mr. Irving and his wife were also patrons of the arts. They made major donations of Asian art to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where a wing is named for them. They also collected Japanese art, in particular lacquerware — decorated bowls, boxes and other crafted objects.Mr. Irving got his start in the frozen foods business in a venture he started with a brother-in-law. That business, Global Frozen Foods, later became part of Sysco.Mr. Irving was born on Nov. 5, 1917, in Brooklyn. He graduated with bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He served in the Army in Europe during World War II, landing in Normandy soon after the Allied invasion in June 1944.He and his wife, the former Florence Rapoport, were married in 1941.Besides his wife, he is survived by his sons, Jeff and Ron; a daughter, Gail; and several grandchildren.Advertisement