
Breakingviews By                     
RICHARD BEALES

OCT. 12, 2016
John G. Stumpf’s departure from Wells Fargo was inevitable, but it came quickly.The Wells Fargo chairman and chief executive’s “retirement,” announced Wednesday evening, clears the way for his successor to fix the culture that led to millions of fake accounts being opened. Along with the $228 billion lender’s board, though, his successor, Timothy J. Sloan, has to show he can break with the past.The last stage of Mr. Stumpf’s fall from grace must have come faster than anyone, including Wells Fargo’s stodgy board, had expected. Only two days earlier, the bank announced new executive appointments that bolstered its operating committee and Mr. Sloan’s responsibilities. Now the latter part of that, at least, has been overtaken by events.Mr. Stumpf’s final chapter began when his California-based bank agreed in early September to pay $185 million to settle allegations that its bankers illegally opened accounts to help meet sales targets. Complacency and prevarications at two disastrous appearances before Congress – with his belated forfeiture of $41 million in unvested stock awards – undid the good work that made Wells Fargo unusually solid among big American banks during and after the 2008 mortgage crisis.Timothy Sloan, the new chief of Wells Fargo, told CNBC that he feels sorry for John Stumpf, but the ex-C.E.O.’s retirement was the right thing for the bank.The views of shareholders, the biggest of which is Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, may have had something to do with Mr. Stumpf’s hurried departure. Investors elevated the company’s shares by about 2 percent in after-hours trading in New York – a step back toward the levels of late August.AdvertisementYet although the chief executive’s exit became necessary, it isn’t sufficient. A scandal that bank executives knew about for years and that led to the firing of more than 5,000 employees suggests ingrained problems, at least in parts of the Wells Fargo edifice. Mr. Sloan, with 29 years at the bank, has been there only five years fewer than Mr. Stumpf. It’s not certain he will be able to set a sufficiently different tone.It’s an improvement that the board will now get a separate chairman, Stephen Sanger, and a new vice chairwoman. Yet Mr. Sanger has acted as lead director since 2012, and if there was anyone in a position to push Mr. Stumpf to tackle the accounts problem sooner and with more gusto, it was him.AdvertisementThe Wells Fargo stagecoach has changed drivers; now it also needs a clear new direction.Richard Beales is assistant editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »