AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. Stewart“You should resign,” a fiery Senator Elizabeth Warren told Wells Fargo’s chief executive, John G. Stumpf, during Senate hearings last month.Now he has.In an all-too-rare example of corporate governance working the way it should, someone at the top is being held accountable for Wells Fargo’s multiyear abuse of its retail customers.In September, Wells Fargo reached a $185 million settlement with federal regulators and acknowledged that thousands of employees, under intense pressure to meet aggressive sales targets, opened as many as two million bogus accounts without customers’ knowledge, in some cases forging signatures.Mr. Stumpf said at the time that the Wells Fargo board would consider the appropriate fate of top executives, including him. By the standards of corporate America — a low bar — it moved swiftly and decisively. Just a week after Mr. Stumpf’s widely panned appearance on Capitol Hill, the board said it would claw back compensation from him valued at $41 million. And within weeks it went further, securing his resignation.The board also said it would separate the roles of chairman and chief executive, both previously held by Mr. Stumpf, another move applauded by governance experts.“I’m surprised but not shocked” by the board’s aggressive moves, said Charles Elson, director of the John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware. “It’s very smart, especially given the disaster this has been for the company. As long as Stumpf remained, he would have been a lightning rod for criticism. Now they can focus on rebuilding their reputation.”Why did Mr. Stumpf’s head roll when so many other chief executives emerged from other scandals and the financial crisis unscathed?Unlike, say, the London Whale scandal that engulfed JPMorgan Chase, the misconduct at Wells Fargo couldn’t be ascribed to one or a few “rogue” actors. Wells Fargo fired more than 5,000 low-level employees over fraudulent practices that spanned years, while appearing to hold no senior-level executives accountable. That’s systemic behavior for which a chief executive is ultimately responsible.Mr. Stumpf was also personally implicated in ignoring the severity of the misconduct. Some employees who tried to warn him that the company’s aggressive sales goals were causing damaging and unethical behavior at the branch level wrote personal letters to Mr. Stumpf, some as early as 2011, my colleague Stacy Cowley reported on Wednesday. Not only did he appear to ignore them, but some of these employees were subsequently fired and blackballed from future employment, as an employee named Ashley told Robert Smith, the co-host of NPR’s “Planet Money” podcast.In his handling of the crisis, Mr. Stumpf often seemed out of touch with reality. He seemed blindsided by the fury unleashed by the bank’s conduct, repeatedly falling back on the claim that customers didn’t lose that much money, and that the amount wasn’t material. As Mr. Elson put it: “A chief executive is expected to have some perspective. It should be obvious you don’t open accounts for people who don’t want them and then forge their signatures.”And ultimately the buck should stop with the chief executive — a simple truth that many boards often ignore.“Wells Fargo emerged unsullied by the financial crisis and with a reputation for integrity,” Mr. Elson said. “That reputation was so hard to gain, so easy to lose. Stumpf was paid a lot of money for the good things, and now he has to take responsibility for the bad. He didn’t seem to grasp that.”Advertisement