AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Neil UnmackDeutsche Bank has received a cautious vote of creditor confidence. The German lender is issuing expensive debt. That shows it can get access to markets, despite a feared $14 billion American regulatory fine. It is less powerful a signal than buying debt back, as Deutsche Bank did in February — but at least it shows that investors do not fear losses that could eat into senior debt.The German bank is issuing like gangbusters. It sold $3 billion of five-year bonds on Friday, and it has just raised an additional $1.5 billion, after an investor wanted more. The bank’s motives may be largely practical: It needs to issue about $30 billion of bonds by the end of the year, and by the end of June it was two-thirds of the way through.Yet even prosaic actions take on extra significance in light of the bank’s potential $14 billion fine, and reports it may need a bailout, or that clients have been cutting their exposure. A bond issue shows that the bank can get access to markets, reinforcing its €215 billion pile of liquidity.When the bank bought back debt in February that showed that it thought the market was temporarily mispricing its debt and that it had ample liquidity. It also created capital, by retiring debt below book value.The bond issue also does little to reassure investors’ concerns over Deutsche Bank’s profitability. The bank is paying a spread of 290 basis points more than Treasuries, a level that is uncomfortably high for a large trading house, as higher financing costs eat into the counterparties’ returns.Still, it shows that investors are pretty confident that the bank will not be declared insolvent, that senior creditors will be protected even if instruments further down the capital hierarchy get hosed, and that Deutsche has raised its capital significantly since the last financial crisis. There is good reason: Even a maximum $14 billion fine should not cause Deutsche Bank to breach minimum capital ratios, and it has $15 billion of hybrid and subordinated that could recapitalize it before senior bonds take a hit. Deutsche is still fighting fires, but its back is not against the wall.Advertisement