By SEI CHONGOCT. 12, 2016
John G. Stumpf, the chief executive of Wells Fargo, told Congress that it was not until 2013 that he and other senior managers realized the extent of the bank’s fake accounts scandal.That was two years after the bank began firing people for illegal activities.But as early as 2005, Julie Tishkoff, then an administrative assistant, had sounded the alarm over these fraudulent actions. That was the same year that Mr. Stumpf became the bank’s president.Ms. Tishkoff continued to complain for four years, before she was fired in 2009. Two supervisors she accused of ignoring her complaints are now regional presidents.Her story is not unique.Dozens of former employees have come forward with similar accounts of unethical actions committed under pressure to meet unrealistic sales goals.AdvertisementIn at least two cases in 2011, employees wrote letters directly to Mr. Stumpf — who by then was the chief executive and chairman — to describe the activities they had witnessed.AdvertisementThe recent revelations continue to raise questions. Among them:• When exactly did Mr. Stumpf find out about the fake accounts?• Why was the fraud allowed to continue?• Why did the brunt of the firings over the scandal fall on low-level workers, not managers?In Silicon Valley, you’re either hot or you’re not, and that is why Twitter’s future is looking grim, says Steven Davidoff Solomon in the Deal Professor column.He compares Twitter’s prospects with that of Snapchat (now renamed Snap).“The problem is that in the eyes of the Valley, Twitter has lost its mojo,” Mr. Davidoff Solomon says.Neither company is profitable, but Twitter’s user growth is faltering while Snap reports growth rates of 30 percent — about the same as that of Twitter when it went public in 2013.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s the secret sauce of internet valuations,” he says. “Revenue and earnings are forgiven if you can show growth in users. Whether that makes sense, of course, is another matter.”Snap should not get too cocky, however, he says, because “the fickle gods of Silicon Valley will turn if the company can’t sustain its growth story.”A federal appeals court ruled on Tuesday that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s structure was unconstitutional because it gave the director of the agency too much power.AdvertisementThe three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit pointed out that other independent federal agencies are typically overseen by a commission, not a sole director.In its ruling, the appeals court panel cited “the threat to individual liberty” posed by an independent agency with a leader with so much independence.The ruling was a victory for the agency’s critics, who have argued that the bureau should be shut down if the structure was found to be unconstitutional.But the court proposed a simple remedy, which was to give the president the power to fire the agency’s director at will.The agency is expected to appeal the ruling to the full circuit court.• The Federal Reserve will release the minutes of its unusually contentious monetary policy meeting in September, during which three officials voted to raise interest rates.• William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, speaks to the Business Council of New York State.• Esther George, president of the Kansas City Fed, speaks at the Chicago Payments Symposium.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.