AdvertisementSupported byBy Brett SokolThey would seem to make odd broadcasting bedfellows: the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn and the Global Service Center for Quitting Chinese Communist Party. Yet the two organizations are partnering on the airwaves, with two radio stations starting next month at 105.5 FM in Queens.Weekday mornings and early afternoons, the diocese’s WDMB will air daily Masses, rosary prayers and call-in shows. At 2 p.m., the Global Service’s WQEQ will take the microphone “to disseminate info about the Chinese Communist Party’s crimes against humanity” — as it declares in its mission statement.The common thread? Both stations will broadcast solely in Mandarin, focusing on the growing Chinese community in Queens. “We have a similar target audience,” said Msgr. Kieran E. Harrington, the diocese’s vicar for communications.These are just two of the nearly 2,000 FM stations across the country that have received new licenses from the Federal Communications Commission over the last two years. All are classified as Low Power FM — operating at 100 watts with a broadcast range of roughly five to 15 miles, depending on the surrounding terrain and the proximity of other FM transmissions. About a third are already on the air.All of these new stations have received their licenses free. The F.C.C.’s only requirement was that the applicants be nonprofit organizations committed to broadcasting locally originating programs.The recipients encompass an array of churches, schools, municipal governments, artist collectives and activist groups, including South Florida’s 1Miami, established by officials of the Service Employees International Union; San Francisco Community Radio, founded by volunteer D.J.s from the University of San Francisco’s KUSF after the university abruptly sold the station to a classical music network; Razorcake, a magazine based in Pasadena, Calif., that covers the “do it yourself” punk rock culture; and the Maetreum of Cybele, a pagan convent and temple in Palenville, N.Y..Those 100-watt signals pale in comparison to the 50,000 watts that many big commercial stations possess, but Monsignor Harrington said it was still enough to convey the church’s message — and perhaps change lives.“From our perspective, the largest group coming into the Catholic church and the Diocese of Brooklyn is the Chinese,” he said. “But there are great fears in the community about public worship, about attending religious services and devotions. They are fearful that the Chinese government is surveilling them, and they’re worried about the implications for their families back home.”Radio offers “a way for them to express and learn about their faith without the fear of reprisal,” he said.Low Power FM is another step in the evolution of radio since the 1990s, when there was widespread public concern over regulatory changes that significantly increased the number of stations one company could own. Critics lamented what they called the homogenization of the FM band.“That’s why the commission took steps to open the dial and increase the programming options,” said Neil Grace, an F.C.C. spokesman. “Through the Low Power FM program, the commission’s been able to empower community voices, promote media diversity, and enhance local programming by giving small stations a chance to make a big impact.”Yet the emergence of this fresh crop of radio pioneers raises a question: Does FM still matter? In an era of online streaming and podcasting, is there an audience still scanning analog radio dials, hungry for more options?The trend lines aren’t in FM radio’s favor. A recent analysis from Edison Research and Triton Digital showed that 53 percent of all Americans listened to online audio last year, while 21 percent of American households no longer even own an FM radio — and that number jumps to 32 percent among 18-to-34-year-olds.If there’s a bright spot for radio die-hards, it’s inside automobiles: 84 percent of all drivers still tune in to their car’s AM/FM radios. Alejandro Cohen, executive director of Dublab, an internet radio station in Los Angeles and another new recipient of a low-power license, said the station was relying on car radios as it prepares to broadcast at 99.1 FM.“L.A. is a driving culture. You have a captive audience, and we’ll be offering a real alternative to what’s currently on FM,” said Mr. Cohen, whose station’s D.J.s spin a mix of vintage soul and of-the-moment electronica. He acknowledges the technological back flip of an online-only station using a low-power license to put its webstreams onto the FM band. “As people are heading for the exit, we’re entering,” Mr. Cohen said with a chuckle, “but it’s a way to expand our voice.”Matthew Lasar doesn’t see any inherent conflict between streaming and FM broadcasting. Mr. Lasar, an instructor in the history department at the University of California, Santa Cruz, and the author of “Radio 2.0: Uploading the First Broadcast Medium,” said the increasing fragmentation of audiences meant that low-power stations had to be everywhere their potential listeners were. And, he added, they had to offer programming that couldn’t be found elsewhere.“There’s still a need for local news and information, which many public radio stations have abandoned,” he said. “There’s a lot of stations that just go on automatic pilot and play NPR and satellite downloads. That’s Low Power FM’s ace in the hole.”An early low-power success story is WNHH 103.5 FM in New Haven, Conn., started by Paul Bass, a veteran journalist. Mr. Bass founded The New Haven Independent, an online newspaper, in 2005; it has largely eclipsed the more than 200-year-old New Haven Register as the city’s civic watchdog. The key, he said, was eschewing the news industry’s growing enthusiasm for click bait, hastily shot videos and incessant tweeting, all at the expense of actual reporting.“I felt the role of the reporter had to go back to old-school ‘shoe leather’ fact-gathering and analysis,” he said. Mr. Bass hopes to apply the same formula — and outcome — to WNHH.After going on the air last year, “I was shocked by how much more excited people were about FM as opposed to web radio,” he said. “People told me they really missed ‘old fashioned’ radio. In my opinion, what they’re missing isn’t just the radio. It’s local, live, smart, real grass-roots interactions, discussions and music.”That has translated into a lineup of both hosts and guests “from all walks of life,” Mr. Bass said, including New Haven’s mayor, who sits in with Mr. Bass and takes listener calls every Monday morning, and a heroin addict, who spoke candidly about the deadly spread of fentanyl among local opioid abusers.“Community radio is unpredictable,” Mr. Bass said. “As a listener you can feel connected to it in a special way you don’t with reading a website.”Mr. Cohen of Dublab agreed. “Where FM is going, we can’t say,” he mused. “But there’s still something about terrestrial radio that is very enticing. Maybe it’s the romantic idea of being on FM and literally floating through the air.”Advertisement