By JOHN SCHWARTZOCT. 14, 2016
Oops! Didn’t mean to bump into you there. It’s just that I can’t stop playing Pokémon Go, the smartphone game.It has sent me wandering through Times Square on my lunch break on a quest to capture imaginary monsters. These odd creatures have gotten me looking at the screen of my phone even more than usual. A lot of people stopped playing over the summer, but I haven’t given up: As they say, Gotta Catch ’Em All.The game, like so many other things, has me thinking about money: If you can use augmented reality to find monsters, why not use it to capture weirdly enticing investments?“Augmented reality?” Maybe you’re not pleased by the thought of yet another new technology, and techie buzz phrase, coming your way. A.R., as it’s called, brings the physical world into a cartoon-inspired game. If you haven’t played, it looks like this: Your phone shows a map of your surroundings, and the camera shows the Pokémon characters popping up around you.AdvertisementI find it addictive. As I walk toward the office elevator on my way to lunch, a Mankey, a furry, ball-shaped dude with monkey arms and tail but a piggy snout, pops up on my screen. It has found a perch by a bookshelf, and is bobbing saucily at me. Lunch can wait; I want to catch that ugly little sucker. These creatures show up everywhere — on the street, in the park, even sitting on my wife’s lap.AdvertisementThe notion of applying A.R. to investing could be a million-dollar idea. I used to have billion-dollar ideas, but since nobody liked them much, I started discounting. For all I know, they might only be $10 ideas. But they are precious to me, and in my heart they shine like gold.This one seems especially brilliant: Instead of running all over town finding imaginary creatures, why not locate investments? You’re a new parent, buying diapers in the store. You grab that box of Huggies, and scan the bar code: On the phone’s screen, up pops a little creature that identifies the parent company, Kimberly-Clark. The company trades under the ticker KMB so let’s call the creature a KMBino. Along with the waggling diaper creature, you’d see the ticker symbol, stock price, one-year return — heck, maybe even the price-earnings ratio.Grab it!After all, you’re giving the company thousands of dollars, you think, so why not get something back by buying the stock and watching it rise? This also could work for older investors buying Depends — it’s the same company! And the same KMBino. Now there’s a cradle-to-grave investing strategy.Buying beer? Get some BUD — the ticker symbol for its maker, Anheuser-Busch InBev, at least until the merger with SABMiller goes through. Throw your colorful Pokéball at that BUDrosaur and put the stock into your portfolio — the investor’s term for what Pokémon players call their Pokédex.My A.R. investing game is complicated, but no more so than evolving a Bulbasaur into an Ivysaur. The game could even go from augmented reality to the real thing: Just as the Pokémon game lets you spend money to buy things like extra balls, incense and potions, my game would let you use actual dollars to buy shares. Players learn about the stock market, and inject a little fun into their lives and portfolios.You can firm up your calves while firming up your investments.You might not see the point of tying the market to a game that has you wandering around all the time. But consider that the phrase “random walk” describes a theory that basically says prices move randomly, and so trying to beat the market is a sucker’s game. Burton G. Malkiel popularized the idea in his 1973 investing classic “A Random Walk Down Wall Street.”See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.What’s more random than a walk to find and catch Pokémon?I asked Mr. Malkiel what he thought of my game. “I think that’s actually fun,” he said, astonishingly. “I was the one who said, sort of jokingly, you might as well throw darts at the stock page, because you’ll pick your stocks as well that way as any other way.”AdvertisementSo why not modernize the dart-throwing with virtual Pokémon? It’s the most random walk out there — I almost fell into Verona Lake, in what is known in the real world as New Jersey, while pursuing yet another Magikarp.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I did not tell Mr. Malkiel about the Magikarp or the lake; the conversation had been going well, and I didn’t want him thinking I am not a serious journalist. Anyway, he was off and running with the idea, thinking about using the game to mimic other forms of investing.Many people, for example, think that rather than buying individual stocks, you should follow the buys of professional stock pickers, like mutual fund managers. He summed up this idea as “Instead of picking the horse, pick the jockey, pick the trainer — whatever analogy you want to use.”The problem with that approach, of course, is that picking actively traded funds hasn’t really turned out any better than picking individual stocks when it comes to beating the market. As he likes to put it, at least two-thirds of those trying to beat simple market indexes fail. About a third do beat the market, but it’s not the same third from year to year.This is starting to sound like a depressing game! It’s like the movie “WarGames,” where the supercomputer concludes (Caution: Spoiler coming!) that when it comes to global thermonuclear war, “The only winning move is not to play.”That’s when I realized that Mr. Malkiel’s approach to investing provides a road map to the perfect A.R. investing game. A little oversimplified, it comes to this: Don’t pick and choose. Buy the whole market.Low-cost index funds would go up and down with the market index that they reflect, like the Standard & Poor’s 500. The game could distribute the component stocks around the landscape like so many Jigglypuffs and Clefairies. Catch the stock, and it goes into your portfolio.Get the millennials I see playing out in the park to switch to Indéxmon, and we might even be able to solve the national retirement savings crisis.Ah! I hear you saying (and not for the first time), “Schwartz, you idiot! The point of an index fund is to have the whole basket of stocks from the start.”AdvertisementI see your point. To use a Pokémon analogy, if all you’re capturing are Caterpies or Rattatas, it will take years to build a well-rounded portfolio.Of course, I’ve thought of an answer for that: Every dollar would be invested in an index fund from the start, and your game is about filling in the virtual scorecard for the fun of it. Play and profit; it’s beautiful.And that’s a game anybody should want to win.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page BU19 of the New York edition with the headline: Picking a Portfolio With Pokéballs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.