By NORM ALSTEROCT. 14, 2016
Call it confidence, or an unwillingness to try to time the market, or even complacency. But whatever the reason, some mutual fund managers with the best performances over the last five to 10 years say they are disinclined to sell their stock holdings — even if the overall market turns down.“I used to try to time the markets,” said Jerome L. Dodson, manager of the Parnassus Endeavor fund, which has returned nearly 12 percent annually over the last decade, according to Morningstar. “I got hit every time.”Mr. Dodson said he did not know when the next market peak would arrive, and so would not try to sell stock in anticipation of it. “It’s definitely going to come,” he said. “It may come soon. But I can’t predict it.”This stick-with-stocks approach, which is embraced by many managers of funds that have prospered in the long bull market, may be a stabilizing force these days, offsetting some of the downward pressures that come when stock prices fall.AdvertisementThat doesn’t mean that all of these bullish stock fund managers are pouring fresh money into the market, however.AdvertisementEven if Mr. Dodson isn’t selling stock, his fund’s cash levels have risen from just over 4 percent in September 2015 to 14 percent in August. That’s mainly because the fund’s strong performance has attracted investors, and Mr. Dodson said he could not immediately put all of their money to productive use.“Because the market is near a high, I can’t really find good stocks to invest in,” he said. “I can’t find companies, so I stay in cash.”While Mr. Dodson has considerable leeway, some funds are required by prospectus to be nearly fully invested in stocks at all times. Such is the case with the Brown Capital Management Small Company fund, which has returned more than 13 percent, annualized, over the last decade. The fund tries to limit its cash level to 5 percent or less at all times.Other funds maintain their stock holdings because they know that their shareholders expect them to maintain full exposure to, say, small-cap growth or large-cap value stocks. And many others maintain their overall asset allocations, but buy and sell specific securities depending on market conditions, including downturns.“We are not going to raise cash,” said Chip Reed, who manages the Eaton Vance Atlanta Capital SMID-Cap fund, which has returned nearly 12 percent annualized over the last decade, according to Morningstar.Mr. Reed said he would not sell heavily even if he were to come to believe that a bear market was underway. Money can be made in bear markets, he said: “You just don’t realize it at the time.”See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.Is there good reason to fear a bear market? Some managers are still weighing what they see as conflicting signals.AdvertisementAndrew R. Adams, lead manager of the Mairs & Power Small Cap fund, which was founded in 2011 and which has delivered nearly 21 percent in annualized returns during the last five years, said he saw reasons both to buy and avoid stocks.On the negative side, Mr. Adams said, the valuations of many stock indexes have reached 10-year highs. But on the positive side, the dividend yield on the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index is above 2 percent, while the 10-year average is 1.71.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Companies have been increasing dividends faster than stocks have been rising,” he said. Mr. Adams said he could still find attractive growth stocks, sometimes in unexpected places. One example he cites is the Oshkosh Corporation, which this year won a United States Army contract to upgrade heavy tactical vehicles.Thomas Ognar, manager of the Wells Fargo Growth fund, said that as a matter of principle, he did not want to build up the fund’s cash holdings.“We don’t use cash as an asset allocation tool,” Mr. Ognar said. Instead, even if the market were to appear to be overpriced, he would search for stocks that had relatively good prospects, which he defined as having the ability to sustain growth at twice the pace of gross domestic product growth for three to five years.But Mr. Ognar said he saw no “major warning signs” that the market was near a top.He said he did become nervous in January, though even then he did not stay out of the stock market. Instead, he wanted to see whether companies “were overextended on the debt side,” he said. “We were doing more trading between positions.”Large fund families often offer asset allocation guidance to their individual portfolio managers, but T. Rowe Price hasn’t recommended an “underweight” position in stock holdings since 2001, said Sebastien Page, co-head of asset allocation at the company. These days, Mr. Page said, neither stocks nor bonds are particularly appealing. “Both appear expensive right now,” he said.“For us the rally seems a bit artificial — like a sugar high,” Mr. Page said. The Fed’s sustained low interest rate policies have spurred stock advances, he said. But because “bonds are expensive, too,” Mr. Page has not called for a reduction in equities.What would induce Mr. Page to recommend a cutback in stock holdings now? “If bonds were more attractively valued, maybe we would reconsider our neutral on stocks,” he said. Asked to put a percentage probability on a renewed “underweight” call, Mr. Page estimated a zero to 15 percent chance.On the other hand, Bruce Picard, MassMutual’s chief investment officer for asset allocation, reported that MassMutual had “slightly” lightened its equity holdings. Still, he said the company was unlikely to make a major shift unless three factors aligned: “a faltering in the employment situation, a loss of momentum in consumer spending and a faster pace of Fed tightening.”AdvertisementOf course, one fund manager’s reason for selling stocks may be another’s reason for buying.Mr. Adams of Mairs & Power said a downturn might well be a buying opportunity. “When prices on good stocks go down,” he said, “I’m like a kid in a candy store.”A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page BU20 of the New York edition with the headline: Sticking With Stocks, Even When Others Don’t.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.