AdvertisementSupported byBy John F. WasikYou may not realize you are doing it, but if you are salting away money every month in a workplace retirement plan, there is a good chance that you are practicing one of the most time-honored methods for long-term investors: dollar-cost averaging.If you are not doing it, dollar-cost averaging is worth considering, because it will keep you invested in markets all of the time. That way you avoid the risky business of guessing when the top or bottom is and save gradually, at a reasonable price.The idea is to keep buying at varying prices. Your average price, using this method, is neither at the highest- nor lowest-possible market price. While dollar-cost averaging is not a perfect strategy, it is a good way to blunt the emotional distress of market volatility and reduce the risk of making bad decisions.When share prices drop, you can buy more of a fund or stock, and vice versa when prices rise. It is a durable middle-of-the-road method to stay invested over the long term.Dollar-cost averaging is compelling because most investors are not good at timing markets to their advantage. In its most recent survey of long-term investor behavior, Dalbar, a financial research company, found that the average stock mutual fund investor trailed the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index by almost 4 percent over the last two decades through 2015.That means despite the market downturn after the British vote to leave the European Union (“Brexit”), the 2013 federal debt ceiling scare and the 2008 meltdown, you still would have been better off just sitting in a stock index fund after the market’s most volatile periods and continuing to buy shares even as stocks plunged.Regular contributors to retirement plans who do not jump in and out of the market are adept, if often unknowing, practitioners of the technique.“Most do dollar-cost averaging throughout their careers,” said Rob Cheney, a certified financial planner in Palo Alto, Calif. “People are hesitant to put lump sums to work.”Most people who invest in their 401(k) accounts not only employ dollar-cost averaging but also trade infrequently, avoiding money-losing market-timing moves.In the “Brexit”-related sell-off in July, for example, only 0.4 percent of 401(k) accounts tracked by Aon Hewitt, the human resources consulting firm, shifted money from stock funds to cash or bond funds. That compares with an average of 0.2 percent during nonvolatile periods, according to Rob Austin, Aon Hewitt’s director of retirement research, whose company has been tracking retirement trading for 20 years and monitors more than 1.3 million 401(k) accounts.While trading within a 401(k) is generally a bad idea because traders tend to lose money over time, steady contributions add up.“Most people in 401(k)’s are also making contributions along the way,” Mr. Austin said, and that increases their balances. “We see a lot less trading over all.”Advice on dollar-cost averaging becomes complicated when a lump sum, like an inheritance, big bonus or other large cash payment, is being invested.Mr. Cheney, whose clients include Silicon Valley employees who receive stock awards or large bonuses, says dollar-cost averaging a lump sum may not work for everyone.In such a situation, you could benefit from buying shares in one or more timed purchases when the market offers bargain prices. But you must gauge your risk tolerance on making such moves. You could easily guess wrong on the market’s direction, and it is hard to tell if you are getting the best price.That adds another wrinkle, which is why it is important to consider risk tolerance. How much of a loss can you stomach? What is your investment time horizon?“I don’t advise dollar-cost averaging for lump-sum investing such as inheritances,” said Simon Brady, a certified financial planner based in Manhattan.“Taking a significant lump sum and breaking it up into, say, 24 equal chunks and contributing one chunk a month for two years would mean that for much of that time, the majority of the funds would be sitting in some useless savings account, where the temptation will exist to go in and spend it. In any case, you would be holding money that would not be working for you,” Mr. Brady said.“Dollar-cost averaging works best for money that comes to you over a period of time. It’s based on the assumption that markets go up over time,” he added.Then there is the potential continuing cost of dollar-cost averaging. If you are buying individual shares of stock or exchange-traded funds, you might be paying a commission on every purchase, which can add up. But most large mutual-fund companies do not charge commissions for direct purchases, particularly for shares of their largest index mutual or exchange-traded funds. This is not a problem in most 401(k) accounts, either.Of course, if shares really are cheap, a big purchase may make sense. Making that decision can be risky, though, and before doing so, you might want some sound advice, perhaps from a chartered financial analyst or certified financial planner.Yet even market professionals are often wrong about the timing of stock market cycles. For most people, dollar-cost averaging is a reliable fallback.Sticking with the strategy may take discipline if stocks start to veer up and down, especially down. If you have sufficient risk tolerance and do not need cash immediately, regular, steady, long-term investing may be just the thing. Patience and consistency reduce the opportunity to make bad decisions.Advertisement