AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael CorkeryWells Fargo disclosed on Friday that new account openings had taken a nose-dive since the scandal over illegal activity at the bank erupted: Bank executives said customers opened 25 percent fewer checking accounts and applied for 20 percent fewer credit cards in September compared with a year ago.Wells Fargo executives acknowledged that customers may have shunned the bank as the extent of the problems came to light. Timothy J. Sloan, who was named the chief executive on Wednesday, said on the company’s third-quarter earnings call that he understood the gravity of the situation.“As a new C.E.O., my immediate and highest priority is to restore trust in Wells Fargo,” Mr. Sloan said.In other measures of the fallout, the bank said that a gauge of customer loyalty — which asks customers whether they would recommend Wells Fargo to family and friends — was also down in September.Although it was too early to assess the impact the declines might have on the bank’s bottom line, the fallout from its widespread creation of sham deposit accounts and credit cards dating back to 2005 was clearly taking its toll.Friday morning’s earnings call was the first time Mr. Sloan had addressed the bank’s investors and analysts since taking over the top spot from John G. Stumpf, who retired abruptly on Wednesday during intense criticism of his handling of the scandal.Removing the tarnish from Wells Fargo’s name will not be an easy job, given the breadth of the problems that have surfaced since the bank announced that it had reached a settlement with banking regulators on Sept. 8.The decline in new customer account openings came with less than three weeks remaining in the third quarter. In an interview, the bank’s chief financial officer, John R. Shrewsberry, attributed the decline partly to the bad publicity and to the fact that customers were “irritated with Wells Fargo in September.”The bank said traffic at its roughly 6,000 branches remained consistent in September with levels of a year ago, while credit card and debit card use increased.Wells Fargo executives — who have been questioned by two congressional committees, excoriated by corporate governance groups and criticized by former employees — faced probably their most friendly audience on Friday: Wall Street analysts who for years have celebrated the bank as a profit machine.But even this group had pointed questions for Mr. Sloan, 56, who has spent 29 years at the company, most recently in the dual role of president and chief operating officer.Paul Miller, an analyst at FBR Capital Markets, echoed concerns raised by members of Congress that the management shake-up this week failed to bring in any fresh faces at the top.“Has there been any thought about bringing somebody from the outside?” Mr. Miller asked during a lengthy conference call on Friday. “Because a lot of you guys have been with the bank for multiple, multiple years.”Mr. Sloan said it was a “fair question, and one that we have been getting asked.” But in the end, he said, the board was “very supportive of the management team.”Other analysts pressed Mr. Sloan and Mr. Shrewsberry to estimate how much revenue the bank could expect to lose from the scandal, including the higher legal expenses related to the slew of lawsuits and government investigations that are underway. The bankers said it would take time before the full financial damage could be calculated.“It could get a little bit worse before it gets better,” Mr. Sloan warned.Expressing regrets that senior managers failed to take steps sooner to root out the problems, Mr. Sloan outlined how the bank was trying to make things right.Among the initiatives: sending mystery shoppers on as many as 20,000 visits to branches to make sure customers were being treated correctly.More broadly, the bank is potentially facing an extensive overhaul in its business model as it shifts from pushing sales to improving customer service.That could prompt the bank to close branches and shift its business emphasis away from bread-and-butter checking and savings accounts. But Mr. Sloan said that any major moves would come many months down the road.For now, there is the continuing fallout to deal with: On Friday, Ohio became the latest state to say it would stop doing business with Wells Fargo (for a year) because of the bank’s duplicity. Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio — which is Mr. Sloan’s home state — posted on Twitter that the bank’s actions “have cost it the public’s confidence.”When one analyst asked whether Mr. Sloan planned to pursue the same strategy as Mr. Stumpf, who had run the bank since 2007, the new chief executive reminded the group that he had been on the job for only two days.“Candidly, I would be a lot more nervous if I were you if I came out with some new strategic plan for Wells Fargo in 48 hours,” Mr. Sloan said. “That would be pretty dangerous from my perspective.”For most of the call, Mr. Sloan sounded contrite about the problems and vowed to keep investigating new complaints. He came closer than his predecessor to acknowledging that there were problems with Wells Fargo’s corporate culture that had contributed to the problems.“I just wanted to address a few of the most common questions we’ve been getting,” Mr. Sloan said. “First is whether Wells Fargo’s culture is broken.”He continued: “Our goal of building lifelong relationships with our customers and appropriately offering them additional products is still the foundation of our business model. But there was clearly something wrong, and we will make the necessary changes to fix it.”Advertisement