
Advertising By                     
 JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
 
OCT. 14, 2016
ONCE, he was widely known as the Verizon guy, or the “Can you hear me now?” guy.Now, he’s just Paul.This summer, Paul Marcarelli, an actor whose private life was largely a mystery during the decade or so in which he starred in Verizon commercials, made a big announcement. He had switched to Sprint, his former employer’s competitor for wireless service.“Hey, I’m Paul. And I used to ask if you could hear me now, with Verizon,” he said in a commercial. “Not anymore. I’m with Sprint now.”The ad set off a flood of interest. David Tovar, a spokesman at Sprint, said most new commercials get between 30,000 and 40,000 views on YouTube. Sprint’s first commercial featuring Mr. Marcarelli has been viewed over 14 million times. More than 970 articles were written about Mr. Marcarelli’s switch, the company said, and the ad created over three billion impressions.AdvertisementMr. Marcarelli, 46, spoke to The New York Times about his experience working for the two companies. He said a major difference was that, with Verizon, he had been playing a character who represented an employee.Advertisement“Now I’m speaking from personal experience as a legitimate Sprint customer,” he said.Mr. Marcarelli’s transformation from actor to advocate speaks to a traditional marketing culture that is starting to loosen up in some corners as it faces threats from new forms of advertising, as well as digital tools like ad blockers. Sprint has opted for transparency in its marketing and communications efforts, an unusual approach in a telecommunications industry dominated by giants like Verizon and AT&T.Mr. Tovar said Sprint had to do things differently from other companies “because of where we are in the market right now.”“We’re the No. 4 carrier; we feel like we have to be bold,” he said. “Otherwise we’re not going to be able to compete with our competition. They have more money, they have more resources and they have more brand equity.”Verizon declined to comment for this article.Part of Sprint’s strategy is letting Mr. Marcarelli off the leash. The actor was unaccompanied during our phone interview. (Public relations staff members often insist on monitoring interviews.)“I don’t represent them,” he said. “I am one of their customers. They wouldn’t presume to tell me what to say.”Mr. Marcarelli, who grew up in North Haven, Conn., said he moved to New York in 1992 to pursue an acting career. In 1998, he founded a theater company with some friends, helping to bankroll productions with money from his work on commercials. In late 2001, he said, he auditioned for the role of “Test Man” for Verizon.“We never discussed it as a spokesman role,” he said. “I knew that I would be playing a character that in some way embodied the brand identity of the company. But I was never called upon to be a spokesperson per se.”AdvertisementHe could not discuss the specifics of his arrangement with Verizon because of contractual obligations, but said it was agreed that he would not promote his character outside of the advertisements.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I had absolutely no public persona outside of that role,” he said.The news media took note of his silence. In 2003, Advertising Age reported that Verizon did not want Mr. Marcarelli speaking to the press.“He is not positioned as an icon,” a Verizon spokeswoman said at the time. “His role is to give visibility to the real people in the company who test the network.”Mr. Marcarelli made dozens of commercials with Verizon. His relationship with the company formally ended in 2012, he said, though in the fall of 2010, he was told that Verizon would be taking a new direction in its advertising.A 2011 profile in The Atlantic made it seem as if he were glad to leave the job behind. But Mr. Marcarelli said that was not the case.“We all set out to build and direct a career for ourselves, and I think the career shapes itself, sometimes in spite of our best efforts,” he said. “We come to acknowledge the gifts inherent in that, as well as the drawbacks.”This spring he was approached by Sprint, which asked if he would like to try its service. It was understood that a role in an ad campaign was in the works. Mr. Marcarelli tried the service and, as he says in the commercial, liked it enough to switch from Verizon (and to receive what is, no doubt, a lucrative contract). He would not discuss financial details but joked, “This is not my volunteer job.”He expressed gratitude that Sprint was letting him play himself, describing a “pretty amazing conversation” that he had with some Sprint employees after having already switched his carrier.Advertisement“I happened to mention to them that my husband has always been with Sprint,” he said. “And I asked them: ‘Incidentally, do you have any discomfort about the fact that I’m married to a dude? Is that going to be an issue? If it is, that’s kind of a deal-breaker for me.’“And they were actually surprised that I even asked that. They said, ‘We love everything about you.’ And this was in a business meeting!”“I’ve been speaking as myself with my name,” he added. “And there’s no way that I would take a job if I in any way, shape or form was being asked to tell a half-truth, lie or closet myself.”The Sprint campaign has helped prompt new analyses of its business. In a recent head-to-head comparison between Sprint and Verizon, a headline at the Motley Fool stock advising website asked, “Sprint stole Verizon’s spokesperson. Can it steal its investors?” The article concluded that Verizon remained a better investment option.Mr. Tovar acknowledged, “We have a long way to go in terms of transforming Sprint.”“But we’re a far better company today than we were two years ago across any metric that you can point to,” he said. He sent along some statistics, including the company’s consistent gains in postpaid phone subscribers, and last year’s record decrease in churn, a metric that shows customers departing for other carriers.Mr. Tovar said that while there were some instances in which transparency had backfired for Sprint, he was happy to remain as open as possible.“If everybody just tells their story and tells the truth, well, then you let the chips fall where they may,” he said. “If that’s the case, we feel really good about our company.”A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: On Sprint, Ex-Verizon Actor Says, You Can Hear Him Just Fine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »