AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Stephen FishbeinCongress has never passed a law defining the crime of insider trading. This legislative vacuum has left the courts to make up the rules as they see fit.Last week, the Supreme Court heard argument in United States v. Salman, the most important insider trading case to reach the court in decades. The justices’ frustration was evident as they struggled to develop a definition of the crime that would outlaw obvious cheating, while at the same time protect the legitimate exchange of corporate information that enhances the efficiency of the securities markets.By all means, Congress should pass an insider trading statute. But as long as our elected representatives shirk their responsibility in this area, the Supreme Court should adopt a common-sense approach that market participants can understand and juries can apply. A sensible rule would be to distinguish tips to close friends and family — which are almost always made for personal reasons and with no plausible business purpose — from disclosures to work colleagues, social acquaintances and others. Outside the circle of close friends and family, motives are more ambiguous, and the government should be held to a higher standard to establish a crime.The courts have long said that trading on inside information is a crime only when an insider exploits confidential company information for personal gain. If an insider discloses information by mistake — say, by speaking loudly on a mobile phone in public — trading on the information is permitted. Nor is it illegal to trade on information that an insider furnishes out of a desire to benefit the company, for example, an executive’s effort to promote favorable analyst coverage by giving out confidential details of upcoming financial results. Although that kind of selective disclosure may result in civil liability under the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Regulation FD, it is not a crime. A criminal prosecution is permitted only when the insider personally benefits from the disclosure and is deemed to have defrauded the insider’s employer by using for personal advantage information that was intended only to serve corporate purposes.There is little dispute among courts and scholars that an insider benefits personally when giving a tip in exchange for money or other tangible value. A personal benefit can also be intangible. Few would disagree that an insider who tips in exchange for an appointment to an important charitable board receives a personal benefit in the form of enhanced reputation or the gratification of accomplishing a deeply desired personal goal.The harder question is whether an insider who gives valuable information for free benefits personally from the mere act of giving. The Supreme Court touched on this issue more than 30 years ago when it mentioned tips to a “trading relative or friend” among a handful of illustrations of illegal insider trading.The ensuing years have brought little clarity to the issue, however, as was apparent at last week’s argument in the Salman case. In that case, an investment banker gave inside information to his brother. On appeal, the defendant argued that because the banker had received nothing tangible in exchange, it was legal to trade. The Supreme Court was understandably skeptical of that argument – making a gift to your brother is like helping yourself, observed Justice Stephen G. Breyer. But the justices were equally unsatisfied with the government’s view that an insider always benefited when passing inside information knowing that the recipient will trade on it.The way forward is to carve out a subset of relationships — close friends and family — for which a benefit to the tipper is presumed, but to require more exacting proof when the disclosure is to others. It is fair to presume that someone who gives valuable inside information to a relative or close friend intends the disclosure as a personal gesture that gratifies both giver and recipient alike. Prosecutors should not have to identify and prove the precise personal advantage that a corporate executive receives by tipping a brother, a lover or a best friend. The benefit to the giver is inherent in the closeness of the relationship and does not need to be independently established. And, because many insider trading cases involve tips to close friends and family, this streamlined approach would apply to a large number of the most egregious cases.On the other hand, disclosures made to more limited relations — professional contacts, social acquaintances or even strangers — may have a host of different motivations, some personal and some not. When a finance executive tells an analyst that the coming quarter will be disappointing, the tip may be given with the expectation of some personal favor (illegal to trade) or because the executive thinks the company will be better off if the bad news leaks and there is no big surprise on earnings day (legal to trade).Given the ambiguities, the prosecution should have to prove a quid pro quo involving something consequential and objectively valuable. This is not to say that the personal benefit requires money to change hands. Intangibles count, but the prosecution should have to identify and prove the personal benefit in each case when the recipient is not a close friend or relative. Put another way, the mere act of giving a gift should not be considered a benefit to the giver outside the context of close personal relationships.A successful definition of insider trading should set down a line bright enough that juries will be able to apply it consistently and market participants will know when they are crossing it. Knowing who is a relative is straightforward enough. But what does it mean to be a “close” friend?Definitional questions like these can prove thorny in practice. In the Salman case, the justices were unconvinced that juries could distinguish between disclosures for “personal” as opposed to “corporate” purposes, especially because many tips involve multiple, overlapping purposes. One advantage of the “relative” or “close friend” test, though, is that these are common-sense concepts with which most people are quite familiar. Haven’t we all been asked at some point if someone was a close friend? And weren’t we able to answer the question without resorting to legal treatises?Court decisions are an unsatisfactory way to define insider trading. But if the courts must decide, then the goal should be a clear rule that prohibits personal enrichment, while avoiding restrictions that will chill the free flow of information. Tips to close friends and relatives are invariably personal in nature and should be presumed to benefit the giver. When disclosures go beyond that group, the government should bear the burden of proving an objective and consequential quid pro quo to ensure that legitimate communications are protected.Stephen Fishbein is a lawyer in New York who specializes in insider trading matters.Advertisement