
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
OCT. 14, 2016
This interview with Jeff Goodby, co-chairman and partner of the advertising agency Goodby Silverstein & Partners, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up near Providence, R.I. My mom is an Italian immigrant and a painter, and my dad is a Wharton graduate who worked in insurance. My neighborhood was very formative for me because I had to hang around with kids who were really different from me — kids who beat you up and kids who were smart and made me read books that I would have never read.It taught me to accept people, not judge them too much, and be patient with them. That’s been very valuable as a creative person, especially later in life.In what way?In my job, I have to be very accepting of differences in people because I have a lot of artists and writers and others who are odd characters. If you’re not tolerant of that oddness, you’re trying to form something into your idea of what things should be like. That’s a mistake.AdvertisementI’m very good at accepting those people on their own terms, bending them subtly to do things that I think are useful. Sometimes I succeed, and sometimes I fail. But I do think my childhood was helpful for that.Can you talk more about how you learned the art of nudging people?When you get the job as creative director, your first inclination is to agree with everything people present to you, because you want them to like you. But then when it doesn’t come out well, then you actually have to think, inform the discussion and get the person to come back again with something slightly different and feel good about that. And they may have to change it again.I try to see the work through the eyes of the people who did it because I don’t want to demoralize them. Why are they excited about their approach? Then I judge it from the best part of it. Sometimes there isn’t a lot there, and so I’ll say, “You guys are doing a good job of thinking about it because this problem is not easy.” So I give them some credit for the time that they’ve put in and for the perspective that they’ve got on it.Sometimes I also have an idea for fixing the problem. Sometimes it’s a lame idea, and they walk out of the meeting thinking, “I can beat that.” But that’s fine. I give them a lot of rope to do what they think is right.How have your parents influenced your leadership style?I see a lot of my dad’s influence. When I would go to work with my dad, he would be friendly and know everybody in the office. He was one of those guys who knew the names of the security guards’ kids. I’ve tried to be that way in life as much as I can.AdvertisementIt’s definitely worked in a business context with clients. I try not to get caught up in the politics and hierarchies on their side of the table. I try to treat everybody the same. We’ve got the same problem to solve.My mom taught me how to draw. That sounds like no big deal, but it’s been very useful for getting my ideas across to creative people and clients.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She has a very loving, accepting side to her, too, but compared with my dad she has stronger opinions about things.What were some other leadership lessons early on for you?In many ways, my partner, Rich Silverstein, and I have had to unlearn how to become managers, because there are a lot of things that you think you know, and you need to put them aside and relearn them in new ways.There are so many different styles that work for people, and you need to unlearn everything so you’re not trying to be like someone else. You have to learn how to be yourself and find your own way, and that’s a hard thing to do. It’s the same for creative work, too. You need to do away with your preconceptions about how something’s going to get solved and try to come up with your own way.Over the years, you’ve no doubt visited the offices of countless clients. What do you look for in sizing up their corporate culture?Even if they’re buttoned up, I look for places where people can make fun of upper management to their faces in respectful ways, and the upper management likes it. That’s a really good sign. In a lot of places, the people are not allowed to do that. They’re not allowed to humor up. They have to humor down. I think humoring up is a good thing.How do you hire?For the most part, I hire people on the basis of one piece of work they’ve done that’s really good. You have to see some meshing between the possibilities you see in that work and the possibilities you see in their personality.When I interview people, I look at their work ahead of time, but I don’t talk about their work. I try to find out who they are as people in the world. Do they do anything besides advertising? Do they have a life? Do they read? Do they have children?I’m listening for depth in terms of understanding of culture. Do they go to the movies and read books, or are they just reading trades and magazines and staying inside the echo chamber of advertising? Because the way you make yourself better is to get outside that echo chamber. I often ask people, “What do you find in the world to be really brilliant that’s not advertising?”AdvertisementWhat career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I always tell people not to narrow their interests too quickly in life. It’s good to have focus and to be good at something, but it’s important to take in a lot more than that in life. So don’t narrow too quickly. You’ll have more fun later, and you’ll be more valuable to the world. You’ll have perspective.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Work for Bosses Who Can Take a Joke.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »