By CHAD BRAYNOV. 2, 2015
LONDON — Visa said on Monday that it had reached an agreement to pay as much as 21.2 billion euros, or about $23.3 billion, to acquire its former unit Visa Europe Ltd.The deal, which had been widely expected, would expand the international reach of Visa, the world’s biggest payment network, and help it compete with MasterCard, whose European operations have already been integrated. The sale would also add to the coffers of several European banks.The combined company would have annual revenue of $15.5 billion and about 2.9 billion credit and debit cards issued by Visa member banks, the company said. About 42 percent of the payments it processes would come from North America, and about 28 percent from Europe.The two companies separated in 2007, shortly before Visa’s $18 billion initial public offering.Under the terms of the deal, Visa would pay €16.5 billion upfront in cash and convertible shares, and as much as an additional €4.7 billion on the fourth anniversary of the closing of the transaction.Advertisement“We are very excited about unifying Visa into a single global company with unmatched scale, technology and services,” Charles W. Scharf, the chief executive officer of Visa, said in a news release.Advertisement“This transaction is beneficial for financial institutions, acquirers, merchants, cardholders and other partners, as well as for our employees and shareholders,” he added.Visa Europe is owned and operated by an association of banks and other payment service providers in Europe. At the end of its 2015 fiscal year, the company’s member banks had issued more than 500 million Visa cards in Europe. It said it processes more than 18 billion transactions a year, worth more than €1.5 trillion.Under the terms of the deal, Visa Europe’s owners would receive €11.5 billion in cash, plus convertible shares worth €5 billion in an upfront payment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The additional payment of up to €4.7 billion would be based on the performance of the business.Several European lenders on Monday gave investors a preview of what they expected from the sale.The British bank Barclays said it expected to post a profit after tax of about 400 million pounds, or about $617 million, on the sale of Visa Europe. The Lloyds Banking Group, another British lender, said it anticipated a pretax gain of about £300 million. And the Royal Bank of Scotland said it expected an initial pretax gain of about £200 million.The deal has been approved by both the Visa and Visa Europe boards. The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in Visa’s third quarter next year.“Integrating into one global business will ensure we have the financial strength and operational scale necessary to accelerate the next generation of payments throughout Europe,” Nicolas Huss, the Visa Europe chief executive, said in the news release on Monday.News that the two companies were in early discussions first emerged in May, with the companies later confirming the talks. In July, Visa said there was “compelling logic” to combine the businesses, and that it hoped to conclude discussions by the end of October.The announcement came as Visa, based in Foster City, Calif., reported that its fiscal fourth-quarter profit rose 44 percent to $1.51 billion, from $1.07 billion in the same period a year earlier.AdvertisementRevenue increased 11 percent to $3.57 billion in the period, from $3.23 billion in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2014.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: Credit Card Dealings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.