AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerAfter the Treasury Department announced new rules in April restricting companies from using certain tax-reduction strategies, the protests rang out loudly. Business lobbying groups, executives, tax experts and lawmakers argued that they went too far.The rules were aimed at limiting the benefits of inversions, transactions that have grown popular in recent years, in which an American company buys a foreign one and moves its headquarters abroad to lower its tax bill.On Thursday, the Treasury announced exemptions and amendments to the rules after hearing concerns from the business community. “Coupled with Treasury’s previous actions to address corporate inversions, today’s final regulations balance the operational needs of companies while preventing the erosion of our U.S. corporate tax base,” the Treasury Department said in a statement.Part of the Treasury’s goal was to clamp down on a tax-saving strategy called earnings stripping, where the American subsidiary of an inverted company borrows money from its foreign parent and uses the interest payments on the loans to take a tax deduction. The rules issued in April required corporations to better classify these loans as stock-based instead of debt.But many multinationals with no history of inversions were affected by the rules as well. The regulations may impose “unnecessary compliance costs” and “burdens to businesses,” said the Business Roundtable, an association of chief executives of American companies, in a comment letter in July. One month later, the Chamber of Commerce filed a lawsuit, seeking to block such rules.The Treasury’s rules in April also took aim at the $152 billion deal between Pfizer and Allergan. The Treasury prohibited what it called “serial inverters”: companies that have completed three or more deals with American companies in a short period. That broke up the pharmaceutical merger, as Allergan was the product of multiple levels of inversions.Thursday’s changes provided exemptions for cash pools and short-term loans, which multinationals use to move cash among subsidiaries across the world.It also said that the regulations made special exceptions of types of entities, foreign subsidiaries of American corporations. The amendments also made exceptions for ordinary business transactions, such as purchasing stock as part of compensation plans.The Treasury also said it would ease the documentation rules by moving the deadline to whenever the company files its tax return. The effective date for these documentation rules was extended by a year to Jan. 1, 2018.The Chamber of Commerce reiterated Thursday that it had “significant concerns” about these rules when they were proposed in April.“We continue to believe punitive, one-off changes to the tax law do nothing to address the root of the purported ‘inversion problem’: our antiquated and anticompetitive tax code,” said Caroline L. Harris, chief tax policy counsel for the Chamber of Commerce.Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew agreed that business tax reform was needed, and said in a statement that he was “hopeful” that Congress would take action in the next administration.“The real solution is for Congress to enact comprehensive business tax reform with specific anti-inversion and earnings stripping provisions,” he said.Advertisement