AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — As Snapchat’s parent company prepares to go public, it has turned to some familiar faces to help shepherd it through the process.In picking Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs as the lead banks for an initial public offering of stock, the social media company Snap Inc. has hired two of the banks that worked on the $25 billion stock market debut of the Chinese company the Alibaba Group, the biggest I.P.O. on record.They will be working hand in hand with Imran Khan, who was Credit Suisse’s top internet investment banker and is now the chief strategy officer of Snap.Officially, six banks led Alibaba’s initial offering. But Credit Suisse and Morgan Stanley did much of the work on the deal’s prospectus and the early preparation for the offering and ended up taking home the biggest percentages of fees paid to the six lead underwriters.That is not to say that other companies like Goldman or JPMorgan Chase played only small roles in the Alibaba offering. But teams from Credit Suisse, co-led by Mr. Khan, and Morgan Stanley worked for Alibaba well before it became an e-commerce colossus with enormous valuations in the private markets.(Several of the other banks that worked on Alibaba’s market debut are now working on Snap’s, according to a person briefed on the matter. They include Credit Suisse, JPMorgan and Deutsche Bank. Other companies are likely to be added as the social network moves down the I.P.O. path.)Morgan Stanley’s selection as the overall lead bank for Snap’s initial offering — giving it the title “lead-left” underwriter because of where its name would appear on an offering’s prospectus — was perhaps telegraphed when Snap hired it to put together a line of credit last month. Such a move is often regarded as a precursor to a public offering, with banks often clamoring to lead those debt offerings to gain a spot on the more prominent initial public offering.There are other reasons to turn to Morgan Stanley. The firm was the top underwriter on initial public offerings worldwide for the first nine months of the year, according to Thomson Reuters.Goldman usually duels Morgan Stanley to win the prestige of leading tech I.P.O.s in the United States. According to Thomson Reuters, Goldman tops that list so far this year, with JP Morgan Chase second and Morgan Stanley third.Advertisement