
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

OCT. 13, 2016
Sumner Redstone and his daughter, Shari, want to crunch their two media companies back into a $40 billion combo.The putative helmsman for the reunited CBS-Viacom is the CBS chief executive, Leslie Moonves. His ability to turn around the ailing Viacom business may hinge on whether he can prevent the controlling shareholders from meddling.Mr. Moonves is well placed to drive a hard bargain with the Redstones, who control both companies with voting stock held through their National Amusements vehicle. On his watch, the CBS stock price has doubled since Mr. Redstone decided to split his empire a decade ago. Viacom was supposed to be the high-growth hope, but Mr. Moonves proved shrewder than Philippe Dauman, who was recently ousted as chief of Viacom.The CBS boss has been spared much interference from the Redstones to date. But they have taken a more hands-on interest at Viacom, which suffered a litany of intrusions, like sudden bylaw changes that make the sale of the Paramount movie studio more difficult and forcing executives at the company’s MTV channel to broadcast a reality-TV show starring attractive if not so talented women who had caught Mr. Redstone’s eye.That helps explain why Mr. Moonves is looking for assurances about his operational autonomy, according to Reuters. His list of tasks is daunting enough without the Redstones looking over his shoulder. First, he needs to sell a merger to the holders of the roughly 90 percent of shares in both companies not owned by the Redstones. He needs their support even though most of them are not entitled to vote on any planned deal. Then, he has to tackle Viacom’s problems in a shifting media landscape.Mr. Moonves and his lawyer — Martin Lipton, a famed defender of executives against shareholder demands — could start by asking for first dibs should the Redstones ever sell their voting shares. There is precedent for such agreements: Liberty Media’s chairman, John C. Malone, struck a similar deal with the chief executive of Discovery Communications, David Zaslav.He might also ask the Redstones to give him control over their votes in certain situations, like mergers and acquisitions, so that he could pursue other targets. There may be further options to give Mr. Moonves confidence that he will be unequivocally in charge. Like all things involving the Redstones, though, working it out will not be straightforward.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »