AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressUnited States markets closed lower on Thursday, following global markets downward after a steep drop in China’s exports. Shares of mining and chemicals companies and banks took some of the largest losses. Weakness in China, the world’s second-largest economy, could slow growth in the United States, its largest.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index ended the day 0.3 percent lower. The Nasdaq composite index lost 0.5 percent.CHINA WORRIES China’s exports fell 10 percent in September compared with a year ago. That was a much bigger drop than in August and also a larger decline than analysts had expected. China has been crucial to global economic growth for a quarter-century. Since the summer of 2015, stocks have periodically been agitated by worries that China’s economy was weakening.BONDS Bond prices rose sharply and yields turned lower. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note slid to 1.73 percent from 1.77 percent. The drop hurts banks, as rising bond prices are a sign that investors think interest rates will stay low and banks will not be able to make as much money from lending. Bank of America stock fell 1.3 percent, and Citigroup stock declined 0.5 percent.FALLOUT Shares of mining companies and other suppliers of basic materials fell. Many of those companies rely heavily on exports to China. Shares of the copper and gold producer Freeport-McMoRan gave up 4.1 percent. Shares of the fertilizer maker Mosaic shed 2.4 percent, while shares of the chemicals maker DuPont lost 0.9 percent. International Paper stock sank 1.3 percent.TECH TROUBLE Shares of technology companies that rely heavily on sales to China fell. Apple stock broke a seven-day winning streak and fell 0.3 percent. Microsoft stock lost 0.3 percent and shares of the chip maker Nvidia slid 1.6 percent.TAKEOFF Airline stocks moved higher after a shaky start. Delta reported a strong profit partly because of cheap jet fuel, and it said it planned to cut capacity to combat lower airfares and rising salaries. Delta shares rose 1.9 percent. BEAUTY PRODUCTS Shares of the beauty products retailer Ulta Salon rose 11.4 percent after the company raised its guidance and gave strong estimates for the third quarter.LONG HAUL Shares of the railroad operator CSX climbed after the company reported earnings that were better than expected, even though coal volumes kept falling. The stock rose 3.1 percent.EBAY SALE Shares of MercadoLibre, which runs an online marketplace and payments system in Latin America, slumped after the company said eBay would sell most of its stake. EBay owns about 8.1 million shares of MercadoLibre and will sell 5.5 million. MercadoLibre stock lost 8.1 percent.EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX fell 1 percent and in France, the CAC 40 lost 1.1 percent. The FTSE 100 was down 0.7 percent in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 ended down 0.4 percent in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng closed down 1.6 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.1 percent in China. The Kospi lost 0.9 percent in South Korea. Stocks in Australia, Taiwan and Southeast Asia also declined. The market in Thailand sank 2.4 percent upon the news that its longtime king, Bhumibol Adulyadej, had died. The king had reigned for 70 years, making him the longest-serving head of state in the world.OIL Benchmark United States crude oil rebounded, gaining 16 cents, to $50.34 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, the international standard, rose 13 cents, to $51.94 a barrel in London. CURRENCIES The dollar fell to 103.51 yen from 104.25 yen. The euro rose to $1.1045 from $1.1011.Advertisement