AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael ForsytheHONG KONG — He has been called China’s Carl Icahn. But the billionaire owner of one of the country’s most successful investment firms is now the latest suspect in a broadening crackdown on corruption in the financial industry.The fund manager, Xu Xiang, nicknamed Big Xu, was apprehended in dramatic Hollywood fashion, more worthy of a spy movie than of a financier’s arrest. As the police closed in, the highway patrol sealed off the 22-mile Hangzhou Bay Bridge for more than 30 minutes and eventually apprehended Mr. Xu near the exit late Sunday morning, according to state media.The government offered scant details on the arrest. “Xu Xiang and others are suspected of insider trading and other offenses and are in criminal detention,” said a brief statement on the Xinhua News Agency, the government’s official media outlet.The Chinese government has been extending its anticorruption investigation, moving more aggressively into the financial industry. Wang Qishan, the Communist Party official in charge of the crackdown on graft, announced last month that his Central Commission for Discipline Inspection would begin inquiries into financial companies.The corruption crackdown has been a cornerstone of the tenure of President Xi Jinping. Since Mr. Xi rose to power in 2013, the Chinese government has arrested more than 100,000 officials, executives and others in a far-flung investigation that has touched many big industries including oil companies, car manufacturers and electric utilities.Scrutiny of the financial companies has been amplified by the stock market turmoil in recent months. After riding a boom for over a year, the industry is now at the center of the storm as Beijing looks into what went wrong.An official at the main stock market overseer confessed in late August to insider trading, forgery and accepting bribes. An assistant chairman at the agency, the China Securities Regulatory Commission, is under investigation.Authorities are also looking into a number of executives at Citic Securities, the brokerage arm of the biggest state-owned financial conglomerate, including its president, Cheng Boming. The investigation centers on insider trading.In recent years, Mr. Xu, the fund manager who was arrested on Sunday, was at the top of the financial game.His funds at Zexi Investment, based in Shanghai, outperformed almost every other investment vehicle in China. His record of taking minority stakes in companies and pushing for shareholder rights, like higher dividends, earned him comparisons with Mr. Icahn in China’s financial press. Mr. Xu and his relatives have a combined fortune of $2.2 billion, according to the Shanghai-based Hurun Report, which tracks the wealth of China’s richest people.As the rest of the market stumbled this year, Mr. Xu seemed to defy the slump.Although the Shanghai composite index has risen less than 3 percent so far this year, the Zexi No. 1 Fund, which works with a subsidiary of the state-owned conglomerate China Resources, gained 323 percent through Friday; it has risen 3,270 percent since its inception in 2010. The Zexi No. 3 Fund has gained 382 percent this year and 3,945 percent since 2010, according to figures on the company’s website, which were obtained before it was taken down late Monday morning.The firm’s performance was the subject of intense market speculation in September, when a post on social media accused the company of manipulation. It focused on an unprofitable clothing retailer that reached a market high this summer despite the market volatility.The online post suggested Zexi had told Citic Securities, which had been tasked with helping to prop up the markets, to buy shares of the retailer. At the time, Zexi said the accusations were “fabrications from nowhere and malicious attacks.”The statement about the arrest on Sunday made no connection to the market speculation. Nor did it indicate there was any substance to the chatter.Joanna Jiang, a public relations representative for Citic Securities, said in an email that the company “does not comment on market rumors.” Calls to Zexi Investment went unanswered. The police headquarters in Zhejiang Province, where the arrest took place, did not answer phone calls.With a dearth of information from the government, the market mayhem — and the crackdown that has followed — has created a ripe environment for rumor.On Monday, the website of another official media outlet, China National Radio, published an article from Xinhua stating that an associate of Mr. Xu had been shot and killed by the police while trying to escape. The report was quickly retracted with no explanation and was not available on Xinhua’s website.Later in the day, Xinhua reported on one of its social media accounts that its name and that of one of its reporters were used falsely to spread a “rumor” that the police had killed Mr. Xu’s associate. Xinhua reported the incident to the police. A picture purportedly of Mr. Xu’s arrest, with him in handcuffs and wearing what looked like a white lab coat, was posted on the website of Sina.com, one of the most popular Internet portals in China.Separately, the police in Shanghai arrested three people in relation to an investigation into a high-frequency trading firm. The company is suspected of manipulating futures trades to make a profit of more than 2 billion renminbi, or $316 million, according to a Xinhua report.The company, Yishidun International Trading, is owned by two Hong Kong companies in turn owned by two Russian nationals, Anton Murashov and Georgy Zarya, according to Chinese and Hong Kong corporate records. Mr. Murashov did not immediately reply to an email sent to him through his LinkedIn account. A person answering the phone at Yishidun’s Shanghai office declined to comment.Kiki Zhao contributed research from Beijing.Advertisement