AdvertisementSupported byBy Nathaniel PopperAfter years of behind-the-scenes planning, Goldman Sachs is opening its new online lending platform, Marcus, on Thursday.Borrowers will be able to visit Marcus.com and apply for unsecured loans of up to $30,000 to refinance their credit card debt or pay for a household project.The new site takes an unusually casual tone for Goldman as it tries to lure in customers.“Debt happens — and it can happen to anyone. We created Marcus to help you better manage it,” the site says.“No jargon. No tricks. Just straight talk,” it promises.Initially, applications will be limited to people who get a code from Goldman in the mail. Goldman said this week that it would send the code to millions of people. The company is focusing on customers with a credit score above 660, so-called prime credit.Marcus is a significant departure for Goldman, which has traditionally avoided consumer-oriented banking, focusing instead on government and corporate clients. That has earned it a reputation as the most elite firm on Wall Street.Since the financial crisis, though, Goldman has viewed consumer banking as a new opportunity that can help the firm overcome some of the regulatory and reputational difficulties it has faced in recent years.Marcus is the centerpiece of Goldman’s push into consumer banking, and the firm has put significant resources into designing and planning the site and the products it will offer. The venture is named for the man who founded Goldman Sachs in the 19th century, Marcus Goldman.Stephen M. Scherr, the chief executive of Goldman’s bank subsidiary, has said that the firm will look to expand into other traditional banking businesses based on the lessons learned from Marcus. Mr. Scherr helped hire Harit Talwar, a former executive at Discover, who has led the Marcus project.Marcus will bring Goldman into direct competition with the new crop of online lenders like Lending Club and Prosper, which have sprung up to challenge traditional banks by offering unsecured loans.The new online lenders, though, have struggled in the last year because they are not banks and have to rely on funding from investors, who can withdraw their money if doubts arise. That is what happened this year when the Lending Club’s chief executive, Renaud Laplanche, resigned after irregularities in the firm’s practices were discovered. The turmoil that ensued forced many online lenders to significantly curtail their new lending.Goldman is hoping it will benefit from its status as a regulated bank, which gives it access to cheap and reliable cash from depositors.In April, Goldman began offering traditional retail savings accounts through GS Bank, and it has already drawn billions of dollars in deposits.Goldman is hoping that it will be able to best traditional banks because it does not have expensive physical branches and can instead do business with its customers through the internet.Industry analysts have wondered whether Goldman will be able to learn quickly how to serve ordinary retail customers, something it has never done before.When Goldman started GS Bank this year, it was confronted with complaints that it could not handle all the prospective applicants.At the time, customer relations were addressed at a call center in Iowa, which Goldman acquired along with the savings account business it bought from GE Capital.Customer relations for Marcus will be handled by a Goldman service center in Salt Lake City. Goldman employees will also be handling the servicing of the loans, dealing with customers who fall behind on payments.The number of customers trying out Marcus will be limited by Goldman’s decision to allow applications solely from invited customers.Goldman says it developed the product in response to focus groups it conducted with potential clients.The firm is allowing customers to set their own monthly payment date and to pay off the loans over two to six years. Interest rates on the loans will be fixed over the term of the loans, and will range from 6 to 23 percent.“Marcus offers an option for consumers who are searching for a simpler alternative to credit card borrowing, where rates can change and multiple fees can be charged,” Mr. Talwar said in a statement.Advertisement