By SEI CHONGOCT. 13, 2016
The fake accounts scandal that has plagued Wells Fargo has now taken down its chief executive.The abrupt resignation of its chief, John G. Stumpf, on Wednesday is a startling end for a man who started out as a repo man and went on to oversee one of the largest banks in the United States.Timothy J. Sloan, the bank’s chief operating officer and president, will replace Mr. Stumpf.In an interview, Mr. Sloan — who had known for several days that Mr. Stumpf was preparing to step down — said Mr. Stumpf told him of his decision to retire after concluding that he would most likely continue to be the focus of much of the criticism being leveled at the bank.“It was an incredibly selfless decision,” Mr. Sloan said.Some of Mr. Stumpf’s biggest critics in Congress, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representative Maxine Waters (both Democrats), approved of Mr. Stumpf’s resignation but called for more action.“As I said at the hearing last month, Mr. Stumpf should resign, return every nickel he made while this scam was going on, and face an investigation by the Justice Department and S.E.C.,” Ms. Warren said in a statement. “So far, he’s one for three.”AdvertisementJames B. Stewart says in the Common Sense column that it was only right that Mr. Stumpf resign, given “the buck should stop with the chief executive.”AdvertisementThe Financial Times reports that Mr. Stumpf’s departure may have lessons for other banks, including:• Clawbacks are not enough. Wells Fargo’s decision to take back $41 million from Mr. Stumpf’s compensation did little to quell the anger over the scandal.• Dual roles are in question: Having a chief executive also hold the chairman role, as Mr. Stumpf did, may cast doubt on a bank’s corporate governance. Notably, Mr. Sloan will not have a dual role as chief executive and chairman.Investors appeared to approve of Mr. Stump’s departure, with Wells Fargo’s stock rising 2 percent in after-hours trade.Now, all eyes turn to Mr. Sloan, who comes with his own set of baggage, as Antony Currie of Breakingviews notes. Mr. Sloan will preside over the bank’s earnings call on Friday.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to Richard Beales of Breakingviews, however, Wells Fargo will need more than a change of leadership to fix its problems — it needs a new direction.Snap (as Snapchat recently renamed itself) has taken a big step toward becoming a public company by hiring Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs as the lead banks on a potential initial public offering, people briefed on the matter said.If Snap, a messaging services company, decides to go public, it could begin to sell stock as soon as the first quarter of next year, these people said.AdvertisementSnap has also hired JPMorgan Chase, Deutsche Bank, Allen & Company, Barclays and Credit Suisse to help manage a stock sale, one of the people briefed on the matter added. Bloomberg earlier reported the selection of bankers.The company was most recently valued at $19 billion by private investors, but The Wall Street Journal reported last week that Snap was aiming for a valuation of $25 billion in an offering.It sounds like a lofty valuation for a company that has not yet made a profit, but last week Bloomberg demonstrated in five charts why Snap could be worth that much.Still, analysts said the company must still demonstrate a path to profitability if it wants a successful offering.“Investors aren’t willing to buy growth at all costs,” Kathleen Smith, a co-founder of Renaissance Capital, said.• Jacob J. Lew, Treasury secretary, speaks at a Center for American Progress forum in Washington on the small-business economy.• Patrick T. Harker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, speaks about the economic outlook before the World Affairs Council in Philadelphia.• Neel Kashkari, president of the Minneapolis Fed, holds a town hall-style meeting at the University of Montana in Missoula.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.