
Workspace As told to                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

OCT. 15, 2016
‘Mad Men’ and MoMAWe have the first four floors in a building at the corner of 53rd and 54th on Sixth Avenue in Manhattan. The first floor is our store. Our showroom is on the second floor, and our offices are on the other two. The area has a “Mad Men,” ’60s aesthetic. We’re around the corner from the Museum of Modern Art. Knoll has 40 or 50 pieces in the permanent collection there, so it has a lot of meaning for us related to the development of modernism.A design denWe help design, develop and market furniture by noted designers. My office features a number of current and archived pieces, and a couple that never went farther than a prototype. I’ve collaborated with many of the designers to bring their ideas to market, so I feel a personal connection with them. I love living with these items every day.1. Crimson curtainsThe red curtains, which are by Dorothy Cosonas, our design director, were contentious when we renovated this space. Our landlord felt they looked like construction netting and would send a negative message about the building, so we put film over the windows to darken the look. When we close the curtains at night, the upper three floors ooze a beautiful red color. People tell us, “Hey, I walked by your building.” They see the red and think we own it.2. Gather ’roundRobert Venturi designed the round meeting table, which has a camouflage pattern in red, pink and blue. It’s got cigarette burns and matte knife cuts, so it’s aged, but it has that great patina and history. In college, I wrote my thesis about Venturi, and I got to meet him when he started designing for Knoll. In my first job here I worked with Frank Gehry, who designed the blond maple Hat Trick chairs around the table.Advertisement3. Functional sculptureThe dynamic room divider, called an 04 Counter, was designed by Rem Koolhaas and his firm OMA. It can be twisted around and reconfigured any way a person wants. When my kids visit, they climb on it, and when I host buffet lunches in my office, we’ll place food on it. It’s also a great conversation piece.4. Honoring DadA favorite photo shows my father, Marshall Cogan, and his partner Stephen Swid when they bought Knoll in 1977. The company changed hands a couple of times, and I became C.E.O. in 2001.Advertisement5. Joining the clubOn the low part of the wall unit is a green jade mere, a club that the Maori people have historically used to fight with in New Zealand. In 2001 we started a partnership with a company there and the first time I visited, some of the staff did a war dance and presented me with the club.At a moment’s noticeOccasionally I’ll leave an aluminum suitcase and black bag on the floor by the wall unit because I travel for a day or two on short notice.6. See-through tableThe acrylic coffee table by OMA can be reconfigured like the divider. It was never put into production so there are only two in the world. It was too ghastly expensive ever to try and sell.7. Up to scaleThe black sculpture is for the throne we produced for David Adjaye for the Metropolitan Opera’s “Prince Igor” production. It was a modern interpretation of African ceremonial design. This is a maquette — the scale model we made before making the full size.Team buildingOne of my favorite personal items is a photo of me and our design teams from Knoll and Holly Hunt furniture while we were in Marfa, Tex. I thought the trip would be inspirational for us. I’m head of the board of the Chinati Foundation, a modern art museum there, and we’re sitting on a huge foam sculpture in the museum, by John Chamberlain. It captures the sense of fun we try for at Knoll.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Meeting Place Where Noted Designers Share One Room.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »