AdvertisementSupported byBy Mary Williams WalshReach for your wallets. It is going to be expensive to pull America’s largest territory out of its death spiral, Puerto Rico’s outgoing governor warned the island’s new federal oversight board on Friday.Even if Puerto Rico’s 3.4 million residents keep tightening their belts, and even if the creditors who lent it $74 billion agree to less than full repayment, the island will still “need the assistance of the federal government to bring this economic and humanitarian crisis to an end,” said Gov. Alejandro García Padilla, addressing the panel that the Obama administration set up to handle the territory’s staggering debt.He urged the board’s seven members to join him “in one voice before Congress” to seek help.Twenty floors below the room in Lower Manhattan where the governor made his remarks, protesters chanted their opposition to colonialism — which is how they view the power that the panel holds to make decisions about Puerto Rico’s future.It was the first substantive meeting of the board, known in Spanish as the junta, the Spanish word for political group, that Congress created this year to direct Puerto Rico’s financial affairs. The group is similar to the control boards that have led other distressed American jurisdictions, like New York City in the mid-1970s. But because of heightened sensitivities about Puerto Rico’s colonial history, Congress gave Puerto Rico’s governor, and not the board, the authority to draft the 10-year fiscal plan that will become the basic road map for moving Puerto Rico out of its financial troubles.Most of Friday’s meeting was devoted to the governor’s delivery of his fiscal plan and questions from the board. Next, the board will review the plan and decide whether amendments are needed.Puerto Rico has stopped paying its bondholders and would be mired in creditors’ lawsuits by now if Congress had not proscribed most creditors from enforcing their claims for a few months. Lawsuits by creditors could resume as soon as February, which is one reason the governor urged the board to move quickly.“Puerto Rico needs a plan in place immediately,” he said.But the board members seemed inclined to proceed cautiously. Puerto Rico’s debt structure is dauntingly complex. And all board members are aware that their decisions could set a precedent: The arrangements they make for Puerto Rico could be sought in the future by severely troubled states such as Illinois, Pennsylvania or New Jersey. These states have some of the same problems as Puerto Rico — in particular, unfunded pension promises to retired public workers that are rising so fast that they are crowding out other essential government services and making it more expensive to borrow.Like Puerto Rico, America’s states are barred from seeking help under Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code, the chapter that distressed cities and other local governments can use. But the law that gave rise to the oversight board and the stay on lawsuits, known as Promesa, also gives Puerto Rico certain debt-restructuring powers that are normally available only in bankruptcy. Puerto Rico can use those powers only if a majority of the board members agree.During the meeting, Andrew G. Biggs, a board member who is a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, seemed to be trying to figure out where Puerto Rico’s cash had been moved to as the island’s troubles accelerated last spring. He asked how much money the government had parked in commercial banks and how far it had fallen behind on paying its vendors.Juan Zaragoza, Puerto Rico’s treasury secretary, gave a detailed description of how revenue arrives at the island’s treasury and what the government is doing to collect more taxes. He said there were about $1 billion worth of unpaid bills outstanding, and that the government had written about $350 million in checks but had not yet sent them — a practice that could make it look as though the bills had been paid, even though vendors have not received their money.That prompted another board member, Carlos M. García, the head of a private equity firm in the Boston area, to question the governor’s fundamental premise that Puerto Rico’s government lacked enough money to govern.“You’re currently at high tax collections, and you’re currently not paying debt service,” he said. “Why does the government not have enough money to pay vendors or provide essential services?”Mr. García was a president of the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico under a previous administration, which was led by a rival political party. He seemed skeptical in general of the governor’s description of the island’s problems and what had caused them.Mr. García Padilla did not waver. He said his fiscal plan called for Puerto Rico to improve its financial reporting, to merge branches of government to end duplication, to ease certain regulations and to court investors, especially those interested in financing infrastructure and energy projects.The governor also said that current efforts to collect more tax revenue and reduce government spending would continue, but he pleaded with the board not to “double down on austerity.”“You will soon realize that any reduction in spending implies intolerable effects in aggregate demand, and will further throw Puerto Rico into a death spiral that will directly affect creditors’ recoveries across the board,” Mr. García Padilla said.Without help from Washington, he warned, the government could end up with a total accumulated debt of $59 billion over the next 10 years.Federal assistance, Mr. García Padilla suggested, could take the form of improved Medicare and Medicaid programs, and tax measures that could help Puerto Rico become more competitive as an offshore manufacturing site for United States companies.Advertisement