
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

OCT. 14, 2016
JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup are hinting at broader woes for Wells Fargo. Wall Street helped the two diversified giant banks trounce third-quarter earnings expectations, while Wells Fargo just squeaked by. As Timothy J. Sloan, the new chief executive at Wells, contends with the sham accounts fiasco, he also will be tested by falling returns.The scandal cost Mr. Sloan’s predecessor, John G. Stumpf, his job this week, but it has yet to have any discernible effect on the business. Only $5 million had to be set aside to compensate customers, and the $185 million in fines is negligible. Though Wells Fargo’s profit fell 2.6 percent from a year ago, the bank has generated $5.6 billion in net income in the three months ending Sept. 30, down from $5.8 billion in the third quarter of 2015.The fallout is far from over, however. Mr. Sloan told investors on Friday that credit card applications fell 20 percent and new bank account openings 25 percent in September compared with the same month last year. Mortgage referrals from bankers also dropped about a quarter from August.
            From sham accounts to releasing client data, Wells Fargo has drawn negative attention several times over the past year.        Wells Fargo was already hurting. It warned shareholders in May that results were under pressure from industrywide trends including low interest rates, increasing competition among lenders, the need to hold more cash and low-yielding assets, and rising loan losses.AdvertisementIt slashed its return on equity target to between 11 percent and 14 percent. Last quarter’s annualized 11.6 percent, while among the best in the business, was the bank’s fifth consecutive decline.AdvertisementBy contrast, JPMorgan produced a 10 percent return last quarter, just enough to cover its cost of capital. Net income in retail fell as expenses and provision for credit losses both increased.JPMorgan also reported a record third quarter in investment banking and trading. Revenue from merger advice and new securities sales jumped 15 percent, while fixed income and currencies sprinted ahead 48 percent. Citi’s investment bank performed similarly well, with a 35 percent increase in bond trading helping to lift the unit’s bottom line by one-fifth.This means some Wall Street players are at least partly offsetting problems in some places elsewhere, but Wells Fargo lacks that buffer. And only about four out of 10 clients at its broader wholesale banking unit have used its investment banking products in the last year. For Mr. Sloan, who spent most of his career at Wells Fargo’s commercial and investment bank, such high-level cross-selling might start to look appealing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »