
Book Entry By                     
JONATHAN A. KNEE

OCT. 14, 2016
For 15 years, the business school cases written by Bharat N. Anand, a popular Harvard Business School strategy professor, have played a central role in framing students’ understanding of the media industry. Like all great business school cases, they tell an interesting story and provide the critical facts but leave it to the interactive classroom experience to draw out the relevant lessons.Dr. Anand has taken his insights from a generation of teaching these cases, along with his related research and recent experience building a new media business within the Harvard Business School, to provide a framework for thinking about effective strategy more broadly in the face of digital disruption.Given how many media businesses have been turned into roadkill on the digital superhighway, “The Content Trap: A Strategist’s Guide to Digital Change” (Random House) is a remarkably optimistic book. In Dr. Anand’s view, those who have failed to thrive in this environment often have only themselves to blame for falling into a “content trap.” His criticism extends to all those both inside and outside media whose strategic response to the emergence of digital competitors reflects “a bias towards content, product and quality.”Rather than embrace the opportunities afforded by the internet to make new “connections” across customers, products and functions, unsuccessful companies have looked inward and made unwise content investments in a futile effort to forestall the inevitable digital future. Although the term “connections” is stretched far beyond its usefulness in an effort to establish a unifying conceptual framework for the book, Dr. Anand’s essential point seems to be that modern businesses can thrive by taking advantage of opportunities to foster valuable interactions with and among customers as well as complementary businesses and capabilities made available by the internet.AdvertisementDr. Anand’s observations about the impossibility of maintaining a sustainable advantage over competitors simply by being “better” — whether in content creation or product quality — are well placed. Equally insightful is his emphasis on the importance of context rather than universal “best practices” to address emerging competitive threats.AdvertisementLess compelling is the insistence that “a veritable gold mine” awaits incumbents who simply “think creatively about how to differentiate” new “digital products from the traditional ones.” Dr. Anand repeatedly avoids pointing out the obvious: Even where successful, these new businesses typically have lower barriers to entry and are inevitably more competitive and less profitable. This reluctance may be based on a misapprehension about the nature of the differences between the network effects associated with digital businesses and the fixed-cost scale economies associated with traditional ones. In Dr. Anand’s mind, “chances are you win everything” in the network-effects markets, but for those who rely on scale benefits, “chances are that others can, too.”In an interesting twist, in the very market that “The Content Trap” leads with — newspapers — the opposite was true. Local newspaper franchises are a “winner takes all” market because the fixed costs make only a single paper economically feasible, whereas every online classified marketplace, while benefiting from network effects, supports multiple competitors.A real strength of “The Content Trap” is the detailed case studies underlying the analysis. Surprisingly, however, given Dr. Anand’s focus on connections and context, these have often not been updated or related to each other where doing so would have enhanced the narrative and provided important nuance to the strategic lessons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The success of the Scandinavian newspaper publisher Schibsted in building online classified businesses with other regional newspaper publishers is detailed, followed by a recounting of The New York Times’s decision to institute a paywall. Nothing is said, however, about The Times’s decision to remove itself years ago from an industrywide classified consortium. Other than describing the American newspaper classified consortium as “unproductive,” Dr. Anand does not contrast the respective approaches and experiences of Schibsted and The Times. Far from being unproductive, in 2014, the consortium sold just one of its classified verticals — cars.com — for almost as much as the public market value of the entire American newspaper sector.The book’s discussion of the sports marketing giant IMG and its founder, Mark McCormack, is as compelling now as it was when Dr. Anand’s Harvard case was last updated in 2002. But given the different direction that the subsequent owners took the business after Mr. McCormack’s death in 2003, some discussion and analysis of the reasons and implications would have been helpful.Dr. Anand ends the book by recounting his own experience as a leader of the start of HBX, Harvard Business School’s online education initiative, with the aim of demonstrating the successful application of the previously described strategic principles. The account is a fascinating one, and the product the school has developed sounds truly impressive.It is unclear, however, how this story should inform business decisions of others in online education or otherwise. Dr. Anand is operating at a well-funded, nonprofit university and was given access to arguably the best global brand in business education and its distinguished faculty. Armed with a seemingly unlimited budget, his direction from the dean was simply that “failure is not an option” — although it is never clear how success is measured. Beyond noting the $1,500 price for the first program developed and the size of the initial cohort group, Dr. Anand provides no information about the costs, revenue or financial aspirations of HBX. Along the way, some odd strategic decisions are made. For instance, HBX decided to develop its own software platform on which it would run, although much of the core functionality described by Dr. Anand would appear to be supportable by any number of existing learning management systems.Regardless of any disagreements about the implications of specific cases, there is still much to be learned from the breadth and richness of Dr. Anand’s examples. Although one can argue with his individual conclusions, the overarching observations regarding the dangers of “the content trap” seem irrefutable — particularly in light of last year’s breathtaking record of more than 400 scripted original television series.Sometimes, however, a digitally challenged business may also be better off simply dying with dignity and milking the core franchise rather than investing in new “connections” that others are better positioned to exploit.Jonathan A. Knee is Professor of Professional Practice at Columbia Business School and a Senior Advisor at Evercore Partners. His next book, “Class Clowns: How the Smartest Investors Lost Billions in Education,” will be released by Columbia Business School Publishing in November.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »