AdvertisementSupported byStreet SceneBy William D. CohanIs there any significance to the fact that a short-term interest rate has nearly tripled in the last year, to 0.86 percent from 0.32 percent? The short answer, of course, is yes. But the more interesting answer involves what the change in the so-called three-month London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor, says about the Federal Reserve’s new regulatory framework for Wall Street, which it has slowly but surely been rolling out since the worst days of the financial crisis eight years ago.Libor is used to set the cost of money borrowed around the world. If you have an adjustable-rate mortgage or a credit card, the annual percentage rate is probably based on Libor. If your company has borrowed money from a bank, the cost of the loan is probably based on Libor. It is also the rate used to determine what big banks charge each other when borrowing money on a short-term basis.The cost of hundreds of billions of dollars in borrowed money is affected by changes in Libor. In other words, the increase in the three-month Libor in the last year — which pretty much no one noticed — means that everyone who borrows money for whatever reason is paying more for that money than they would have a year ago, though it is worth noting that interest rates around the world, including Libor, remain at historically low levels.What pushed up Libor? Theories abound. But one of the more riveting ones relates to the policies of Daniel K. Tarullo, the powerful Federal Reserve governor, who is determined to make sure that Wall Street never again does anything like what it did to intensify the 2008 financial crisis.Mr. Tarullo has the power to make that happen, because he is in charge of regulating the big banks as chairman of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. But Mr. Tarullo’s mission also shows how far regulators are going these days to eliminate risk inside Wall Street’s biggest banks, and that will have unintended consequences — like higher rates for borrowed money — for the rest of us.Some on Wall Street blame Mr. Tarullo for the increase in Libor. The Securities and Exchange Commission, after several years of urging by Mr. Tarullo, is requiring that, as of Friday, money-market funds never again invest in anything that seems the slightest bit risky.You may recall that one of the more seminal moments in the 2008 financial crisis was when the Reserve Fund, a theoretically safe money-market fund, “broke the buck” for the first time ever, costing investors hundreds of millions of dollars when they discovered that what they had thought was a safe investment that locked in at 100 cents on the dollar was no longer worth 100 cents on the dollar. This happened in part because in an effort to get a slightly higher yield for investors, the Reserve Fund managers invested in the supposedly highest quality parts of mortgage-backed securities.As we later discovered, what Wall Street advertised as Triple-A securities were not high quality after all. When these securities lost value and had to be written down, the Reserve Fund’s cash turned out to be worth less than 100 cents on the dollar.Mr. Tarullo wants to prevent that from happening again — understandably — and so has mandated that, as of Friday, money-market funds must certify that they will no longer invest in “runnable liabilities,” which is Fed-speak for any security that is less than 100 percent safe. “As has been frequently observed, the recent financial crisis began, like most banking crises, with a run on short-term liabilities by investors who had come to doubt the value of the assets they were funding through various kinds of financial intermediaries,” Mr. Tarullo said in a speech in July.Money-market funds have been selling off their mortgage-backed securities and investing instead in Treasury securities, which are the gold standard of safety. Not surprisingly, Treasury securities have rallied and mortgage-related securities have fallen in price because money-market funds will no longer be able to buy mortgage-related securities. Libor has risen, too, to account for the increased risk of anything that is not a Treasury security.A few people have an understanding of Mr. Tarullo’s stance and have written about it, with some considerable passion.“All of this essentially comes down to the Fed moving decisively and out of necessity to literally take back the definition of money from the Wall Street firms that have spent the better part of the last 30 years redefining it on their own terms, and for their own convenience,” Ralph Del Guidice, a founder of Madrone Macro-Economic Advisors, wrote to his clients in August. “Get ready for a re-pricing across the board, because that is going to be the ugly result here, and as far as the Fed is concerned, c’est la vie.”Others are worried about the future of the securitization market. John Fichthorn, a hedge fund manager at Dialectic Capital Management, says the new regulations are dooming the market for new securitizations because top buyers have been driven out of it.According to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, Mr. Fichthorn is right. In the first half of 2016, the issuance of asset-backed securities by Wall Street companies — outside of those backed by the government-controlled entities Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac — fell 36 percent from the same period the previous year. The issuance of mortgage-backed securities fell 42 percent in the same period.As can be seen in the increase of Libor, the cost of capital is going up for banks and ordinary Americans alike. Mr. Fichthorn blames the Fed, and Mr. Tarullo in particular. “They’re burning the house of Wall Street to the ground,” he told me in a recent interview. “They’re basically regulating things that they don’t like through increased cost of capital and increased regulatory requirements.”Mr. Fichthorn said he thought the market should be allowed to regulate itself, rather than be regulated by one man sitting in Washington. “If you’re the kind of person that thinks that people are smarter than markets, if you think a Ph.D. — one guy — is smarter than the invisible hand of all of humanity, then it’s a great idea,” he said of Mr. Tarullo’s machinations.We are living in an era where anything and everything anti-Wall Street is wildly popular. But that also means we are living in a time when many of the things that made our financial markets the envy of the world are quietly being dismantled. The increased in Libor is just one example of what is coming, unless somehow curbs are placed on what Mr. Tarullo is able to do.Advertisement