AdvertisementSupported byBy Sei ChongIs Verizon having second thoughts?It has expressed doubts about paying $4.8 billion for Yahoo’s operating business after the internet company reported that the email accounts of at least 500 million users had been hacked in 2014.“I think we have a reasonable basis to believe right now that the impact is material, and we’re looking to Yahoo to demonstrate to us the full impact,” Craig Silliman, Verizon’s general counsel, told reporters in Washington on Thursday. “If they believe that it’s not, then they’ll need to show us that.”Verizon is still determining the financial effect of the hacking, which was disclosed after the deal between Verizon and Yahoo was announced.One component is the cost of remediation, which includes increased security spending, as well as customer notification and litigation.A report in July by the Ponemon Institute, which tracks data breaches, found that the cost to remediate such an intrusion was $221 for each stolen record. Using that standard, the cost to Yahoo would be far greater than Verizon’s purchase price.Verizon is also likely to be asking whether the hacking has affected Yahoo’s customer base, which had been one of its strong selling points, said Jacob Olcott, vice president of BitSight Technologies, a security company.Yahoo’s stock dropped nearly 2 percent on Thursday after Reuters first reported Mr. Silliman’s comments.Robert Peck, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, said investors had a bigger concern than a discounted sale price.If Verizon ultimately decides against the deal, it will delay the sale of Yahoo’s large stakes in Yahoo Japan and Alibaba, which are worth far more than the portion being sold to Verizon.SoftBank of Japan said on Thursday that it would set up a new fund with Saudi Arabia that could invest up to $100 billion in technology companies worldwide.SoftBank will invest at least $25 billion into what is provisionally called the SoftBank Vision Fund over the next five years, while Saudi Arabia is weighing putting in at least $45 billion. Other partners added later could eventually push the fund’s size up toward its ceiling.The fund will be led by Rajeev Misra, SoftBank’s head of strategic finance, and will be based in Britain. Nizar al-Bassam, formerly of Deutsche Bank, and Dalinc Ariburnu, previously of Goldman Sachs, will also be involved.Say hello to Marcus.That’s the name of an online lending platform introduced on Thursday by Goldman Sachs, chosen in homage to the man who founded the bank, Marcus Goldman.It is the centerpiece of Goldman’s push into consumer banking.Users can apply for unsecured loans of up to $30,000. Applications will initially be limited to people who get a code from Goldman in the mail, and the company is focusing on customers with a credit score above 660, so-called prime credit.In trying to appeal to these customers, the site takes an unusually casual tone for Goldman, which is better known for its government and corporate clients.“Debt happens — and it can happen to anyone. We created Marcus to help you better manage it,” the site says. “No jargon. No tricks. Just straight talk.”• Wells Fargo is back in the spotlight as it reports quarterly earnings, along with Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase. Wells Fargo’s new chief executive, Timothy J. Sloan, will lead an earnings call with analysts, after his predecessor, John G. Stumpf, abruptly resigned.• Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, speaks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s annual conference.• Eric S. Rosengren, president of the Boston Fed, is on CNBC at 7:30 a.m. and will also speak at the Boston Fed conference.• The Commerce Department will report retail sales data for September.Advertisement