AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.31 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.46 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Meriden, Conn., $68.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.California, $255 million of general obligation unlimited tax taxable bonds. Competitive.California, $575.8 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.California, $815 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Minnesota, $92.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Osseo Area, Minn., Independent School District No. 279, $51.7 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County, N.Y., $53 million of general obligation limited tax bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County, N.Y., Water Authority, $56.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Suffolk County, N.Y., Water Authority, $78.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.University of Alabama Medicine Finance Authority, $65.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Wake County, N.C., $162.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Cincinnati, $54.9 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Georgia, $376.8 million of series E general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Georgia, $504.2 million of series F general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.San Francisco County, Calif., $76 million of general obligation unlimited tax taxable bonds. Competitive.Charleston County, S.C., School District, $75.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Monroe County, N.Y., $95.5 million of general obligation limited tax bonds. Competitive.Orange County, Calif., Sanitation District, $107.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Virginia, $114.1 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Virginia, $70.8 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Alaska Municipal Bond Bank, $84.5 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Calhoun County, Mich., Hospital Finance Authority, $73.7 million of Oaklawn Hospital revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Carmel, Ind., Local Public Improvement Bond Bank, $55 million of special program bonds. Piper Jaffray.Chesterton, Ind.; Toledo-Lucas County, Ohio, Port Authority; $62 million of StoryPoint Chesterton Project economic development bonds; StoryPoint Waterville Project revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Connecticut, $650 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Dallas County Utility and Reclamation District, $155.8 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Glen Cove, N.Y., $126 million of local economic assistance revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $175.1 million of University of Chicago Medical Center revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Iowa Student Loan Liquidity Corporation, $188.8 million of student loan revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.King County, Wash., Public Hospital District No. 1, $189.7 million of Valley Medical Center limited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Maricopa County, Ariz., Industrial Development Authority, $66 million of Christian Care Surprise Inc., debt securities. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $91.1 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, $51.1 million of homeownership finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Montebello, Calif., Public Financing Authority, $53 million of Home2 Suites by Hilton Hotel Project lease revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Montgomery County, Pa., Higher Education and Health Authority, $70.9 million of Holy Redeemer Health System revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Nebraska Public Power District, $113.3 million of general revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Nebraska Public Power District, $56.6 million of taxable general revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.New Hope, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $62.8 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $1 billion of Robert Wood Johnson Barnabas Health Obligated Group revenue and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $627.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Jefferies.New York State Dormitory Authority, $58.4 million of school districts and financing program revenue bonds. Raymond James.Norman, Okla., Regional Hospital Authority, $157.7 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.North Carolina Capital Facilities Finance Agency, $319.5 million of revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.North Carolina Housing Finance Agency, $191.8 million of homeownership revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.North Oaks, Minn., $73.5 million of Waverly Gardens Senior Housing revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Ontario, Calif., International Airport Authority, $52.5 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Oregon, $280 million of Oregon Facilities Authority revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Pennsylvania Commonwealth Financing Authority, $758.8 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Pennsylvania Public School Building Authority, $561 million of Philadelphia School District Project school lease revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $186.3 million of turnpike subordinate revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Pennsylvania, $57.2 million of Pocono Medical Center revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Philadelphia School District, $817 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.San Diego Community College District, $612 million of general obligation election and refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Skagit County, Wash., Regional Public Hospital District No. 1, $60 million of hospital revenue improvement refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.South Regional Joint Development Authority, Ga., $88.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Successor Agency to the Redevelopment Agency of Stockton, Calif., $72.9 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Co.Tampa, Fla., $137.1 million of H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center Project cigarette tax allocation and hospital revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Texas Transportation Commission, $600 million of state highway improvement general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Twin Rivers, Calif., Unified School District, $50 million of series B general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Twin Rivers, Calif., Unified School District, $141 million of general obligation and series A general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.University of Alabama Medicine Finance Authority, $273 million of revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.University of Washington, $202 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Utah Board of Regents, $131.1 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $67.1 million of single-family program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Advertisement