OCT. 15, 2016
“How Food Banks Can Stop Sending Potatoes to Idaho,” by Sendhil Mullainathan of Harvard (The Upshot, Economic View, Oct. 9), told how Feeding America used free market principles to aid distribution among the food banks it serves. The organization put in place a bidding system employing a virtual currency.The article attracted 60 comments to nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.Interesting article. You can call it a “free market” or whatever, but I believe the important factor that makes the system work has a lot to do with giving the power to make the decisions to the ones directly involved who know what is needed.MRM, Long IslandThis reminds me of a discussion long ago with a business major about confusing decentralization with capitalism. An allocation system based on need is at least a mixed economy with half of the general socialist principle. These “markets” are free of the unregulated impact of inherited wealth or income disparities.Kent Cprek, Villanova, Pa.It is a market, just not a capitalistic one. There is no capital accumulation and therefore no cumulative inequality. How well you do in a round does not affect the next cycle. No winners grow or losers die, so there is no tendency toward oligopoly formation.AdvertisementMartha Martinez, ChicagoThis is not a “free market.” This is a well-regulated system that uses a marketlike structure to allocate scarce resources. From all reports it sounds like it was an improvement on a very dumb alternative.AdvertisementJonathan, ManhattanThis article seems to have it backwards. The food banks may be using pricing and bidding as mechanisms for optimization, but they seem to be following the communist “to each according to his need” by giving the most needy food banks the most points for bidding. This isn’t even a real step away from central planning; the points are allocated centrally.That’s excellent for optimizing the food bank problem, but it is not how real economic markets work.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kaleberg, Port Angeles, Wash.I think free markets are awesome! But let’s not reject all forms of socialism either. Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, the U.S. post office, the U.S. highway system, are at base socialist institutions or have socialist components.Ricardito, Los Angeles“Donations were sometimes not accepted. Imagine how this made donors feel. Why give when what you offer is not wanted?”Gee, I don’t know, maybe the donors can ask food banks what their needs are.blueberryintomatosoup, HoustonWow, a classic forest for the trees example.If it weren’t for the inequalities created and exacerbated by the existing free markets, food banks would not even be a thing.Cheap Jim, BaltimoreLetters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2016, on Page BU6 of the New York edition with the headline: Food Banks and Free Markets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.