AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersGOA, India — India and Russia signed billions of dollars’ worth of military and energy deals on Saturday at a summit meeting that sought to inject new life into a relationship that has been tested by shifting global alliances and conflict in the Middle East.Under the biggest agreement, a group led by the Russian state oil giant Rosneft said it would pay $12.9 billion for a controlling stake in both India’s Essar Oil and the port facilities the company owns.In addition, the countries, which had strong ties during the Cold War, announced plans for a joint venture to build helicopters in India. New Delhi said it would also buy surface-to-air missile systems and stealth frigates from Moscow.“Ours is a truly unique and privileged relationship,” Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India said after talks with President Vladimir Putin of Russia in the western seaside state of Goa.Mr. Modi said his views were aligned with Mr. Putin’s on the unstable situation in Afghanistan and the Middle East, where Moscow is at odds with the West in the five-year-old civil war in Syria that has killed hundreds of thousands of people.“We are conducting a comprehensive dialogue on a wide scale of international issues, in which Indian and Russian approaches are close to each other or coincide,” Mr. Putin said.Mr. Modi also praised Mr. Putin’s support for the fight against international terrorism, which India accuses its neighbor and rival Pakistan of sponsoring.The Rosneft-Essar deal comes as Russia moves to reassert its role in global affairs and as its own economy is stagnating, hurt by Western sanctions and low oil prices.Under the deal, a group led by Rosneft will acquire 98 percent of Essar Oil, and with it a refinery that produces 400,000 barrels a day, as well as the port at Vadinar for $12.9 billion, the two sides said.The Russian state bank VTB said it would refinance $3.9 billion owed by the Essar Group. Rosneft would pay $3.5 billion, and its partners, the oil trader Trafigura and the investment fund United Capital Partners, the same amount for an equal joint stake.The military pacts will also deepen military ties between the two countries that date back to the Soviet era, when India depended on Moscow to equip its armed forces. The United States has since taken over as India’s top arms supplier.Indian military officials have said the plan is for the joint venture to build at least 200 Kamov 226T helicopters. Hindustan Aeronautics will be the local partner of Russian Helicopters and the state arms exporter Rosoboronexport.The S-400 surface-to-air missiles would strengthen India’s defenses along its borders with China and Pakistan, Indian military officials have said. The countries also agreed on plans to build and supply stealth frigates for the Indian Navy.Advertisement