AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — One of Goldman Sachs’s top bankers in Asia is planning on retiring after nearly three decades at the firm.Mark Schwartz, who is chairman of Goldman’s Asia Pacific region and a vice chairman of the firm, will retire at the end of the year, the firm said in an internal memorandum on Monday.His departure comes as Goldman faces challenges in Asia, particularly a slowdown in investment banking in the region for all Western firms. Goldman is expected to lay off a significant number of its bankers in Asia. (Mr. Schwartz’s plans were unrelated to those issues.)He has catered to some of the firm’s biggest clients, including the Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan. Mr. Schwartz was one of Goldman’s point men on Alibaba’s $25 billion initial public offering, the biggest on record, and was on hand at the New York Stock Exchange when the Chinese e-commerce behemoth began trading.Over his career, Mr. Schwartz became an influential member of Goldman’s inner circle, spearheading some of the firm’s biggest businesses. He joined Goldman in 1979 and later founded the firm’s high-yield debt department. He was made partner in 1988. He later led its global debt capital markets business from 1991 to 1997.Mr. Schwartz later moved to Asia, becoming president of Goldman Sachs Japan and then assuming the chairman role for the Asia Pacific region from 1999 to 2001. He then left the firm in 2001 to work for George Soros’s hedge fund, later becoming its chief executive from 2003 to 2004.The banker then co-founded MissionPoint Capital, an investment firm focused on clean energy, before returning to Goldman as chairman of the Asia Pacific region, but moved the position to Beijing.“Mark’s leadership, expertise and focus on client service have been invaluable in further integrating our activities across Asia Pacific, building on previous successes and advancing our leading franchise in the region,” Lloyd C. Blankfein, Goldman’s chief executive, and Gary D. Cohn, the firm’s president, wrote in the internal memo.“Over the years, Mark has demonstrated an unwavering focus on supporting and enhancing Goldman Sachs’ culture, reminding us that the caliber of our people, combined with our history of serving clients, has differentiated us in our efforts to build successful businesses across geographies.”Upon retiring, Mr. Schwartz will become a senior director.Here’s the memo from Mr. Blankfein and Mr. Cohn, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal:After 27 years of distinguished service, Mark Schwartz, chairman of Goldman Sachs Asia Pacific and vice chairman of the firm, has decided to retire at the end of the year. We are pleased that he will become a senior director at that time. Ken Hitchner will remain president of Goldman Sachs in Asia Pacific Ex-Japan and Masa Mochida will continue to serve as president of Goldman Sachs Japan.Throughout most of his tenure at Goldman Sachs, Mark played an instrumental role in shaping our strategy in Asia Pacific, first as president of Goldman Sachs Japan from 1997 to 1999, based in Tokyo, and later as chairman of Goldman Sachs Asia Pacific, a role he held until 2001. He reprised that role in 2012 and relocated to Beijing. Mark’s leadership, expertise and focus on client service have been invaluable in further integrating our activities across Asia Pacific, building on previous successes and advancing our leading franchise in the region.Over the years, Mark has demonstrated an unwavering focus on supporting and enhancing Goldman Sachs’ culture, reminding us that the caliber of our people, combined with our history of serving clients, has differentiated us in our efforts to build successful businesses across geographies. As a member of the Pine Street Board, he helped develop the Pine Street Leadership Program for managing directors, among other Goldman Sachs training programs. In addition, Mark has hired, trained and mentored many of our professionals in Asia Pacific, helping to develop a new generation of leaders in the region.Mark first joined Goldman Sachs in 1979 as an associate in the Public Utility Finance Group in the Investment Banking Division. He moved to Fixed Income in 1985, when he founded the High Yield Department. Mark then headed the Global Debt Capital Markets Department from 1991 to 1997 when he assumed his leadership roles in Asia Pacific.Mark left the firm in 2001. He became a senior advisor to Soros Fund Management in 2002, where he later served as president and chief executive officer from 2003 to 2004. He then became chairman of MissionPoint Capital Partners, an investment firm he co-founded with a focus on the low-carbon economy, as well as a member of the Board of Directors of both MasterCard Inc. and SoftBank Corp.When Mark returned to Goldman Sachs in 2012, he re-joined the Management Committee. He is also a member of the Growth Markets Executive Group. Previously, Mark was a member of the Partnership Committee, the Commitments Committee and the Recruiting Committee. He was named partner in 1988.Outside the firm, Mark is a trustee of NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital and a member of the Executive Committee of the Morgan Stanley Children’s Hospital of NewYork-Presbyterian. He is also a trustee at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), and serves on the Board of Directors of the Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard University. Much of Mark’s philanthropy at Harvard and MGH has been devoted to global health issues and HIV and Tuberculosis research. He is also on the Boards of Dean’s Advisors at Harvard College, Harvard Business School and the Harvard School of Public Health. Mark and his wife, Lisa, also support Seed Global Health, as well as Teach for China and Northern Westchester Hospital.Please join us in thanking Mark for his dedication and service to the firm, our clients and our people. We wish him and his family all the best in the years ahead.Lloyd C. BlankfeinGary D. CohnAdvertisement