AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningWhen a friend or business acquaintance pitches an investment as a surefire winner, there can be a question about when that cajoling crosses over from mere sales talk to fraud. A recent case in Texas involving the state’s attorney general, Ken Paxton, shows finding that line can be difficult.The Securities and Exchange Commission sued Mr. Paxton in April for securities fraud related to his role promoting Servergy, a technology company that was also named as a defendant along with its founder and another person who solicited investors in the sale of approximately $26 million in private stock offerings. Mr. Paxton, who was elected attorney general in 2014 after serving in the Texas Legislature, was also indicted in state court for securities fraud and failing to register as an investment adviser.According to the S.E.C.’s complaint, Mr. Paxton promoted Servergy by saying that it was a “great company” and passing along sales information without conducting any due diligence into its operations. Mr. Paxton had an arrangement to receive a 10 percent commission for those investors he brought to the company.He recruited friends, former law firm clients, a fellow legislator and members of an investment group to buy shares, but he never told them he would be paid if they invested — a fact they certainly would have wanted to know. The S.E.C. claims the company awarded Mr. Paxton 100,000 shares in July 2011 for his efforts to bring in five new investors who put in a total of $840,000.He was certainly less than transparent with the investors, especially his investment group, which relied on its members to work for their collective benefit rather than profit individually from an investment. But does that amount to a fraud?According to the S.E.C., the answer is yes because his compensation was a “material” fact, which means that investors would consider it important in evaluating whether to buy Servergy’s shares. But just because information is considered material does not require that it be disclosed unless the person also had a fiduciary duty to disclose the benefit he would receive.Mr. Paxton filed a motion to dismiss the complaint, arguing that he did not owe any duty to the investors because he was only recommending the company as a friend or business associate.Judge Amos L. Mazzant III of the Federal District Court in Sherman, Tex., agreed, finding that the S.E.C. lawsuit did not have sufficient facts to claim a fraud in violation of the federal securities laws. He gave the regulator 14 days to add new facts to its complaint, but whether that is possible is an open question because the S.E.C. is unlikely to have held back information that strengthened its case.In rejecting the S.E.C.’s claims, Judge Mazzant wrote that the “case is not about whether Paxton had a moral obligation to disclose his financial arrangement with Servergy to potential investors.” Instead, the judge concluded that he “did not have a legal obligation” to do so, which meant there was no fraud.One might hope that a friend, or a member of an investment club, would take care to disclose important information like receiving a commission for lining up new investors. The law, however, does not impose such a duty generally in the absence of evidence that the person assumed control over the investments of others or occupied a position as an investment adviser or broker.The S.E.C. relied on the 1938 decision in S.E.C. v. Torr to support its position that someone promoting a stock can become a “volunteer fiduciary” to potential investors with an obligation to disclose any information that would affect the decision to buy shares. Judge Mazzant had little trouble dispensing with that argument, finding that no court in nearly 80 years had taken a similar position to expand the obligation to disclose information for almost any stock recommendation.The district court rejected the case at its earliest stage, even before the parties started the discovery process. It is a rare rebuke for the S.E.C. to have civil charges thrown out based solely on an insufficient complaint, indicating that the government’s legal theory was deficient from the outset. The regulator can appeal, but the problem with proving the necessary fiduciary relationship to establish a fraud from failing to disclose the compensation arrangement would remain even if the case were allowed to move forward.With the civil case dismissed, one would expect the state criminal charges to be called into doubt because there is much a higher standard of proof for a conviction. But unlike the S.E.C.’s complaint, the indictment has survived Mr. Paxton’s efforts in the Texas courts to dismiss the charges.His lawyers argued that the Texas statute making it a crime to offer services as an unregistered investment adviser was unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. They also challenged the method for appointing the grand jury members who issued the indictment.Unlike in a civil case, courts are usually loath to dismiss criminal charges before trial because the facts in the case have not yet been established in court. Judges prefer to let the process play out rather than intervene before a courtroom battle, especially when a “not guilty” verdict would obviate the need for any further consideration of the case.There are rare instances in which a criminal case will be dismissed before trial, such as the prosecution of Rick Perry, the former Texas governor who was accused of abuse of authority for vetoing legislation. But the general rule against pretrial appeals in criminal cases means a defendant has to deal with the expense of a trial even if the charges are based on a misapplication of the law.The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, the last chance to get the case dismissed, rejected Mr. Paxton’s request last Wednesday, so he will have to face the charges. The trial will put him in a difficult position of defending conduct that might appear to be dishonest while not necessarily rising to the level of fraud.When a lawyer or politician says “trust me,” there is always a measure of suspicion. An investment pitch should draw similar hesitation, but when a friend tells you it is a good company, there is a measure of trust — even if there is no legal obligation to tell everything that might be considered important.Advertisement