AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieBank of America’s chief executive, Brian Moynihan, is making progress — but the ultimate goal still looks improbable.On Monday, the lender, which has $2.2 trillion of assets, reported its best pretax showing in a decade in the third quarter. Absent higher rate increases or capital returns, though, a decent return on equity remains a long way off.The bank reported net income of $5 billion in the period, 7 percent higher than the same quarter last year. Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo, all of which unveiled their third-quarter numbers on Friday, registered declines of 3 percent to 10.5 percent.Bank of America benefited from the investment banking trends that also benefited Citigroup and JPMorgan – its fixed-income traders added 39 percent to the top line, for example. But Mr. Moynihan has also been playing catch-up on cutting costs. A couple of years ago, the bank was spending around $70 of every $100 of revenue on expenses. The chief executive got that down to just over $62. The bank’s peers, though, have been solidly below $60 for some time.The trouble is, Bank of America would have had to slash expenses to just $51 per $100 of revenue in the third quarter to increase its annualized return on equity to 10 percent – as a rule of thumb, that is the target that big banks need to reach to cover their cost of capital. Though Mr. Moynihan’s third-quarter efficiency ratio was not far off his target for 2018, that is of little benefit: He would still have had to cut another $6.5 billion of costs to make a double-digit return on equity.That leaves the bank’s long-suffering shareholders at the mercy of the Federal Reserve, whether it raises interest rates, allowing banks to make more money, or permits Bank of America to buy back a lot of shares. Neither looks likely any time soon.There may be a way to close the gap from the other end. Some lenders already hint that a return-on-equity figure closer to 9 percent is more realistic than 10 percent considering that rates are low, cheap deposit funding is growing and regulations have made banking less risky than before the financial crisis.Shareholders, though, are not yet buying it, with Bank of America’s stock trading at two-thirds of book value. Mr. Moynihan’s long slog toward a distant target continues.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement