By THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 16, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s expected in the coming week:BANKING INDUSTRYMore big banks report their third-quarter earnings this week, starting on Monday with Bank of America. Goldman Sachs is expected to release results on Tuesday and Morgan Stanley on Wednesday. All three banks should be helped by stronger trading revenue in the quarter, thanks to market volatility generated by uncertainty about monetary policy and Britain’s decision to leave the European Union. Investors will be watching Bank of America’s results for signs of weakness in the consumer sector. Michael CorkeryTECHNOLOGYYahoo will report its third-quarter financial results on Tuesday after the market closes. But don’t expect answers to the many questions hovering over the troubled internet company. Yahoo said it would not hold its traditional conference call with analysts to discuss the numbers, citing the pending $4.8 billion sale of its core operations to Verizon. That means investors are likely to learn little about the long-term business impact of Yahoo’s disclosure in September of the hacking of 500 million customer accounts, or the news in October that it had scanned all customer emails for information related to a suspected terrorist group. Verizon, for its part, has said that it believes Yahoo’s value has been diminished by the disclosures and that it may seek to renegotiate the purchase. Vindu GoelTRADETrade ministers from the European Union will meet on Tuesday in Luxembourg to decide on a far-reaching deal with Canada. For the ministers to reach unanimity, as they’ve agreed to do, Belgium will need to overcome determined opposition from parts of the country, including French-speaking Wallonia, where the regional parliament last week refused the deal. A failure by ministers to reach an accord could delay plans by Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, to sign the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement in Brussels later this month, and would also highlight a growing hostility to globalization and open markets. James KanterECONOMYOn Tuesday, the Labor Department will release its reading on the Consumer Price Index in September. Economists expect to see a 0.3 percent rise in the overall index, mostly reflecting higher prices for gasoline and natural gas last month. Health care prices were up sharply in August, and if that pattern repeats, the index could jump more than expected. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementChina’s economy continues to slow, but data to be released on Wednesday will provide more insight on whether that slowdown is happening faster than expected. Gross domestic product in the July to September quarter is forecast to rise 6.7 percent from a year ago, in line with the official forecast for full-year growth of 6.5 to 7 percent. But recent signs of stability have been achieved by the government’s unleashing a torrent of state-directed credit, with some of it going to further inflate a bubble in the property market. Private investment is expected to continue to shrink. Neil GoughPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday, the Commerce Department will report data on new housing starts in September. Economists expect to see new homes constructed at an annual rate of 1.175 million last month, slightly faster than the 1.142 million pace in August. Nelson D. SchwartzAdvertisementThe European Central Bank will announce the results of its latest monetary policy meeting on Thursday. Most economists expect the central bank to maintain its benchmark interest rate at zero, where it has been since March.Investors will be closely watching to see if Mario Draghi, president of the central bank, gives any indication of the bank’s plans for a stimulus program in which it purchases 80 billion euros, or about $88 billion, a month in bonds. Some investors would like to see the bond-buying program, known as quantitative easing, extended. It is currently scheduled to end in March. Chad BrayTECHNOLOGYFor several years, Microsoft has boasted in its earnings reports about its progress in cloud computing, which is gradually replacing traditional methods of purchasing software. Investors have rewarded the company, but they have been clamoring for more detail from Microsoft about how its cloud business is performing. On Thursday, Microsoft will finally provide that. Its latest earnings report should contain new details about gross margins and sales growth in its cloud computing businesses, along with revenue from its game products. The new data won’t necessarily please investors, but it should at least answer their calls for greater transparency from the company. Nick WingfieldA version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Earnings Data for Yahoo and Bank of America.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.