
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

OCT. 18, 2016
Goldman Sachs is charting a frustrating path back to the top.Trading, share buybacks and operating leverage all helped the investment bank earn $2.1 billion in the third quarter, its best showing in a year and a half. The way it beat its cost of capital, though, fails to inspire full confidence.More than half the $1.3 billion increase in revenue from a year ago came fromfrom from the company’s investing and lending division. Gains on equity investments accounted for most of it. That is fine, as far as it goes. Results in this area fluctuate wildly, however. And new regulations are curbing how large this part of the business can be.What’s more, Goldman’s tax rate slipped to 27 percent for the three months to the end of September, compared with a rate of at least 30 percent. If taxes had been more like usual and investment gains half what was reported, the annualized return on equity for the quarter of 11.2 percent would have dipped to around 9.3 percent.Even so, Goldman fared well by current industry standards. Few rivals have managed to achieve the 10 percent return considered the theoretical cost of capital. And the bank run by Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive, is hitting the right notes elsewhere.AdvertisementFixed-income trading jumped 34 percent, roughly in line with that of rivals Bank of America, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase. Top-line gains of 19 percent outpaced the 10 percent increase in expenses as Goldman slashed noncompensation costs by almost a quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was good news for employees, too. The amount set aside for bonuses swelled by more than a third, even as staff levels fell 5 percent as Goldman reversed its mistimed hiring exuberance last year.There was another unexpected benefit: buybacks reduced outstanding shares by 6 percent, far more than the 1 or 2 percent decrease Goldman has tended to carry out. That helps push up shareholder returns.AdvertisementAs welcome as these many elements are, Goldman’s earnings look overly lumpy. That makes them too unreliable to justify its shares heading back above book value any time soon.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »