By LANDON THOMAS Jr.OCT. 18, 2016
“You're seeing a migration from active to passive,” said Laurence Fink, chief executive of BlackRock. “I don’t believe active is dead.”BlackRock, the world’s largest publicly traded money manager, reported on Tuesday a slight increase in its earnings for the third quarter, thanks to strong flows into its exchange-traded funds business.Net income rose 4 percent, to $875 million, in the quarter, from $843 million in the quarter a year earlier.The quarter also represented a milestone of sorts for BlackRock’s chief executive, Laurence D. Fink, as assets under management, the most important gauge of a money manager’s success, passed the $5 trillion mark.Assets grew 14 percent over the last year, to $5.1 trillion, from $4.5 trillion.As has been the case for the last five years, growth was driven by the continued popularity of exchange-traded funds, which are investment vehicles that track a wide variety of bond and equity indexes.AdvertisementThe firm’s risk management platform, Aladdin, continued to grow at a steady pace, with revenue up 13 percent on a yearly basis. Funds with more than $10 trillion under management now use BlackRock’s risk navigation system to ensure that their portfolios are capable of responding to market ups and downs.Advertisement“The diversity of our platform drove over $70 billion of net inflows across our platforms,” Mr. Fink said on a conference calls with investors. “Clients are turning to BlackRock to help them understand risks.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With increasing fervor, investors, both retail and institutional, have been pulling their assets out of actively managed mutual funds that promise to beat a certain index but have not been able to do so.The result has been a slow but steady migration of money from traditional stock and bond picking investment managers like Franklin Templeton, Fidelity and Pimco to firms like Vanguard and BlackRock, which offer lower-cost funds with passive investment strategies.Over the quarter, $51 billion flowed into BlackRock’s iShares funds, which stand at a market-leading $1.2 trillion. The flows were broadly split between bond and stock E.T.F.s.Money moving into E.T.F.s masked weaker outcomes in other areas of the firm, such as equities, where investors pulled out $7 billion. Like its actively managed peers, BlackRock has been struggling to bolster the returns of its stock pickers, but investors have shown little inclination to stick around while it does so.Over the last five years, for example, just 53 percent of client assets in BlackRock’s actively managed equity funds beat their index. Over the last year, the numbers worsened, with just 50 percent of funds surpassing their benchmark.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.