AdvertisementSupported byDoes Hillary Clinton really mean it when she says, “No bank is too big to fail, and no executive is too powerful to jail”? It is easy to dismiss comments like these as being just a sop to progressives, especially because transcripts of her speeches to big banks show her striking a much more conciliatory note.But it is also worth taking a closer look at the emails that WikiLeaks leaked, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes. She may be more inclined to be tough on Wall Street than many believe. Although Mrs. Clinton has long said she will not reinstate the Glass-Steagall Act, one consultant to her campaign wrote in an email last year that her understanding “from H.R.C. is that she left her call kind of leaning toward endorsing Glass-Steagall.”These emails may just be more two-faced talk; Wall Street may even be counting on it. But being two-faced could go either way.The United States attorney in Manhattan, Preet Bharara, is expected to select Lisa Zornberg as the head of his criminal division. Ms. Zornberg, a white-collar criminal defense lawyer once nicknamed a “tiny tornado,” had already spent than a decade in the United States attorney’s office.She takes over from Daniel L. Stein, who is stepping down to lead Mayer Brown’s global regulatory and investigations group.The role carries a great deal of cachet: the division encompasses the prosecution of terrorism, digital crime, Wall Street fraud and public corruption.Dalian Wanda is here to help, according to Wang Jianlin, the company’s chairman, who was in Beverly Hills to wrap up its acquisition of Dick Clark Productions and to lure more production to its Movie Metropolis in Qingdao. Although the company is viewed by some as a propaganda threat, Mr. Wang said Wanda only wanted to help American film companies increase their market share in China.The company may have gone on an $8 billion shopping spree in Hollywood, but it is “not like we are invading,” he said. Mr. Wang noted that Wanda had purchased struggling companies like AMC Theaters and Legendary Entertainment, and strengthened them.Although there are concerns that Wanda is moving aggressively to push a pro-Chinese agenda, Mr. Wang said that the company was focused on profit and that “more Chinese elements mean more Chinese profits.”• Goldman Sachs publishes its latest quarterly earnings, which are expected to be helped by stronger trading revenue from market volatility.• Yahoo also reports its results, although the company said it would not hold a conference call to discuss the numbers because of the pending sale of its core operations to Verizon. There are many questions hanging over the deal after Yahoo disclosed that at least 500 million customer accounts had been hacked and the news that it had scanned customer emails for information related to a suspected terrorist groups.• The Labor Department will release its reading on the Consumer Price Index in September. Economists expect a 0.3 percent rise in the index, but the increase could be more than that if health care prices jump like they did in August.“If he is going to start dressmaking, he should know how to make dresses.”— Zonia Watroba, owner of a general store in Reading, Vt., on Andrew J. Hall, an aggressive oil trader and resident of the town who may have been duped while building his art collection.Advertisement