By LANDON THOMAS Jr.OCT. 18, 2016
As the bear market in oil approaches its two-year anniversary, a consensus is growing that stagnant growth worldwide and aggressive pumping by giant producers like Saudi Arabia will keep a lid on oil prices for some time.It’s an easy assessment to make. Large emerging economies like those of China, Brazil, India and Russia, which represent about a quarter of global demand for oil, are no longer booming, and it has become accepted wisdom that Saudi Arabia wants to keep prices low to wipe out higher-cost shale producers in the United States.Goldman Sachs foresees the price of oil, currently about $50, remaining flat through most of 2017. And the federal body that analyzes oil price movements, the United States Energy Information Administration, expects an average price of $52 next year.Nevertheless, a few experts have gone out on a limb, arguing that the market has become complacent in its outlook, just as it was when the price stayed above or close to $100 from 2011 to 2014.Advertisement“I think we will be in the 60s next spring and mid-70s by 2018, ” said Dwight Anderson, the founder of Ospraie Management, an energy-focused hedge fund. “Prices will be higher for longer, and I know that puts me in the extreme. But what people are missing is that big markets like Mexico, China, Nigeria and Venezuela are in structural decline.”AdvertisementMaking big macrobets on the direction of oil prices is a hazardous calling — promising praise and applause to those who get it right and ignominy to those who do not. Economist magazine predicted in 1999 that the price of oil would touch $5, only to see crude move gradually up to triple-digit levels.And in 2014, with the price comfortably above $100, Zach Schreiber, then a fairly anonymous hedge fund investor, warned at an investment conference of a supply glut that would send prices tumbling, which is exactly what happened several months later.In the realm of commodities investing, few have experienced these vicissitudes more acutely than Mr. Anderson, who began his investing career in 1994 with hedge fund nurturer Julian H. Robertson Jr.By 2007, Mr. Anderson had $9 billion under management and, with investment banks clamoring for stakes in fast-growing hedge funds, Lehman Brothers and Credit Suisse as shareholders.The financial crisis hit him hard, though. As the price of oil plunged more sharply than he had expected, he was forced to close his main fund because of steep losses.Now, with a smaller yet more manageable $550 million stash, Mr. Anderson is looking to make his mark again.The root of his thesis is that the recent drop in price from over $100 to the low 20s was unusually sudden and sharp, compared with price moves in the past. As a result, global oil giants that had planned large and expensive new projects when prices were high, will be very reluctant to renew these efforts in the years ahead.“The human mind-set will be: ‘Wow, we just saw $26 — we are never going to overspend again,’” Mr. Anderson said. “There is a lot of scar tissue to overcome. And I think that capital expenditure decisions will be impaired for years to come.”AdvertisementAlso, he says, a number of large oil producers will, for various reasons, be experiencing production declines of as much as 10 percent in the coming years. He cites Libya and Iraq, where political instability and cash shortages have taken their toll. The same could be said for Nigeria and Venezuela.Even in Iran, where experts have said that oil production will increase once the country becomes more integrated into the global economy, Mr. Anderson doubts that there will be a meaningful supply surge, given the lack of new foreign investment there.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Iran has been underinvested for years,” he said.What has also been misunderstood, he said, is the effect that the shale oil revolution in the United States has had on global oil prices. The United States recently passed Saudi Arabia as the world’s largest oil producer. And with frequent new discoveries, most recently one in West Texas announced last month, the view has been that this new supply will keep prices from reaching previous highs.Mr. Anderson says, however, that the five million barrels that shale oil companies produce is not enough to have a material effect on a global market that produces 96 million barrels a day.Of those, 39 million barrels come from countries like Saudi Arabia that belong to the oil cartel OPEC and 56 million hail from countries like the United States and Russia.Economists who share Mr. Anderson’s view about oil prices say they believe that Saudi Arabia’s decision to keep pumping hard in a weak market is aimed less at the shale producers than at companies like Chevron and BP.“Saudi Arabia is trying to maximize its economic return by keeping prices low so that the high-cost companies like Chevron cut their supply,” Mr. Anderson said. “In that way the market gets rebalanced so that they can get maximum market share.”At about $9 a barrel, Saudi Arabia is the world’s lowest-cost producer of oil, compared with $23 for shale producers and even higher for the ambitious excavations that the oil majors had been planning.AdvertisementOf course, such a strategy has its risks for the Saudis. With prices so low, their oil revenues have fallen strikingly, and its budget deficit has widened to 15 percent of total economic output.The Saudi government has also seen its cash reserves decline to $623 billion from $732 billion, and for the first time the country has been forced to borrow from international bond markets.In fact, to that very point, Mr. Schreiber, the hedge fund investor who predicted the recent oil price collapse, said this year that his next big bet was that the Saudi Arabian economy would collapse. Its young population, so accustomed to government handouts over the last decades, will resist new austerity measures and threaten the tenuous social compact that the kingdom has put in place since oil was discovered there in the 1930s, he said at the conference.“If you are long, I feel sorry for you,” Mr. Schreiber said at an investor conference in New York last spring. “Saudi Arabia has two or three years of runway before it hits a wall.”A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2016, on Page S2 of the New York edition with the headline: Not everyone’s so sure oil prices will stay low.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »