By BROOKS BARNESOCT. 19, 2016
LOS ANGELES — The former Fox News chairman Roger Ailes is coming back to television, but perhaps not in a way he will like.The writer-director Tom McCarthy, whose journalism drama “Spotlight” won multiple Academy Awards in February, including the one for best picture, has agreed to be the executive producer for a mini-series about Mr. Ailes, who was ousted from Fox News in July after multiple women accused him of sexual harassment.Producing the series will be Jason Blum, who is best known for horror movies like “The Purge.” Mr. Blum has also shepherded TV projects like HBO’s Emmy Award-winning “The Jinx,” which chronicled the deaths or disappearance of three people close to the real estate scion Robert Durst. Mr. Durst was subsequently arrested, convicted and sentenced on gun charges and now faces a murder trial in California.Joining them in creating the still-untitled series: Gabriel Sherman, the journalist who doggedly pursued Mr. Ailes and his allies starting in 2011, when Mr. Sherman was working on a biography about the cable TV titan. Mr. Ailes, as reported by CNN, was so eager to discredit Mr. Sherman and silence his sources that a 400-page dossier was compiled on him.AdvertisementMr. Sherman’s resulting book, “The Loudest Voice in the Room,” will serve as source material for the series, as will Mr. Sherman’s revealing articles for New York magazine on the sordid accusations that toppled Mr. Ailes. (Mr. Ailes has maintained his innocence.) Jennifer Stahl, who is married to Mr. Sherman and collaborated with him on the biography, will also work on the mini-series.The project, announced on Wednesday at the Vanity Fair New Establishment Summit in San Francisco, will be financed by Blumhouse, Mr. Blum’s production company. Mr. Blum’s other TV credits include the HBO movie “The Normal Heart,” an Emmy Award-winning adaptation of Larry Kramer’s 1985 play about the AIDS crisis.AdvertisementJosh Raffel, a Blumhouse spokesman, said a network partner had not yet been secured for the series about Mr. Ailes but that it would eventually be offered to a select number of channels. Blumhouse declined to say whether FX, the cable channel that is a corporate sibling to Fox News, would be one of them.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Chairman of Fox News to Be Focus of Mini-Series.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.