AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — The head of the South Korean retail giant Lotte, one of the country’s largest family-controlled conglomerates, was indicted on Wednesday on tax evasion, embezzlement and other criminal charges, the latest high-profile corruption scandal to hit big businesses here.Several relatives of the Lotte chairman, Shin Dong-bin, 61, were also indicted, with the family accused of evading $76 million in taxes over all and costing the company $165 million through embezzlement and breach of trust, South Korean prosecutors said in a news release.Although corruption scandals have regularly rocked family-controlled conglomerates, or chaebols, in South Korea, it is rare for the entire chaebol family to be indicted together.In a typical chaebol conglomerate, the chairman’s family owns a small portion of the corporate empire but controls it through loyal executives at subsidiaries that are also interlocked through circular holdings.Over the decades, the chaebols have spearheaded South Korea’s export-driven economy. But their imperious chairmen have in several instances been convicted of tax evasion and other crimes, though seldom kicked out of management.Mr. Shin is the most prominent head of a chaebol conglomerate to face corruption charges since Lee Jay-hyun, chairman of the food and entertainment group CJ, was arrested in 2013. Mr. Lee was convicted on charges of tax evasion and embezzlement the next year, but he was released from prison in an annual presidential pardon in August.Indicted with Mr. Shin on Wednesday were his brother, Shin Dong-joo, 62; their 94-year-old father, the Lotte founder, Shin Kyuk-ho; and the senior Mr. Shin’s common-law wife and a former winner of the Miss Lotte beauty pageant, Seo Mi-kyung, 57. None of them was arrested.In July, Mr. Shin’s sister, Shin Young-ja, 73, was arrested on charges of collecting $3.1 million through embezzlement and bribery. And weeks later, as investigators looked into the company, the group’s vice chairman was found dead hours before he was due to appear before prosecutors. The authorities considered the death to be a suicide.Mr. Shin was accused of arranging for his father and other relatives to receive fat salaries from Lotte subsidiaries although they did not work there, prosecutors said.He was also accused of arranging for Lotte subsidiaries to buy stocks of another affiliate at illegally high prices, and giving lucrative contracts — like running cafeterias in a chain of Lotte movie theaters — to a company owned by his family members without conducting competitive bidding.South Korea has placed restrictions on such deals because chaebol chairmen were often accused of using them to help their children accumulate a fortune.A household name in South Korea, Lotte operates department stores, duty-free shops, shopping malls, hotels, amusement parks, multiplexes, burger joints and coffee shops.It has recently become a symbol of family greed as Mr. Shin and his elder brother, Dong-joo, accused each other of corruption in a bitter public feud over the control of the empire built by their father. The sibling dispute helped uncover a trove of dirty laundry for prosecutors.Advertisement