By STEVEN ERLANGEROCT. 19, 2016
The Transocean Winner, a rig filled with more than 300 tons of diesel and weighing 18,740 tons, broke away in an August storm to drift onto the rocks on the Isle of Lewis, in far western Scotland.The huge semisubmersible oil rig detached in rough seas from a tug trying to bring it to Malta, and amid worries about pollution, it looked massive and forlorn as salvage crews tried to free it, and refloat it.But the Transocean Winner, both in its plight and in its journey away from the North Sea, is a symbol of Scotland’s growing problem. At the same time as North Sea production slips and oil and gas become harder and more expensive to extract, the price of energy has fallen sharply.Cheap oil prices are making it uneconomical to produce oil and gas from the North Sea, so investment is postponed or canceled and rigs are shutting down or being transported elsewhere. And the drop in production from the mature field has meant a steep drop in tax revenues for Scotland, which in turn has put a big question mark over the prospects of Scottish independence from the United Kingdom.AdvertisementFirst Minister Nicola Sturgeon of Scotland, the leader of the ruling Scottish National Party, is committed to independence, and after Britain voted in June to leave the European Union, while Scotland voted heavily to remain, she said a second independence referendum was “highly likely.”AdvertisementBut in fact it seems far away. Ms. Sturgeon cannot afford to lose a second referendum, and although Scots feel adrift from a Conservative-ruled Britain, the economic situation has deteriorated badly. And that is largely because of the collapse in the price of oil, which has not only reduced revenues, but made new exploration simply too costly.The September 2014 referendum on Scottish independence was a raucous and emotional affair, but one of the central questions was whether an independent Scotland would thrive economically or become poorer than now. And the key element to that debate was competing analyses of the future of North Sea oil — how much revenue it would yield and how far into the future, given that the North Sea is a mature field and production was slowing.Scots voted against independence by 55 percent to 45 percent, driven largely by doubts on the country’s economic future, not just on oil revenues, but on what kind of currency Scotland would have and whether it could join the European Union smoothly or from a standing start.The turnout was 84.6 percent, the highest ever for an election or referendum in the United Kingdom, underlining how important the vote felt to Scots. The turnout for last June’s British referendum on membership in the European Union, by contrast, was 72 percent.But then came the crash in oil prices later in 2014, which pushed many oil explorers to the brink of insolvency, with low profits and little new investment. Oil prices are at about $50 a barrel, half what they were in 2014 and far off their $145 peak in 2008.In fact, production from North Sea oil and gas peaked in 1999 at 4.55 million barrels of oil equivalent a day; today, that number is 1.64 million, said Alexander Kemp, professor of petroleum economics at the University of Aberdeen. And revenue has gone down sharply every year since 2011.The trade group Oil & Gas UK figures that the industry will lose 120,000 jobs by the end of this year. Passenger numbers at Aberdeen airport, a base for the North Sea oil industry, have dropped 20 percent over the last 18 months, and helicopter traffic from the airport to rigs has dropped a quarter in the last year. Aberdeen, once considered Britain’s Klondike, is suffering.AdvertisementAnalysts at S&P Global Platts said that investor anxiety would add to the “existing gloomy prognosis” for the North Sea. “Uncertainty alone could lead to years of delay for new development projects and put more weight behind any planned closures.”With little new investment, they warned, “fields may close down sooner, and the cost of running and maintaining pipelines and other infrastructure is spread over fewer remaining barrels.”In other words, extracting oil from the turbulent North Sea is becoming less and less cost-effective — fine when oil was at $100 a barrel, difficult at $60, disastrous at $44.Budgets for decommissioning oil rigs are estimated to triple over the next two years, because some 30 percent of North Sea rigs now operating are doing so at a loss, and wells are being capped on the seafloor.The 2014 independence referendum put a number of freighted questions to Scots: What kind of country would an independent Scotland be, with what relationship to Britain and to the European Union, and with what resources to finance a country that sees itself as a Nordic-style social democracy and spends far more than it takes in?Of course, the issue of North Sea oil was crucial — if Scotland retained the proceeds, rather than Britain as a whole, it could largely pay for itself, the Institute for Fiscal Studies judged in 2012. But by the next year, Scotland’s own figures showed that in 2012/13 North Sea oil revenue had fallen by 41.5 percent from the previous fiscal year, while Scotland’s public spending deficit had increased to 8.6 billion pounds, or $11.1 billion, from £4.6 billion.Figures from the same official agency, issued in August, were far worse. For fiscal 2015-16, Scotland’s public spending deficit was £14.8 billion amid plummeting oil prices. That deficit, 9.5 percent of gross domestic product, was more than double the percentage debt of Britain as a whole and more than three times the level the European Union requires of new member states.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Revised figures for the fiscal year 2014-15 showed Scotland’s deficit at £14.3 billion, or , 9.1 percent of G.D.P.The latest government report also estimated that Scotland’s share of North Sea revenues fell about 97 percent in 2015-16 year to just £60 million from £1.8 billion in 2014-15.Advertisement“That’s a tiny figure,” said Professor Kemp. With the drop in the price of oil, lower British taxes, accumulated tax credits from major investments since 2009 and now tax credits from decommissioning, he said, “you’re going to have a very low tax take for several years at least, even if the oil price comes back.”Scotland’s onshore revenues grew by £1.9 billion, but overall, Scotland’s revenue was estimated at £10,000 a person, about £400 a person lower than for Britain as a whole. And its government expenditure, at £12,800 a person, was £1,200 greater than the British average.In response, Ms. Sturgeon recognized the challenge. “The lower oil price has, of course, reduced offshore revenues, with a corresponding impact on our fiscal position,” she said. “This underlines the fact that Scotland’s challenge is to continue to grow our onshore economy.”She insisted that the “foundations of the Scottish economy remain strong” and tried to swing attention to the damage a British exit from the European Union and its single market would do to Scotland. “Scotland’s long-term economic success is now being directly threatened by the likely impact of Brexit,” she said.She is not wrong that Brexit, presuming that it actually happens in a couple of years, would do economic damage to Scotland if it remained a part of Britain.But whether Scots would vote for a poorer independence, with a hard border between itself and the rest of Britain, is far less clear. Scotland’s economic ties — and dependency — on Britain were emphasized after the so-called Brexit vote by former prime minister Gordon Brown, a Scot who does not favor independence and did not favor Brexit.Currently, Mr. Brown said, Scottish exports to the rest of Britain are worth £48.5 billion a year, compared with £11.6 billion to the European Union. While 250,000 Scottish jobs are linked to the European single market, he said, one million are linked to trade with England, Wales and Northern Ireland.The British government’s secretary for Scotland, David Mundell, said recent figures demonstrated “how being part of the U.K. protects living standards in Scotland.” Scotland has “weathered a dramatic slump in oil prices last year because we are part of a United Kingdom that has at its heart a system for pooling and sharing resources.”AdvertisementThe North Sea oil industry “is in long-term decline,” Professor Kemp said. While some oil will continue to be produced until at least 2050, “it’s a question of how gently or brutally this decline takes place. Reserves are still substantial — it’s whether they can be produced economically.”Oil prices ebb and flow, of course, and Scotland is trying to invest in alternative sources like wind and tidal power. But the amazing windfall that the North Sea provided for the last 50 years is coming to an end. And investment forgone in an aging field is unlikely to be replaced.A recent study of the North Sea industry by PwC, the audit and consulting firm, concluded that the North Sea had a future, if carefully managed over the next two years, but that there was risk of “a rapid and premature decline” if government and industry did not “create one last cycle of success that will retain and generate jobs, stimulate growth and ensure security of energy supply.”Scottish independence may depend on it.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil’s Plunge Dents Prospects For Scottish Independence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »