By JOHN KOBLINOCT. 20, 2016
The fiery final presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump drew 71.6 million viewers, the third-highest total ever for a presidential debate, according to data from Nielsen released on Thursday.The debate did not approach the record-setting first debate on Sept. 26, which had 84 million viewers, but it did surpass the second debate audience of 66.5 million.By this point, record ratings have become a familiar story line for this year’s election cycle. Wednesday night closed out a 14-month debate season that featured two dozen debates, many of which set records, including:■ The most-viewed debate ever (the first presidential debate).■ The highest-rated primary debate and the highest-rated non-sports cable event ever (the first Republican debate, which drew 24 million viewers in August 2015).■ The highest-rated Democratic debate ever (the first Democratic debate in October 2015 had 15.8 million viewers).AdvertisementChris Wallace of Fox News moderated Wednesday’s debate and received something that’s been elusive this election cycle for moderators: nearly universal praise.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One of Mr. Wallace’s questions provided the day’s biggest headline. When Mr. Wallace pressed Mr. Trump on whether he would unequivocally accept the election results, he refused to say he would. “I will keep you in suspense,” he said.AdvertisementUnlike the first two presidential debates, Wednesday’s debate did not go head-to-head against a National Football League game, though it did have competition from Game 4 of the National League Championship Series (The second debate on Oct. 9 ran opposite “Sunday Night Football,” so NBC did not broadcast the debate at all).Fox News had the highest ratings of any network on Wednesday, 11.3 million, besting ABC’s 11 million, which ranked second. The ratings did not include streaming statistics or C-Span, so the total audience was most likely quite a bit larger.The second most-viewed debate ever, the 1980 debate between Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, had 80.6 million viewers.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2016, on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Final Debate  Is Watched  by 71 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.