By AMIE TSANGOCT. 20, 2016
In the third and final debate, Donald J. Trump said that he might not accept the results of next month’s election if he feels it has been rigged, casting doubt on the country’s democracy.Acceptance seems to be an issue for his campaign.In Silicon Valley, technology executives are having to explain why they continue to do business with the billionaire investor Peter Thiel, who donated $1.25 million to Mr. Trump’s campaign.Mr. Thiel will address the controversy in a speech in Washington this month. But executives with ties to him have had to explain why they have not cut them.And they have faced criticism.“We agree that people shouldn’t be fired for their political views, but this isn’t a disagreement on tax policy, this is advocating hatred and violence,” wrote Ellen Pao, the head of Project Include, an organization that aims to increase diversity in the tech industry. Project Include has severed ties with Y Combinator, where Mr. Thiel is a part-time partner, because of his involvement.AdvertisementSocial Finance Inc. wants longer-term relationships with its borrowers, and it seems it wants its borrowers to have longer-term relationships as well.AdvertisementThe company is running singles events, as well as providing career counseling and wine tasting, in an attempt to enmesh itself further into the lives of its customers.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is trying to attract its potential customer base, so-called Henrys (an acronym for high earners, not rich yet), as well as investors who quickly fled from the online lending industry after Lending Club acknowledged that it had misstated financial records and dumped its founder.And SoFi does seem to be on the rebound, handling more student, personal and home loans than it was before the Lending Club crisis.The singles nights are helping.“They are making their customers into better risks and more committed customers,” said one attendee, Kim Hutchison. “I’m jealous of their business model. I wish I had thought of it.”Steven A. Cohen is a little closer to making his return to the hedge fund industry.He is barred from managing money for others and his former hedge fund pleaded guilty to insider trading, but the new investment firm he opened this year will probably begin raising money from outside investors in early 2018, when the prohibition expires.The move to open the firm, Stamford Harbor Capital, has already provoked anger.Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, sent a letter to the Securities and Exchange Commission in April saying that the firm made a mockery of the agency’s mission to protect investors.• The European Central Bank will announce the results of its latest monetary policy meeting. Most economists expect it to leave its benchmark interest rate unchanged. Investors will be watching for details of further plans for the bank’s stimulus program.• Microsoft should finally provide more detail on how its cloud business is performing, data that investors have been clamoring for.Advertisement• The Federal Reserve Bank of New York will host a conference on culture and behavior in the financial services industry.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.