AdvertisementSupported byMan in the NewsBy James Barron[Update: A.G. Sulzberger will take over as publisher of The New York Times on Jan. 1, The Times announced on Dec. 14, 2017.]He had more than 160 bylines as a reporter on the Metro desk and more than 170 in 19 months as a national correspondent based in Kansas City, Mo. But perhaps the most important piece of writing that A. G. Sulzberger did for The New York Times before Wednesday — when he was named deputy publisher — was not an article and was not published in The Times, but was all about The Times.That work came to be known as the “innovation report.” It zeroed in on the importance of a digital future for the newspaper his family has owned since 1896, and said The Times risked losing its pre-eminent place if it did not make sweeping changes. The report was released in May 2014 after nearly a year of analysis and deliberation by a committee led by Mr. Sulzberger.Systemic change at The Times was not the committee’s original mandate, said Adam Bryant, a longtime reporter and editor who was on the committee. But he said that Mr. Sulzberger “led the way in saying we’ve got to pivot and change our mission.”“The ambition of the report was really Arthur’s,” said Mr. Bryant, who is now editorial director of NYT Live, which organizes The Times’s conferences and live events, and the writer of the Corner Office column. “The work we needed to do was bigger, broader, deeper. He stepped back at the right moments to let the team work together and brainstorm, but when he needed to step up and say, ‘We need to turn the wheel and go left instead of right,’ he did.”Mr. Sulzberger, 36, made the transition to digital strategist after five years as a reporter, national correspondent and assistant editor at The Times, starting on the Metro desk. Since August 2015, he has been an associate editor. He will assume his new responsibilities on Nov. 1.In a conversation in his office off the Times newsroom on Wednesday, Mr. Sulzberger said he saw the innovation report — and the thinking that led to its conclusions — as “a wake-up call to the newsroom that we were at risk of missing the moment.”“It’s always easy to see how change will jeopardize the traditions of the place,” he said, “but what became really clear to me was not changing was the more dangerous course if we cared about the traditions of the place.”Mr. Sulzberger steps into his new role at a challenging moment for The Times, and for journalism itself. His résumé includes strong journalistic credentials and deep strategic thinking about changes in digital media, but limited experience running a digital media company. Unlike some of his predecessors in the deputy publisher role, he has been groomed more in the newsroom than in advertising or consumer marketing. The Times, like other publications, is experiencing declines in print advertising as it navigates a rapidly changing media landscape.Still, his colleagues at The Times described Mr. Sulzberger as a quick study whose modesty masked a deep inner confidence. “He has a very analytical brain,” said Carolyn Ryan, an editor who was Mr. Sulzberger’s boss when he worked on the Metro desk, “but he’s perceptive about people.”Others at the paper said he was a hard worker who plunged into assignments and did not complain when the reporting was tedious and the hours were long. For an article about the Iowa caucuses four years ago, he drove in a loop from one campaign headquarters to another, simply to see which candidate’s forces had the energy to soldier on and which seemed to be giving up.He kept driving until around 1 a.m., said Michael Barbaro, a political reporter who wrote the story with him later that day.“He did it with joy and energy and creativity,” Mr. Barbaro said. “It was one of those unglamorous, dutiful reporting exercises, but there was nothing dutiful about the way he did it.”Ms. Ryan said that “there was no expectation from him that he be treated any differently” from other reporters and editors in a newsroom where everyone knew who he was.In the newsroom or out on an assignment, Mr. Sulzberger did not trumpet his connection to The Times’s owners. He is the son of the publisher and chairman of The New York Times Company, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., and a fifth-generation descendant of Adolph S. Ochs, who bought The Times at a bankruptcy auction and promised a newspaper that would be “clean, dignified, trustworthy and impartial.”“I recognized the name,” said Vincent Bova, a video editor and puppeteer who figured in a feature article that Mr. Sulzberger wrote in 2010. “I mean, I knew I was dealing with royalty. There was no reason for me to bring that up with him, and he didn’t.” Mr. Sulzberger’s mother, Gail Gregg, is a painter and writer with a background in journalism. She and his father divorced in 2009.Mr. Sulzberger wrote his articles in the third person, the way most newspaper articles are written — except for one. He told readers in January 2012, when he was based in Kansas City, that he was a vegetarian, not the easiest thing to be in the Midwest. “A mecca of meat,” he called it.“Any newcomer should expect to start with a tour of the most venerable purveyors of cows, pigs and chickens in what I’ve been told are their most delicious forms,” he wrote. “So, yes, I’ve ‘eaten’ at some of these famous restaurants.”He put the word “eaten” in quotation marks for a reason. He said he had had a baked potato at a steakhouse, rolls at a place known for its fried chicken and a mug of Budweiser at a barbecue joint.Another article he wrote from the Midwest began with a tip from Patrick McGeehan, a Metro reporter in New York, who had heard that the last machine in the world that could develop Kodachrome film — in a lab in Parsons, Kan. — was being retired.Mr. Sulzberger’s article caught the attention of movie producers, who optioned it, and the film-industry website The Tracking Board reported in May that Jason Sudeikis and Ed Harris would star in the movie. Mr. Sulzberger said he had donated the money he received, less than $2,000, to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.Though Mr. Sulzberger grew up in Manhattan, Andrew Paryzer, a friend since the two were in seventh grade at the Ethical Culture Fieldston School in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, said he was “athletic and outdoorsy” and was good at river rafting, which he learned when he lived in the Pacific Northwest from 2006 to 2009.“He’s the best oarsman when we’re going through the rapids and stuff,” said Mr. Paryzer, a managing director of Blue State Digital, a strategy and technology firm. “The story for me has always been: He loves being out there. He’s very comfortable. But he’s also someone who makes a lot of other people comfortable.” He did that on a rafting trip with friends who were not experienced. Mr. Sulzberger, Mr. Paryzer said, “made them comfortable — ‘There’s a plan. Yes, we’re going down a river with rapids, but we’ve done it before.’ He inspires confidence.”Mr. Sulzberger went to Brown University, where he majored in political science and graduated in 2003. He joined The Providence Journal for a two-year reporting internship in 2004 at the recommendation of Tracy Breton, a longtime investigative reporter at The Journal who also teaches at Brown.“I hadn’t always wanted to go into journalism,” Mr. Sulzberger said, “but she really pushed me to give it a shot.”“Once you’re six months into being a reporter and you’ve lost the nerves,” he said, “you realize this is one of the most fun jobs any person can have, so it was being a reporter that made me want to spend a career in journalism.”He joined The Oregonian in 2006 and The Times in 2009, working first as a reporter on the City Room blog, one of the newspaper’s highest-profile digital efforts at the time. He then covered Federal District Court in Brooklyn before opening a bureau in Kansas City in 2010. “I loved the idea of going to a part of the country that the rest of the country feels all too comfortable overlooking and finding the stories that aren’t being told there,” he said. “I feel like I was at my best as a reporter when I was channeling the great stories that I knew were hidden in plain sight.”But he also covered breaking news, as when a tornado destroyed much of Joplin, Mo., and floods devastated other parts of the Midwest.Back in New York, he spent about 18 months as an editor on the Metro desk before taking up the project that became the innovation report.“I’m pretty omnivorous with information,” he said, “and I’ve treated the strategy work I’ve done for the last few years the same way that I always treated any reporting assignment, which was: Before you start writing, before you come to a view of how things are working and how they should change, learn everything. And, as much as you have time to, question everything that you think you already know.”Advertisement