By BEN SISARIOOCT. 21, 2016
The mystery of Bob Dylan’s Nobel Prize deepens.This week, after days in which Mr. Dylan made no public mention of being named the latest Nobel laureate, close readers of his official website noticed a few words in an announcement about a new edition of his complete lyrics: “Winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature.”It seemed an acknowledgment, and possibly a clue that Mr. Dylan, 75, would accept the honor — something that is usually not in doubt for Nobel winners. But it has become an open question given Mr. Dylan’s silence on the issue, along with comments this week by Sara Danius, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, which bestows the award. Ms. Danius said that she did not know Mr. Dylan’s plans because, although she had spoken to an intermediary, she had not spoken to the songwriter directly.And then that brief notice disappeared without explanation.Representatives of Mr. Dylan did not respond to a question about the change, and the academy has made no further comments. (Simon & Schuster, Mr. Dylan’s book publisher, proudly notes his Nobel, along with “the French Legion of Honor, a Pulitzer Prize Special Citation and the Presidential Medal of Freedom.”)Mr. Dylan has played five concerts since the Nobel announcement, and fans have been monitoring his every move for signs of a reaction. In Las Vegas, he played a guitar, perhaps for the first time in four years. At Desert Trip in California, he played “Why Try to Change Me Now,” the 1950s chestnut by Cy Coleman and Joseph A. McCarthy that is on Mr. Dylan’s recent album “Shadows in the Night” (although he has played the song more than 70 times on tour since last year). Do they mean anything? As with everything Dylan, it’s hard to guess.Some literary figures have questioned the choice of Mr. Dylan for the Nobel in literature. But in the music world it has been taken as largely uncontroversial, even obvious — “like pinning a medal on Mount Everest for being the highest mountain,” as Leonard Cohen said.The Nobel ceremony is planned for Dec. 10 in Stockholm.Alexandra Alter contributed reportingA version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2016, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Dylan and the Nobel: It Gets Weirder.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.