AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — British American Tobacco said on Friday that it had made a $47 billion takeover offer to buy the stake in Reynolds American that it does not already own, a deal that would create a tobacco giant with a significant presence around the world.The deal would create the world’s largest publicly traded tobacco business based on net sales and combine companies with brands that include Camel, Lucky Strike, Newport and Pall Mall. It comes with the industry facing a shift toward so-called next-generation products such as e-cigarettes and vaping products.British American Tobacco also appears to be capitalizing on the tumult since Britain voted in June to leave the European Union. The pound has plunged, which helps bolster the profit of companies like British American Tobacco that are based in the United Kingdom but do most of their business overseas. In recent months, the company’s stock price has surged, giving it more currency to make a deal.The new company would have a strong share of the market in the United States, as well as a major presence in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and South America, the company said.British American Tobacco’s nonbinding offer to buy the 57.8 percent of Reynolds American that it does not hold comes just two years after Reynolds agreed to acquire a smaller tobacco rival, Lorillard, for $27.4 billion. That deal was completed last year. Reynolds American itself was formed more than a decade ago, when B.A.T. merged its Brown & Williamson operations in the United States with R. J. Reynolds.British American Tobacco said in a letter to the Reynolds American board that it had offered $56.50 a share in cash and shares, representing a 20 percent premium over Reynolds American’s closing price on Thursday, which was $47.17.“We have been a shareholder in Reynolds since its creation in 2004 and have benefited from its growth in the U.S. market,” Nicandro Durante, the British American Tobacco chief executive, said in a news release. “The proposed merger of our two great companies is the logical progression in our relationship and offers all shareholders a stake in a stronger, truly global tobacco and next-generation products company.”The offer comes with shares in British American Tobacco — a company that makes the vast majority of its profit overseas but that reports its results in pounds — up around 12 percent since the Brexit referendum in June, largely on the back of the declining pound.British American Tobacco also said in its letter to Reynolds American that the combined company would be able to deliver “a world class pipeline of vapour and tobacco heating products” around the world. It also said it expected cost savings of about $400 million from the deal.A Reynolds American spokesman said the company had received the offer and its board was reviewing it.The agreement would equate to $20 billion in cash and about $47 billion in British American Tobacco shares. It would value Reynolds American at $81 billion based on market capitalization.The transaction would be the latest shake-up in the global tobacco industry, which saw its biggest upheaval in years with the Reynolds American-Lorillard deal in 2014. That deal required nearly a year of navigating regulatory hurdles, with the combined company selling several brands to win approval.“We always expected this deal to happen eventually, but we are surprised by the timing,” Adam Spielman, a Citigroup analyst, said in a research note on Friday. “It is true that B.A.T. is doing this deal while borrowing rates are low, but it could have bought R.A.I. before R.A.I. bought Lorillard, when the share price was 57 percent lower.”If completed, this transaction would probably not face the same kind of regulatory scrutiny as the Lorillard deal, as there is little overlap between the two companies. Reynolds American operates primarily in the United States, while British American Tobacco’s focus is outside the country.Reynolds American, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., is the parent company of R. J. Reynolds, the second-largest tobacco company in the United States after the Altria Group, and has brands including Camel and Newport.It was formed in 2004 , but it traces its roots to the founding of Lorillard in New York City in 1760 and R. J. Reynolds in North Carolina in 1875.Reynolds American reported sales of $10.7 billion in 2015 and employs 5,600 people.British American Tobacco, which is based in London and was founded in 1902, has more than 200 brands in its portfolio, including Dunhill and Rothmans. It reported revenue of 13.1 billion pounds in 2015, or about $16.1 billion at current exchange rates, and it employs more than 50,000 people.Centerview Partners, Deutsche Bank and UBS, and the law firms Cravath, Swaine & Moore and Herbert Smith Freehills, are advising British American Tobacco on the proposed transaction.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement