By THE NEW YORK TIMESOCT. 23, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s expected this week.TECHNOLOGYThis week will be a busy one for Apple, which will report its fiscal fourth-quarter financial results on Tuesday and is expected to unveil new Macs on Thursday. Apple, which has experienced sluggish sales of its flagship iPhone products in recent quarters, will offer the first peek into sales of the new iPhone 7 and the extra business it is getting since Samsung’s troubles with the Galaxy Note 7. The anticipated updates to the Mac line should also perk up what is still an important business for Apple in the mobile era. Vindu GoelGoogle must respond by Wednesday to European antitrust charges that some of the company’s advertising products hampered consumer choice. The search company denies any wrongdoing. The deadline may also still be extended from Wednesday. But it represents the first of three separate responses that Google must give to European competition authorities by early November to allegations that some of its services and products, including the popular Android smartphone operating system, hindered rivals and limited competition in Europe. Mark ScottAUTO INDUSTRYTesla Motors’ finances will come into focus on Wednesday when it reports its earnings for the third quarter. The company previously disclosed that deliveries rose 70 percent to 24,500 cars in the July-to-September period. But a loss is likely because the company is spending heavily to introduce a new car, the Model 3, and to start up its gigantic Gigafactory in Nevada, where it will produce batteries. Investors will listen closely to Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, and any details he offers on the pending merger with one of his other companies, SolarCity, a maker of solar panels. On Friday, the company is expected to present a system that combines solar panels with a battery pack to store power for home use and a vehicle-charging unit. Neal E. BoudetteBANKINGIt should be a busy week for earnings reports in Europe as several of the region’s biggest banks are scheduled to report their third-quarter results. Deutsche Bank, the French bank BNP Paribas, Santander of Spain, the Swiss bank UBS and the British lenders Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland are all expected to update investors on their results.AdvertisementInvestors are expected to keep a close eye on Deutsche Bank and any update on its negotiations with the Justice Department over investigation of its underwriting of residential mortgage-backed securities. The German lender’s shares have been under pressure over concerns about the pace of its turnaround and worries that it may be forced to pay billions of dollars in fines. The Justice Department has proposed that the bank pay as much as $14 billion to settle the case. Chad BrayPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.TECHNOLOGYAlphabet, parent company of Google, reports quarterly earnings on Thursday after the close of market. Google’s dominance in search and digital advertising is expected to ensure another quarter of growing revenue and profit at a clip rarely seen for a company of its size. But the focus will be on the progress of Alphabet’s “other bets” — loss-making businesses like Google Fiber and the Nest connected home devices. Alphabet wants to limit those losses in the short term, while hoping that one of those bets blossoms into a future earnings pillar. Daisuke WakabayashiAdvertisementECONOMYOn Thursday, the Commerce Department will announce data on durable goods orders in September. Economists are predicting that durable goods demand will be up by 0.7 percentage point, with much of that gain resulting from a jump in aircraft orders. The less volatile core capital goods category is thought to have declined by 0.1 percentage point, on continuing caution among businesses in terms of new investment, especially in the industrial sector. Nelson D. SchwartzOn Friday, the Commerce Department will release its initial estimate of economic growth in the third quarter. After lackluster gains in the first half of 2016 — 0.8 percentage point in the first quarter and 1.4 percent in the second — economists think the economy expanded at an annual rate of 2.5 percent in the July-to-September period.While that’s better, it’s still down a bit from earlier forecasts of third-quarter growth, amid weakness in business spending and construction of new multifamily housing. On the other hand, consumer spending continues to be healthy, and experts will be watching to see whether that trend continued last quarter. Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Apple, Google and Tesla Have Busy Schedules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.