By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDOCT. 22, 2016
AT&T’s blockbuster $84.5 billion takeover of Time Warner means many things — including rich fees for the bankers and lawyers who helped craft the deal.Freeman & Company, a merger advisory and consulting firm, estimates that there will be $80 million to $120 million in advisory fees for each side.It’s a familiar list of advisers for each company. Last year, Perella Weinberg Partners poached George H. Young III, a veteran telecommunications banker, from Lazard — and gained a close relationship with AT&T in the process. Mr. Young had advised the telecommunications company on its $48.5 billion takeover of DirecTV, as well as on many of the earlier deals that built the modern-day AT&T.JPMorgan Chase was one of the banks in the telecom company’s ill-fated attempt to buy T-Mobile five years ago, and it was one of the financial advisers on the company’s purchase of the Mexican cellphone service provider Iusacell. It is also one of Wall Street’s biggest lenders to AT&T.AdvertisementBank of America Merrill Lynch, meanwhile, had helped advise DirecTV on its sale to AT&T.And both Sullivan & Cromwell and Arnold & Porter are longtime law firms for AT&T, handling many of the company’s deals — Sullivan & Cromwell on the transaction side, Arnold & Porter on the regulatory side.Time Warner also turned to familiar faces. Allen & Company is a longtime adviser to media companies, and last year hired Ketan Mehta, then the global head of Citigroup’s tech, media and telecom practice. Mr. Mehta and other Citigroup bankers helped defend Time Warner from an unwanted takeover bid by Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox.AdvertisementThe law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore was also involved in Time Warner’s defense at the time.Fun fact: Allen & Company, Citigroup and Morgan Stanley also helped advise Time Warner Cable — important to note, a separate company — in its sale to a fellow cable operator, Charter Communications.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.