AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael M. GrynbaumIn its 130-year history, AT&T has transitioned from a telegraph service to a wireless provider to a global communications behemoth.Now, one of America’s oldest corporations is about to take on what may be its trickiest identity yet: journalist.Assuming its $85 billion merger with Time Warner is cleared, AT&T will soon find itself in charge of CNN, the cable news stalwart whose profitability — itself a crucial lure for suitors of Time Warner — relies on an international reputation for legitimate reporting.The difficulties of defending tough reporting and shielding journalists from powerful antagonists can be hard for any corporation to stomach. And while AT&T gained a foothold in the television industry by acquiring DirecTV last year, the company has no journalistic lineage, meaning its executives will have to face these challenges on the fly.“Time Warner was built on journalism first, so they had that in their blood already,” said Jonathan Klein, a former CNN president, referring to Time Warner’s origins as publisher of Time magazine. “AT&T does not, so there is a question if there is any kind of corporate appreciation for editorial independence.”Aware that concerns were percolating within the news network, Randall Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, issued a statement within 24 hours of the merger’s announcement, declaring CNN “an American symbol of independent journalism,” and pledging to respect its editorial independence. On Monday, he appeared on the CNN morning show “New Day” to echo his message of benign neglect.“When people watch CNN, they are getting an independent assessment and reporting of the news,” Mr. Stephenson told the CNN reporter Christine Romans. “The last thing we want to do, as AT&T, is in any way taint that in the slightest bit.”Those remarks may pacify some CNN veterans, but Mr. Stephenson could find himself under more scrutiny. He has contributed about $80,000 this election cycle to aid Republican candidates, an otherwise humdrum fact that could be newly relevant if he takes charge of one of the country’s most influential news outlets.Still, in interviews, media executives said that it would be foolish for AT&T to meddle in a valuable product like CNN, saying that any perception of corporate intrusion could damage a profitable brand.AT&T, once known informally as Ma Bell, is a storied American brand that goes back under a succession of names to the late 19th century, after Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone.Television networks are no strangers to corporate overseers. CBS, and its flagship news division, was purchased by Westinghouse in 1995; Disney owns ABC and thus its news division; and NBC News and MSNBC are subsidiaries of Comcast, the Philadelphia-based cable giant that took control of NBCUniversal in 2011.Comcast’s influence over NBC’s news reporting has appeared to be minimal. When the anchor Brian Williams was accused of exaggerating stories early last year, NBCUniversal’s chief executive, Stephen B. Burke, consulted with David L. Cohen, an executive vice president of Comcast. But Mr. Burke, himself a former chief operating officer at Comcast, is typically the highest-level executive involved in critical decisions by the news division.CNN, founded by the maverick businessman Ted Turner, was first purchased by Time Warner in 1995. Mr. Klein, who was CNN’s president from 2004 to 2010, said he never experienced any corporate interference during his time there.Mr. Klein noted that Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, had no journalistic experience when he bought The Washington Post in 2013. So far, he said, the newspaper has thrived under its new ownership.In an age of consolidation for the ailing media industry, AT&T is the latest corporation to make an audacious move into the news business. One of AT&T’s chief telecom rivals, Verizon, bought AOL in 2015, giving it control of The Huffington Post.Asked on Monday if Verizon had ever tried to influence the site’s coverage, Arianna Huffington, the website’s co-founder who recently left The Huffington Post, replied in a text message: “They never did.”But Verizon did run into trouble when it started a technology news site called SugarString, which, it was later discovered, prohibited reports on net neutrality and domestic spying. Those were touchy subjects for Verizon at a time when it was under fire for turning over phone records of millions of people to the government without their consent. (The site has since been shut down.)The announcement of the planned AT&T-Time Warner merger did raise a red flag for at least one TV news veteran: Tom Johnson, another former CNN president, who emailed a group of leading media figures over the weekend warning of “the critical need for AT&T to protect the news and editorial independence of CNN.”Mr. Johnson was prompted to write the missive after he received an outpouring of concerned messages and phone calls from former CNN colleagues, he said in an interview on Monday. A one-time publisher of The Los Angeles Times, Mr. Johnson has firsthand knowledge of corporate takeovers gone awry: He watched as his former paper was hollowed out after being acquired by the Tribune Company.But Mr. Johnson said that he found Mr. Stephenson’s assurances that CNN would remain autonomous to be genuine. “I really believe he’s quite serious about what he believes,” he said.Still, Mr. Johnson added: “I don’t know if there’ll ever be another Ted Turner.”Sydney Ember and Emily Steel contributed reporting.Advertisement