By LESLIE PICKEROCT. 24, 2016
AT&T’s chief executive, Randall L. Stephenson, has been pretty casual about the costs of failing to push through the telecommunication giant’s proposed purchase of Time Warner.“Breakup fees are not that relevant in a deal like this,” Mr. Stephenson said on Monday in an interview on CNBC.Randall Stephenson, chief executive of AT&T;, and Jeffrey Bewkes, chief executive of Time Warner, defended their big merger on CNBC’s “Squawk Box.”Mr. Stephenson was referring to the chances that the Time Warner deal would fail to get regulatory approval, and the fee that AT&T would owe the media company if the government quashed their deal. His response to the mention of termination fees was mild perhaps because the one for this deal is so small.According to the companies’ merger agreement, dated Saturday, AT&T will have to pay Time Warner $500 million if antitrust officials do not provide the necessary approvals. That represents a mere 0.59 percent of the $85.4 billion transaction cost, far smaller than the average 4 percent for deals greater than $1 billion, according to data compiled by Dealogic.AdvertisementThe low fee suggests Time Warner is confident that the deal will pass muster, but it is also a reflection of AT&T’s regretful history with breakup fees.In March 2011, AT&T agreed to buy T-Mobile USA from Deutsche Telekom for $39 billion. But by December, AT&T ended the deal after failing to persuade regulators that the combination would not lead to higher prices for consumers. Per their merger agreement, AT&T owed Deutsche Telekom $4 billion, the largest termination fee paid for a withdrawn deal, according to Dealogic.AdvertisementThe breakup fee was so high because AT&T had to compensate T-Mobile for disruptions to its business while the deal was under review, said Fiona M. Scott Morton, a former deputy assistant attorney general at the Justice Department. T-Mobile missed out on various handset-maker partnerships while the deal was being scrutinized, which was costly, she said.Those opportunity costs may be less obvious with Time Warner.“Time Warner is in the content business, and they’ll keep working on content,” said Ms. Scott Morton, now an economics professor at the Yale University School of Management. “I can’t think of a strong reason why they’d be hampered during the review.”In the event that Time Warner obtained a higher bid, it would have to pay AT&T $1.725 billion, a fee that is in place largely to dissuade anyone from topping AT&T’s bid.Michael J. de la Merced contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: AT&T; Isn’t Sweating Breakup Fee if the Merger Fails.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.