
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

OCT. 24, 2016
In recent weeks, we have received the latest installment in the long-running — and some would say quixotic — attempt to explain how certain supersize American financial institutions would be addressed under the bankruptcy code if they were to fail.The Dodd-Frank Act, enacted in 2010 in response to the collapse of Lehman Brothers and all other near failures of 2008 and 2009, requires all large financial institutions, including the American units of foreign financial institutions, to prepare plans explaining how they would face their own “Lehman moment.”This exercise is consistent with the notion that Dodd-Frank’s “orderly liquidation authority,” an insolvency system in which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation would act as a receiver of a distressed financial institution, is to act only as a backstop to normal bankruptcy procedures.Some, particularly those abroad, consider this a fool’s errand. Banking regulators in particular seem to be skeptical about the role of a bankruptcy judge, who will obviously not have a pre-existing relationship with the financial institution, in the resolution process.AdvertisementThe new plans are mostly notable for injecting intermediate holding companies into the banks’ organizational structure. This new holding company addressed the obvious bankruptcy law problems that would result from previous plans to have the bankrupt holding company transfer money to its venerable subsidiaries just before filing for bankruptcy.AdvertisementNonetheless, there is something odd about trying to solve this problem by adding yet another legal entity to the already complex corporate structure of banks.But at heart, the new bankruptcy plans are quite similar to the prior drafts. They all turn on the notion that a large financial institution can be saved by efforts that focus only on the holding company at the top of the financial institution.The basic model involves the holding company issuing a lot of debt that is used to fund the operating subsidiaries. Because these new funds come in the form of long-term bonds, they cannot be subject to a run like bank deposits in the 1930s or repo or commercial paper in 2008. These bonds, called total loss absorbing capacity, would be exchanged for shares in the financial institution. Old shareholders would be wiped out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “single point of entry” approach to financial institution bankruptcy posits that fixing the holding company’s balance sheet — by canceling debt, and thus rebalancing the balance sheet — would stabilize the entire corporate group.In a recent paper with Arthur E. Wilmarth Jr. of George Washington University, and forthcoming in The Florida Law Review, I argued that there are good reasons to be skeptical about this approach to financial institution failure.In short, we ask two crucial questions. First, who is going to buy these new bonds? And second, how likely it is that forcibly converting bondholders to shareholders will do the trick in a financial crisis?On the first point, the worry is that retail investors might be the ones most likely to hold this new debt. That means that the taxpayer may be left holding the bag once again. At the least, we will want to make sure that investors understand this up front and demand an appropriate return.On the question of the “single point of entry” approach, the basic issue is whether it is reasonable to think that the near failure of the American International Group in 2008, to take but one example, could have been contained by restructuring its holding company.We are doubtful and argue that the “single point of entry” approach is better viewed as one tool in the resolution toolbox. Thus, we reject pending “Chapter 14” proposals that would tie financial institution resolution under the Bankruptcy Code to the use of that approach.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »