AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangFor media companies, bigger is usually seen to be better.But not everyone is on board with that, especially if it looks as if it could reshape the entire media landscape in the United States and spur even more consolidation.Questions have already arisen about AT&T’s grand plans for a formidable business empire with its purchase of Time Warner, which was announced over the weekend.Politicians, including Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton, have weighed in. The top Republican and Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee’s antitrust subcommittee have said they planned to hold a hearing on the deal. And competitors have urged regulators to pay closer attention, too.The concern is rooted in how consumers have fared since Comcast bought NBCUniversal, setting a template for media and telecommunications consolidation. Would consumers have less choice if the conglomerate that creates the content also provides the pipes that delivers it? Is their privacy at stake?AT&T insists it has no plans to limit Time Warner content on other channels. So what exactly is it getting out of the deal?It could use Time Warner’s creative team to devise new programs that could be exclusive to AT&T, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes. But services like Netflix and Amazon Prime have proved you do not need to buy a legacy media company to do that. Still, it would give the company a head start.And even with rapid technological innovation and uncertain geopolitics, business leaders seem to have adjusted to “the new normal” and are confident enough to plow on with huge deals, as David Gelles reports. We’ll have to stay tuned to see whether AT&T succeeds, but before then, the bankers and lawyers who helped strike the deal could pocket some rich fees if it is completed. The list of advisers is familiar (they have worked with AT&T and Time Warner before) and they are expected to receive $80 million to $120 million on each side.Jeffrey L. Bewkes, the chief executive of Time Warner, will also be sitting pretty. He rejected a takeover bid by 21st Century Fox in 2014, saying that Time Warner could create more value on its own and land a more lucrative deal later. And his bet has paid off — AT&T is offering $85.4 billion, or about $107.5 a share, well above the $85 a share Fox was offering.The resulting megacompany could, however, be looking less comfortable once the deal is done.The merged business would have about $175 billion of debt, making it bigger than some financial institutions. This, experts say, is one of the riskiest parts of the deal: If cheap credit fades away, that could be expensive, even though AT&T is healthy and can easily handle its debt load at the moment.It’s the chief executive’s best friend, helping business leaders become “thought leaders and global ambassadors,” according to its website.And to achieve that, Teneo hires influential political and corporate figures to advise clients. These figures include former President Bill Clinton and Huma Abedin, who worked at Teneo while employed at the State Department under Secretary Hillary Clinton.As a result, the firm is in the public eye for its relationship with the Clintons. The New York Times took a look at how the advisory firm fosters its network for the benefit of its clients.• JPMorgan’s new marketing campaign for its Chase Sapphire Reserve credit card starts today. It aims to attract fans of travel and dining — millennials in particular — with a series of videos featuring James Corden, the host of “The Late Late Show” on CBS, interviewing people in the restaurant, transportation and accommodation industries.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement