AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris HortonThink of it as farm-to-table 2.0.At the heart of this concept is 3-D printing technology, still in its earliest stages, but offering the promise of greater efficiency in the production of food, with less waste and more customization. The first 3-D food printers are being used primarily in commercial capacities, but with new functionalities and lower prices on the way, the mass market awaits.“It’s still early days,” said Gary Shu, senior manager of market development at XYZprinting in New Taipei City, Taiwan, who called 3-D food printing “a niche within a niche.”Mr. Shu is part of a 15-person team tasked with applying industrial 3-D printing technologies to food. The company unveiled its XYZ Food Printer at last year’s International CES, the annual trade show of the consumer electronics industry. Since then, it has sold nearly all of the first 100 machines it manufactured, Mr. Shu said.The $2,499 printer has three capsules that can be filled with the ingredients for printing complete and ready-to-bake cookies, pizza, meat pies or scones from digital files in 10 to 12 minutes. Any ingredients that can be pressed through a die can be printed.“The first question we were asked at CES was ‘Why didn’t you put an oven in there?’,” Mr. Shu said. “We’re trying out a new market, so we tried not to make it too complicated. Future iterations of the printer may feature an oven.’’Most XYZ Food Printers sold have gone to China, primarily to bakeries and food institutions, Mr. Shu said. An Australian food retail chain bought two units on a trial basis and is discussing a bulk order, he said. Nursing homes in Singapore and Japan are using the company’s printers to create foods with precise nutritional formulation for people with specific dietary requirements.The ability of food printing to deliver tailored nutrition opens new ways to approach food, said Hod Lipson, director of the Creative Machines Lab at Columbia University.“Food printing could allow consumers to print food with customized nutritional content, optimized based on biometric and genomic data,” Mr. Lipson said. “So instead of eating a slice of yesterday’s bread from the supermarket, you’d eat something baked just for you on demand. This may be the missing link between nutrition and personal medicine, and the food that’s on your table.”Food printing also offers sustainability advantages.“The promise of 3-D printing is a matter of logistics,” said Joseph F. Coughlin, founder and director of the AgeLab at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “We may see reduced packaging costs and materials. Moreover, we may see reduced fuel use and fuel emissions because the delivery of product may be in larger amounts that may be easily stored.”As with any new technology, 3-D food printing faces challenges.Ronan Ye, founder of 3E Rapid Prototyping, in Zhongshan, China, said that “3-D printing is merely used for the shaping of food materials” at present, and “the degree to which people are willing to accept 3-D-printed food is also a problem.”Mr. Ye said he could envision a 3-D printer synthesizing proteins to create food with the same texture as meat. That will require further innovation, however.Current printers can “make customized cakes, candy and the like, but if you want haute cuisine, I’m thinking it will require game-changing innovations for that to happen,” he said.One chef, Paco Pérez, has been exploring the possibilities of 3-D food printing at Miramar, his restaurant with two Michelin stars in Llançà, Spain, using Foodini, the 3-D food printer made by Barcelona-based Natural Machines.“At this moment, we are in a proving and experimentation phase with meringues and emulsions,” he said. “The Foodini allows us to achieve greater detail in the re-creation of a form and in creating pieces which are exactly identical.”The Foodini retails for $4,000 and most buyers have been professional kitchens, said Lynette Kucsma, a co-founder of Natural Machines and its chief marketing officer. It comes with five refillable capsules.Natural Machines anticipates that 3-D food printers will one day be a common kitchen appliance. Before that happens, Ms. Kucsma said, printers will need to be able to cook food, too. Natural Machines is working on a prototype food printer with cooking function and expects the first mass-market Foodini to retail for $2,000, she said.“Do you think in the future you’ll need an oven, a microwave, a stove and a 3-D printer that cooks?” Ms. Kucsma said. “Probably not. You’re going to see functionalities converge, resulting in devices that are smarter.”This data-driven future of customized meals and snacks — for example, those with less sugar or no salt — will converge with the “internet of things,” she said, so that if your Fitbit tells your food printer that you skipped your morning run, it can offer a lighter breakfast.The food printer’s proximity to the kitchen table would remove the need for additives and preservatives. A plate of 3-D-printed ravioli, for example, would be fresher than store-bought ravioli produced in a faraway factory. The pasta maker Barilla has grasped this; in May it introduced a prototype pasta printer at the Cibus food exhibition in Italy. The printer requires only water and semolina flour to print pasta in a variety of shapes, including three that cannot be made by hand.Farther upstream in the food production chain is the FarmBot Genesis, which applies 3-D printing principles to small-scale farming. The FarmBot features a rail-mounted gantry setup, a retractable tool with heads for different functions, and a camera. The machine can plant, water and weed a 5-foot by 10-foot plot of soil. Crop assortment is selected and managed with a web-based app.“It’s not that far-fetched to say that FarmBot is a really big 3-D food printer,” said Rory Aronson, founder and chief executive of FarmBot, which is based in San Luis Obispo, Calif. “It’s not extruding food material, but it is very precisely putting certain ingredients — seeds, water, tooling and fertilizers — in certain places to produce a product.”Since June, FarmBot has sold more than 300 preorder units at $3,000 each, Mr. Aronson said. Half were sold within the United States.Mr. Aronson is developing a FarmBot for the mass market that he said was less “pricey and technical.”FarmBot is fully open source, with its hardware plans, software and data files downloadable for free. A dozen early adopters have already built and customized their own FarmBots, Mr. Aronson said.After the preordered machines are delivered in February, Mr. Aronson said, he anticipates an “explosion” of feedback via online FarmBot communities. “That’s going to be a really exciting time,” he said.Advertisement