AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersSumner Redstone, the media mogul, on Tuesday sued two ex-girlfriends over civil claims including elder abuse, saying he was forced to borrow $100 million from the private company that holds his voting shares of CBS Corporation and Viacom to cover tax obligations on gifts he gave to the women.The lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles Superior Court, seeks about $150 million that Mr. Redstone’s lawyers say he gave to his former girlfriends Manuela Herzer and Sydney Holland. Mr. Redstone’s lawsuit is the newest front in a nearly yearlong litigation war between Mr. Redstone, the 93-year-old former Viacom chairman, and Ms. Herzer.Ron Richards, a lawyer for Ms. Herzer, said the lawsuit had no merit. “All of the gifts Mr. Redstone made to my client and to Sydney Holland were made with his full knowledge and blessing,” he said.In a statement, Ms. Holland called the lawsuit “fictional revisionist history.” She said that Mr. Redstone’s lawyers and doctors “vetted and approved all payments” she received.Ms. Herzer had challenged her removal as Mr. Redstone’s designated health care agent last year, saying that Mr. Redstone was not competent to make the decision. A Los Angeles judge dismissed her case in May, saying Mr. Redstone made it clear in a videotaped deposition that he did not want Ms. Herzer making decisions about his care. Ms. Herzer has appealed that ruling.In the lawsuit filed on Tuesday, Mr. Redstone says Ms. Herzer and Ms. Holland engaged in a yearslong scheme to drain his wealth by running up credit card bills, selling stock and changing his estate plan.National Amusements owns 80 percent of the voting shares of CBS and Viacom, but Mr. Redstone controls stock options and other shares of the companies, the lawsuit says.The lawsuit claims that Ms. Herzer and Ms. Holland persuaded Mr. Redstone to sell those assets, which generated about $100 million in after-tax income. Mr. Redstone then gave $45 million to each of them.However, this led to tax obligations of more than $90 million, the lawsuit says. Mr. Redstone then had to borrow $100 million from National Amusements to cover it, the suit says.The lawsuit also cites several emails from a nurse for Mr. Redstone saying that Ms. Herzer and Ms. Holland continually berated him and falsely said his family did not want to visit.Mr. Richards, a lawyer for Mr. Herzer, said that Mr. Redstone was now being manipulated by his family, and that his client hoped his true mental state would emerge during the course of the lawsuit.Advertisement