By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 25, 2016
WASHINGTON — Consumer confidence retreated slightly this month after reaching a 20-month high in September, but home prices continued to climb at a solid pace in August as more prospective buyers competed for fewer properties.Consumer confidence slipped to 98.6 this month after rising to 103.5 in September, the Conference Board reported on Tuesday. The September figure was the highest since confidence stood at 103.8 in January 2015. The September confidence number was revised down from an initial estimate of 104.1, the highest in nine years.The October figure reflected a drop in consumers’ assessment of business conditions and employment prospects.Even with the small decline, consumer confidence was still at a level expected to support consumer spending and economic growth in coming months.AdvertisementThe October decline reflected decreases in consumers’ view about current conditions and their future expectations.AdvertisementThe number of consumers saying business conditions at present were “good” decreased moderately, to 26.2 percent from 27.7 percent, while those saying business conditions were “bad” rose to 17.7 percent from 15.8 percent.Their assessment of the labor market was also less positive, with those saying jobs were “plentiful” dropping to 24.3 percent, from 27.6 percent in September, although those who said jobs were “hard to get” also declined slightly, to 22.1 percent from 22.3 percent in September.Economists said the October decline put the Conference Board’s take on confidence more in line with other confidence readings, including the University of Michigan survey.“We read the October data as suggesting that household confidence has corrected after the outsized increase in the previous month,” Blerina Uruci of Barclays said in a research note.Andrew Hunter, a United States economist at Capital Economics, said the October reading from the Conference Board was still consistent with solid growth in consumer spending at an annual rate above 2.5 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Separately, the Standard & Poor’s CoreLogic Case-Shiller 20-city home price index rose 5.1 percent in August, after a 5 percent gain in July.Portland, Seattle and Denver reported the strongest year-over-year increases for the seventh month in a row. Prices in Portland rose 11.7 percent. In Seattle, prices jumped 11.4 percent; in Denver, they rose 8.8 percent.Steady hiring, low mortgage rates and some early signs of rising pay have encouraged more Americans to buy homes. Sales of used properties increased 3.2 percent in September from August, the National Association of Realtors said last week.Advertisement“Demand is high and enthusiasm for homeownership remains strong, especially among all-important young, minority and would-be first-time buyers,” Svenja Gudell, chief economist at the real estate data provider Zillow, said. “Still, the market can’t stay on this course forever, and continued inventory shortages are leading to intense competition.”The Case-Shiller index covers roughly half of American homes. The index measures prices compared with those in January 2000 and creates a three-month moving average. The August figures are the latest available.Developers are building more homes, but not quickly enough to restrain price increases. Builders broke ground on 783,000 single-family homes at a seasonally adjusted annual rate in September, up 5.4 percent from a year earlier.Home prices rose 8.1 percent in Dallas from a year ago, 7.1 percent in Miami, and 6.7 percent in San Francisco. All 20 cities recorded price increases from a year earlier.Home prices plunged 35 percent from their peak in July 2006 until they bottomed out in March 2012. They have since risen to just 7.2 percent below the peak.A version of this article appears in print on October 26, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Public Confidence Slips, but Home Prices Climb.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.