AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Gina ChonAT&T is running corporate finance smack into a populist uprising.The company’s proposed $85 billion acquisition of Time Warner would consolidate an industry already controlled by a small group of companies. It is the sort of concentrated power that helped give rise to opponents like Donald J. Trump and Bernie Sanders.A handful of conglomerates already command most of the American media market. Their influence could grow soon. The media tycoon Sumner Redstone wants his Viacom and CBS to merge. AT&T’s bid to acquire Time Warner would unite one of the largest American telecommunications operators with the owner of HBO, CNN and the Warner Bros. studio. AT&T also recently bought the satellite-TV provider DirecTV.Political opposition has been swift. Mr. Trump, who lags in the polls but nevertheless appears set to win support from at least four out of 10 American voters, said combining AT&T and Time Warner represented an example of the sort of dominant structures he is fighting. He vowed to block the deal and try to break up Comcast’s acquisition of NBCUniversal, a transaction completed in the more sedate political climate of 2013.Mr. Sanders, an influential progressive known for hammering Wall Street, said hours after the AT&T deal was unveiled over the weekend that it should be killed. It would mean “higher prices and fewer choices for the American people.” Senators quickly called for an antitrust hearing.A similar sort of backlash helped derail Comcast’s attempt to buy Time Warner Cable for $45 billion last year. Mr. Sanders was among the lawmakers who asked the Justice Department and Federal Communications Commission to block the deal. Conservative Republicans also worried about the combined company’s ability to favor left-wing programming.Sentiments against powerful institutions have only grown during the presidential campaign. Mr. Trump beat back 16 other Republicans by positioning himself as an outsider. Likewise, the 75-year-old Mr. Sanders marshaled support from younger voters frustrated about entrenched leaders to challenge Hillary Clinton for the Democratic nomination.AT&T is relying on an army of lobbyists to help it in Washington. Deep pockets do not go as far as they used to, however, in a highly charged political atmosphere. This effort to intensify corporate power instead may wind up further coalescing the power of the people.Advertisement