By EMILY STEELNOV. 4, 2015
Verizon Communications has signed a content and marketing partnership with the National Basketball Association that will bring daily league highlights, new original series and access to some live games to its new mobile video streaming service Go90.The deal, to be announced Wednesday morning, also establishes Verizon as the official wireless provider of the N.B.A. As part of the agreement, Verizon will become the title partner of the NBA All-Star Slam Dunk contest and a partner of the NBA Draft. Terms were not disclosed. While some marketing elements are exclusive, the deal is not an exclusive content agreement, giving the N.B.A. the ability to strike other deals in the space.Verizon introduced Go90 about a month ago with a lineup of live events, prime-time television and original web series from networks including Comedy Central, Food Network, ESPN and the NFL Network. Aimed at 18- to 34-year-olds, the free, ad-supported service is available to all mobile users regardless of whether they subscribe to Verizon.Increasing the availability of sports programming is an important next step for Verizon as it seeks to build an audience for the new service. Verizon also is trying to distinguish Go90 in a competitive field of streaming services.Advertisement“We have the opportunity here in the mobile world to go in and work with the leagues, and work with certain networks to bring just the live sports,” said Brian Angiolet, senior vice president for product and marketing for Go90. “People ask why Go90 is different than Comcast’s Watchable, YouTube, Netflix and Hulu. Live sports is one major reason why.”AdvertisementMr. Angiolet said that Go90 was off to a strong start, but did not provide use or audience statistics.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Live sporting events continue to draw mass audiences that tune into advertisements, unlike other television programming, which people are more likely to watch on delay. Yet the availability of live sports outside the traditional cable and satellite bundle is more limited.That has not reduced demand to watch live sports, especially on mobile. About a third of sports fans want to watch sports live on mobile devices, up from about 20 percent in 2010, according to the Consumer Electronics Association.Through the new partnership, Go90 viewers can watch some live games not being played in their market; the two sides did not specify how many. Viewers also can buy live game packages through the NBA League Pass offering, including single games, team passes or the full season package, which includes access to nearly 1,000 out-of-market games.Other programming includes daily highlights and a handful of original series that are still in the works. Those could include stories about players or behind-the-scenes access to events like the slam dunk competition.“Go90 is really targeted at the young, millennial, tech-savvy subscriber, and that is something that we are also hoping to reach,” said William S. Koenig, president of global media distribution for the N.B.A. He added that while the N.B.A. was popular among millennials, many of those fans do not subscribe to traditional pay television. “We’re really trying to get our games out there to people on whatever device they want to consume them.”An article on Wednesday about a content and marketing partnership between Verizon Communications and the National Basketball Association, using information from Verizon, misstated the nature of the partnership. While some marketing elements are exclusive, the deal is not an exclusive content agreement. The N.B.A. retains the right to strike other deals for content.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Verizon and N.B.A. Form Partnership for Mobile Content.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.