AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the beleaguered Italian lender, said on Tuesday that it would slash jobs, close branches and sell some businesses as it seeks to convince investors to back its plan to raise new capital.The latest turnaround plan, unveiled by the new chief executive, Marco Morelli, comes at a critical time for the bank, which was the worst performer in stress tests conducted this year by the European Banking Authority, which regulates lenders in the European Union.Monte dei Paschi, Italy’s oldest bank, is preparing to ask investors for 5 billion euros, or about $5.4 billion, next month in its latest recapitalization plan. It has raised about €8 billion in financial markets in recent years. The lender’s market value is less than €1 billion.On Tuesday, the bank, which is based in the Tuscan city of Siena, said it would cut 2,600 jobs by 2019 and close 500 of its 2,000 branches. The lender had 25,731 employees at the end of last year.It also said it would try to sell some businesses, including its Merchant Acquiring payments processing system, which has received an offer of €520 million.A shareholder vote on the recapitalization plan is set for Nov. 24.Monte dei Paschi said it hoped to exceed €1.1 billion a year in profit by 2019 under its reorganization plan. On Tuesday, the bank reported a loss of €1.15 billion in the third quarter, driven by one-time loan-loss provisions of €750 million.Trading in its stock was briefly suspended on Tuesday amid wild swings up and, later, down after the reorganization plan was announced. The stock was down about 10 percent in afternoon trading in Milan.Shares in Monte dei Paschi, the third-largest bank in Italy behind Unicredit and Banca Intesa Sanpaolo, ranked by assets, have been under pressure as the bank has racked up billions of euros in losses in recent years and has faced repeated questions about whether it has sufficient capital.The bank’s chairman and chief executive left in September after their plans for raising capital received little support in the markets. Mr. Morelli joined the bank last month as chief executive and has been trying to win over investors.Further complicating the turnaround efforts, Italy is set to go to the polls on Dec. 4 to vote on a bid by Prime Minister Matteo Renzi to change the country’s Constitution. If Mr. Renzi fails to win support for his plan, his government could collapse, causing further instability in Italian markets.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.Advertisement