AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangLily and Rabbit met in secret to discuss Bobtail, lest details were leaked.Just to be clear: Lily refers to AT&T’s team of top executives (named after the sales representative in its latest ad campaign), and Time Warner’s team name, Rabbit, was a nod to Bugs Bunny. Only a small group of executives at both companies were part of the merger project, called Bobtail.Now that Lily and Rabbit have disclosed their relationship, we have taken a look at how they got together.The primary point of concern between the two companies was price. Even regulatory issues were less of a problem, with just a $500 million fee payable to Time Warner if the deal was scrapped on antitrust grounds.In the early days of their announced merger, the two companies have had to answer questions and mollify critics.• The two chief executives have emphasized that the deal would help them to “innovate” around advertising, the shows and films people watch and where they watch them. This is all a bit speculative, Farhad Manjoo writes. But in the future, television is likely to be built on lots of bold, speculative experiments. And the transformation of the television business means the companies had to do something. Anything.• There has been little agreement over how much of an obstacle the deal faces in regulatory terms, but there is plenty of speculation about how companies like Disney, Comcast and 21st Century Fox will react and the deals that they might strike in this new landscape.• Even if the deal fails to pass regulatory muster, AT&T’s chief executive, Randall L. Stephenson, did not seem flustered by the prospect of paying a breakup fee. “Breakup fees are not that relevant in a deal like this,” he said on CNBC.• AT&T pledged to respect CNN’s editorial independence after concerns percolated within the news network.With near-zero interest rates at home, foreign buyers are rushing into the United States bond market with their savings, the global glut of which has reached record levels.The problem? This flood of money could inflate the value of these securities well beyond their worth, potentially leading to a market bubble. And before it bursts, the cash could be hampering global growth.Money that could be spent on shopping sprees in China and Japan or on building infrastructure in Germany is being accumulated and put into global capital markets.And not much can be done to force savers to spend more.So it is down to the United States to get global growth going while investors dabble in riskier corners of the market.Lawyers for regulators and MetLife faced off yet again over whether the insurance company should be labeled a systemically important financial institution, a designation that brings new standards and more regulatory oversight.“A.I.G. is instructive,” said Mark B. Stern, a lawyer for the Justice Department, referring to the near-failure of American International Group.The judges explored whether banking regulators should have delved more deeply when examining how likely MetLife was to fail.“You’re not specific enough when you say, ‘Well, it’s a really bad situation so we assume bad things are going to happen,’ ” said Judge Patricia Millett of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.“Donald J. Trump is a libel bully. Like most bullies, he’s also a loser, to borrow from Trump’s vocabulary.”— A report commissioned by media lawyers at the American Bar Association, which the bar association refused to publish, citing “the risk of the A.B.A. being sued by Mr. Trump.”• Apple reports its quarterly results and will offer a peek into how its new iPhone 7 has been selling. Sales of flagship iPhone products have slowed in recent quarters.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement