By AMIE TSANGOCT. 26, 2016
Sure, the AT&T deal with Time Warner has created a new media landscape.But we could also be looking at a new era for competition law. With the political environment as it is today, a generation of antitrust scholars could turn the tide on antitrust policy, James B. Stewart writes.These people hark back to the original trustbusters of the early 20th century, who were most concerned about preventing corporations from gaining too much power. They focus on the concentration of power in fewer hands, rather than just consumer prices and efficiencies.Interestingly, the deal could also be overseen at the Federal Communications Commission by Tom Wheeler, the chairman, who has tightened regulations around cable and telecommunication firms.AT&T, with the help of its significant lobbying representation, is emphasizing that the deal is a so-called vertical merger, in which a company buys a supplier rather than a direct competitor.AdvertisementA block on this type of merger would overturn decades of antitrust policy and case law: Vertical mergers have been viewed as promoting competition, with little effect on market concentration. In recent years, the merger between Comcast and NBC Universal merger was approved.AdvertisementAT&T has the time and resources to make its arguments. But there is a risk that it will find itself in the midst of a revolution in antitrust thinking.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The owners of nearly half a million diesel cars affected by the Volkswagen emissions cheating scandal in the United States have relief in sight.Final approval has been given to the agreement for Volkswagen to buy back or fix the affected cars. The buybacks are expected to start early next month, while fixes will have to wait a few more weeks for the Environmental Protection Agency to approve a software solution.Many analysts expect most of the owners to sell their cars back.Kevin Helmich, the owner of a 2010 Audi A3, is one of them. “While I really like the car, I don’t like being lied to,” he said.Apple expects this to be a very merry Christmas.It has predicted that its new iPhones will pull it out of a yearlong slump. Samsung’s misfortunes will probably help, too.If that does happen, it would be quite a turnaround from the disappointing year it has had. Its poor performance continued in its latest quarter.The one bright spot was in its services business. It is making more money off iPhone app sales, as well as subscriptions to Apple Music and cloud storage.• Tesla reports its latest quarterly results. The company is expected to have made a loss because it has been spending heavily to introduce a new car and on its gigantic battery factory in Nevada. Investors will be listening closely for any details on the pending merger with SolarCity.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.