AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — For decades, whenever Japan’s leaders had an important project to pay for, they turned to the post office.Whether it was a new bullet train line, aid for struggling small businesses or money to finance the national debt, politicians could call on Japan Post to assign a portion of Japanese citizens’ nest eggs to the task, through the nationwide network of savings banks it operates through its more than 20,000 post office branches.On Wednesday, Japan Post was enlisted in a new national project: turning conservative Japanese savers into risk-taking investors by offering them the chance to buy shares in the world’s largest initial public offering this year.Japan’s leaders should be happy with the early results.A glut of buy orders for shares of Japan Post Holdings meant the stock went untraded for more than half an hour on its first day on the market. It ultimately made its debut at 1,631 yen — or $13.49 — per share, 16.5 percent higher than its I.P.O. price. Two subsidiaries that operate banking and insurance businesses, which were listed separately, also faced a surplus of buy orders. Japan Post Bank finally opened at ¥1,680, up 16 percent from its I.P.O. price, and Japan Post Insurance opened 33 percent higher.Japan Post Holdings finished 25.7 percent above its I.P.O. price at ¥1,760. Japan Post Bank ended 15.2 percent higher at ¥1,671, and Japan Post Insurance closed up 55.9 percent at ¥3,430. The Nikkei 225-stock average closed 1.3 percent higher.With the economy sluggish, the Japanese government wants to persuade smaller investors to squirrel away their savings in stocks, rather than in bank accounts. Such a shift, it hopes, will spur a wealth-generating rise in asset prices. To help accomplish the move, the leadership has looked to the privatization of Japan Post, the 144-year-old national postal service that is also the country’s biggest bank and life insurer.“A quarter of Japanese savings are sitting in the postal bank, and for the sake of the economy we need this to become risk-taking money,” said Heizo Takenaka, a professor at Keio University who promoted privatization as economics minister a decade ago. “As a private company, Japan Post will be able to lend and invest freely, which will revitalize asset markets.”The I.P.O. was aimed squarely at small investors, people who might otherwise have added to Japan Post savings accounts. About three-quarters of the stock was allocated to individual buyers in Japan. Japan Post advertised the I.P.O. on television, an unusual move to drum up interest in a stock listing, and brokerage firms reported a surge in new accounts from first-time customers looking to buy in.Demand was strong, with the I.P.O. oversubscribed. The company priced at the top of its range, raising ¥1.4 trillion, or $11.6 billion, in the I.P.O.Japan Post, which is listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, was the largest offering since the $25 billion debut last year of Alibaba, the Chinese Internet giant. It is also the biggest privatization in Japan since 1987, when the government began selling off the state-owned telephone monopoly.Japan joins Germany, Britain and other countries that have privatized their postal systems. Those efforts, though, have often been accompanied by heated political battles.Plans for the privatization of Japan Post began a decade ago, but it was delayed by a fierce tug of war.Some politicians wanted to maintain state ownership and the control of the vast pool of postal savings. Others said the system was obsolete and wasteful. The final impetus for privatization was provided by Japan’s earthquake and tsunami in 2011, when huge sums of money were needed for rebuilding. The government says it will allocate money raised by the I.P.O. to that effort.The I.P.O. frees Japan Post to take more risks with the huge pool of funds it controls. Japan Post’s savings bank holds the equivalent of more than $1.4 trillion of deposits, making it one of the world’s biggest financial institutions. The insurance arm oversees tens of billions of dollars in policies. Much of the money has been invested in relatively safe but low-yielding government bonds.“I hope it will further accelerate the shift from savings to investment and help to create a virtuous cycle in the economy,” Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, who serves as the primary spokesman for Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, said when the offer price of Japan Post’s shares was completed late last month.Other government-controlled financial firms have been enlisted in the campaign.The Government Pension Investment Fund, the world’s biggest public pension fund with more than ¥120 trillion of assets, said last year that it would double the portion of its portfolio dedicated to stocks, to a target of 50 percent.Many analysts said the shift was long overdue, and would align the fund’s investment strategy more closely with other big global pension funds. But some critics have accused Mr. Abe of engaging in a politically motivated effort to inflate stock prices.Postal savings have long been used to pay for government initiatives, supplementing the regular government budget.“It allowed the government to raise funds without having to levy taxes,” said Gene Park, a professor at Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles, who has written a book on the history of postal savings in Japan.That function helped the government by giving it money to spend while keeping taxes lower than they otherwise would have been. But it also fostered a culture of unaccountable and sometimes wasteful spending, Mr. Park said. Favored industries could be propped up in bad times, for instance using subsidized loans backed by postal savings, with little public disclosure or input.“The beauty of it from politicians perspective was that it was invisible,” Mr. Park said. “It allowed problems to be kicked down the road.”Japan Post no longer directly finances the so-called “second budget,” formally known as the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, and the program itself is smaller and less important than it once was. But Japan Post remains a buyer of bonds issued by program-related agencies.Advertisement