By DANIEL E. SLOTNIKOCT. 25, 2016
Stanley Silverstein, who designed fashionable but affordable shoes that helped Nina Footwear, the company he founded with his brother, become a force in the international women’s footwear industry, died on Oct. 20 in Manhasset, N.Y. He was 91.His death was confirmed by his daughter Nina Miner, Nina Footwear’s chief creative officer, for whom the company was named.Mr. Silverstein and his brother Mike, who died in 2012, founded the company that became Nina Footwear in 1953. Stanley designed the shoes while Mike handled sales and promotion.In 1962 Mr. Silverstein made a ballerina flat from what he described as leftover scraps of leather. It quickly became one of Nina’s early top sellers, and in 1963 he received an American Shoe Designer Award from the Leather Industries of America, a trade group.He also designed two styles that sold more than a million pairs during the 1980s: a clog with a wooden base and a Nina nameplate nailed into the side, and a kidskin flat.Nina shoes are sold in more than 20 countries worldwide and most retail for $89 to $129. The company has sold more than 250 million pairs since its founding, Ms. Miner said. Nina also sells shoes under the luxury brand name Delman, as well as children’s shoes and accessories like jewelry and handbags.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company is still privately held, and many Silverstein family members fill executive roles.Stanley Oscar Silverstein was born in Vilna, in what is now Lithuania, on Dec. 24, 1924. He emigrated to Havana with his parents, Max and Sonia, a few years later. His father operated a shoe factory in Cuba, and Mr. Silverstein and his brothers grew up around the trade.After graduating from high school in Havana and attending the University of Havana, Mr. Silverstein served in the United States Army during World War II. He lived in New York after the war and worked as a diamond cutter and accessory manufacturer before turning to the shoe business.Mr. Silverstein remained active with Nina Footwear until his death and helped create the Silverstein Hebrew Academy, a religious school in Great Neck, N.Y. He lived in Kings Point, N.Y.In addition to his daughter Nina, he is survived by his wife, Raine; three other daughters — Renee Dabah, who oversees Nina’s handbag and jewelry collection; Flori Silverstein, creative director for Nina Originals and Delman; and Ami Reines — 11 grandchildren; and 26 great-grandchildren. His son-in-law Ezra Dabah is the company’s current chief executive.An earlier version of a picture caption with this obituary misstated the location of the Nina Footwear factory where the photo of Mr. Silverstein was taken. It is Long Island City, Queens — not Long Island.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Stanley Silverstein, 91; Co-Founded Nina Footwear.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.