By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONNOV. 3, 2015
At the DealBook conference, the activist investor discussed his efforts to stop American companies from moving their profits overseas to take advantage of lower tax rates.There are few on Wall Street who can captivate an audience like the billionaire investor Carl C. Icahn. On Tuesday, the activist hedge fund manager, who has drawn ire from corporate America for his abrasive manner with corporate chieftains, entertained once again.Speaking at the DealBook conference at the Whitney Museum of American Art, Mr. Icahn told a rambling story about an investment he made in ACF Industries about 31 years ago. (He still owns the stock today, he said). Mr. Icahn described how after gaining control of the company, he spent days visiting its New York office and interviewing many of its employees to try to understand how the business worked.“I spend the whole day there, go home, take a look at my yellow pad and I can’t tell what the hell they do.” So, he said, he hired consultants to help.“They come back in three weeks with a big book — boom boom boom, yellow graphs, red graphs, green graphs. I say, ‘Hey, I ain’t going to read this book,’ ” he told the audience.Advertisement“And I’m colorblind anyway,” he added, soliciting laughter.Mr. Icahn also joked about Donald Trump, the Republican presidential candidate who recently said he wanted Mr. Icahn to be his treasury secretary.Advertisement“No, I know he says that, but there is no way I would ever do that,” Mr. Icahn said. “I am never going to be secretary of anything.”Still, Mr. Icahn said he was supporting Mr. Trump’s bid for president. “At this point, I don’t see who else I would support.”Over the years, Mr. Icahn has built a reputation for being a savvy investor who buys up a big position in a company’s stock in order to pressure management for change. He has often battled with companies to try to make that change happen.Mr. Icahn gave a glimpse of that tougher side too on Tuesday. Speaking about Family Dollar, the discount retailer that he called on to sell itself last year, Mr. Icahn told the tale of how he invited the chief executive to his house for dinner, something that Mr. Icahn often does with companies he goes to battle with.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I make a martini and I say, ‘Have a martini.’ And he says, ‘You know, I’d love to have a martini, I’d love to, but I must keep my wits about me for this meeting.’ ”Mr. Icahn paused before delivering the punchline. “I said, ‘It’s not going to help you.’ ”When asked about his plans to have dinner with the chief executive of American International Group, the insurance company that Mr. Icahn recently called on to break itself up into smaller parts, Mr. Icahn told the audience that they weren’t just having dinner.“He’s coming to see me,” he said.But Mr. Icahn was not all jokes. He also warned that the financial system in the United States faced “real problems.”“We’re walking into a minefield of what’s going on with the Fed,” he said. “I could go on and on here, but I think we have problems.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.