AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe Securities and Exchange Commission has quietly taken a stand against corporate inversions. Inversions occur when an American company buys a foreign company and reincorporates in that acquisition’s country, where the corporate tax rate is lower than in the United States. Pfizer’s approach to AstraZeneca of Britain last year set off a public uproar about American companies giving up their corporate citizenship. Now there are rumblings that the issue may re-emerge, with Pfizer’s apparent interest in Allergan. Yet the S.E.C. has been prompted to act by an inversion that ultimately led to shareholder concerns over governance, rather than protests over taxes.In this case, it was a deal this year that allowed the drug maker Mylan to move its place of organization to the Netherlands from Pennsylvania. At the time, shareholders applauded the move, which lowered the company’s tax rate.But then a suitor, Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries, showed up only a few months later. Some of Mylan’s shareholders began to rue their company’s relocation as Mylan suddenly wielded its new Netherlands defenses to fight off Teva.Mylan adopted a “just say never” defense to Teva’s bid by issuing majority control to what is known as a stichting, a Netherlands trust, whose trustees were appointed by Mylan. The trust promptly sided with Mylan.Mylan then proclaimed itself to be a stakeholder-based company, one that under Dutch law was run not solely for the benefit of shareholders but for all people with an interest in Mylan, including the world at large. The Wall Street Journal reported this summer that in a meeting with several investors, Mylan’s executive chairman, Robert J. Coury, leaned across a table and told them, “This is a stakeholder company, not a shareholder company,” and threw in a number of expletives as well.It was all bewildering to Mylan’s shareholders who rightly complained that Mr. Coury’s newfound love of stakeholders and the stichting was not highlighted, yet alone explained, in the public documents outlining Mylan’s move to the Netherlands.Shareholders have sued Mylan, claiming that it pulled a fast one in swapping out United States governance for much more management-friendly rules in the Netherlands.Now the S.E.C. has weighed in.In a rule change posted on its website last week, the S.E.C. announced a technical revision to its rules on voting, aimed directly at Mylan. The rule change is one that could shut down many inversions.The S.E.C. will now require that when a company is acquired by or acquires another company, there must be a separate vote for each corporate governance change put in place by the deal.Previously, the agency had taken the position that only one vote was required on the merger itself. This meant that the target’s shareholders only voted up or down on the deal.The Mylan case appeared to push the S.E.C. to act after it had previously raised this issue in the Medtronic and Chiquita inversions, only to back down later.Requiring a separate vote is significant. Shareholders will typically vote in favor of a merger deal to accept its benefits even though they may not like the corporate governance changes. In other words, the voting mechanics helped short-term greed overcome long-term governance concerns.This is arguably true with inversions. For good or for bad, shareholders tend to focus on the substantial tax savings that such a deal will bring. That generally outweighs any changes in the governance of the company that will also come with the deal. So shareholders overwhelmingly vote in favor of moves abroad.Mylan, for example, moved to the Netherlands by buying a subsidiary of Abbott Laboratories. The deal completely changed Mylan’s governance profile and takeover defenses, and yet the company did not give shareholders a separate vote.I have no doubt that if given a second chance, shareholders would not approve Mylan’s governance changes.It wasn’t just Mylan and inversions. One study showed how companies regularly adopted staggered board provisions in connection with merger transactions, a move intended to add protection for directors.Now Mylan has ruined it for everyone.Going forward under the new S.E.C. rules, if a company like Pfizer tries to move abroad there will be a separate vote on the corporate governance of the company. No longer will companies be able to slip through defenses.This technical change will have revolutionary consequences for all takeover deals, not just inversions.In the case of inversions, companies will no longer be able to choose a country that offers the best protection for management. Instead, shareholders will be able to push back on such a move while still being permitted to vote on the inversion deal itself.The S.E.C. rules allow for the company to condition the deal on all of the changes being pushed through, but no doubt shareholders will scrutinize corporate governance more carefully in their separate vote. Companies can no longer slip through governance changes hidden by a takeover. Mylan has already moved abroad and so unless the lawsuit succeeds, this rule change will not affect its current Dutch status. The company has said that shareholder approval of the inversion also approved the use of the stichting defense, an argument that would not hold up in a deal made today.Mylan remains in the public eye. The company recently disclosed that the S.E.C. had issued a subpoena as part of an investigation of a real estate deal with its lead independent director. Mylan, which set up new headquarters in 2013, failed to disclose that some of the land it bought for the offices was owned by the director.Mylan is also now pursuing a buyout of Perrigo, which is expected to culminate on Nov. 13 when its offer closes. Mylan’s stock price is down more than 17 percent this year, closing on Tuesday at $46.57. (Teva had bid $82 dollar a share.)The S.E.C. inquiry and its rule change merely highlight for Perrigo’s shareholders Mylan’s governance issues. It remains to be seen whether this will have an effect on Mylan’s takeover bid.In the meantime, it’s clear that the S.E.C. has spoken. We can call it the Mylan Rule.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement