By AMIE TSANGOCT. 27, 2016
You want to talk about it? Banks think you do.Bank of America, MasterCard and some financial start-ups have been trying out chatbots that can initiate transactions and give financial advice. They are not up to long, emotional discussions yet, but they could help with some of the important stuff of life, like making payments and keeping track of your budget.One of the attractions of these chatbots is their ability to help you save. Digit, a start-up based in San Francisco, has an app that can put small amounts of money into a savings account a few times a month. Erica, Bank of America’s bot, tracks your credit score, looks at your spending habit and offers financial advice.But maybe you need to take some of their advice with a pinch of salt. A bank is unlikely to tell you to sign up for a cheaper credit card somewhere else, for example. One start-up, Clarity Money, is trying to pre-empt this problem. Its founder, Adam Dell, says consumers need an “unbiased advocate helping them.”Just two years ago, Alibaba’s whopping $25 billion debut made the potential of e-commerce in China clear.AdvertisementAnother company that thrives on Chinese consumers’ demand for clothes, beauty products and electronics, joins its ranks on the New York Stock Exchange. But the scale cannot quite compare. The company, ZTO Express, a delivery service that relies on Alibaba for a huge proportion of its business, said on Thursday that it had raised $1.4 billion.AdvertisementIt is the largest Chinese initial public offering in the United States since Alibaba went public and the biggest United States I.P.O. this year, a time when the market for new offerings has been muted. But the company, which is betting on continued growth in Chinese e-commerce, faces stiff competition in what is already a cutthroat sector. Several rivals are going public in mainland China.Patients and lawmakers criticized the lack of competition in the sector when outrage swirled around Mylan and the soaring price of its EpiPens. But thereturn of Auvi-Q, an alternative made by Kaléo, could remedy that.It is not certain that prices will drop though. Auvi-Q was more expensive than the EpiPen when it was on the market and the price still has not been decided. Mylan even cited its debut in 2013 as a reason for raising its own prices. And Kaléo has also been under scrutiny over its prices.There has been talk of individualized television commercials for at least a decade.And AT&T and Time Warner reckon they can make it happen — if they complete their proposed mega-merger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.How? With the help of a vast amount of consumer data. The companies think that all of their data will finally bring about so-called addressable TV advertising.This already happens on streaming services to some extent, but advertisers are hoping to push further on television, so that people see ads based on their individual interests as they do on the internet.Could AT&T and Time Warner drive that progress? Some certainly see advertising becoming more efficient. But some, like Rishad Tobaccowala, chief strategist for the Publicis Groupe, are skeptical.“The reality of it is, we’re moving into a world where consumers are turning against advertising,” he said.AdvertisementAT&T is also facing skepticism over its vision of ultrafast wireless technology. This time it is because the technology that it would rely on is unlikely to be deployed in any meaningful capacity in the next decade.• Alphabet, Google’s parent company, reports quarterly earnings. Its dominance of search and digital advertising mean that revenue and profit are expected to grow, but the company will want to limit losses on businesses like Google Fiber and Nest.• The Commerce Department publishes data on durable goods orders in September. Demand is expected to be bolstered by a jump in aircraft orders. Orders for core capital goods — used to make other products — are expected to have declined as businesses remain cautious about new investment.“People who are in the schools pitching them and positioning themselves as retirement specialists are really there just to sell them one product.”— Bradley Bergeron, a former employee of Axa Advisors’ retirements benefits group. Workers at private American companies typically enroll in an employer-approved 401(k). Public school employees and people working for nonprofits and religious institutions are often exposed to brokers who operate in a more unruly marketplace.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.