By CHAD BRAY and LANDON THOMAS Jr.OCT. 27, 2016
After weeks of turmoil in the markets, Deutsche Bank has provided some balm on concerns about its stability as a settlement with United States authorities looms.The bank, Germany’s largest, said on Thursday that it had returned to a profit in the third quarter and was making progress in its efforts to turn around the business. Analysts expected a loss for the quarter.In addition, Deutsche Bank, which also has big trading operations in New York and London, said that its capital position had improved, with its Tier 1 capital ratio edging up to 11.1 percent, from 10.8 percent.As was the case with the big Wall Street banks, the quarterly results at Deutsche Bank were buoyed in part by improved trading revenue. But its gain was not as strong as many of its rivals’, as bond trading rose nearly 14 percent from the year-earlier quarter. Deutsche Bank has also been streamlining in the last year, cutting jobs, stripping away businesses and simplifying its structure.AdvertisementStill, the biggest challenge for the bank continues to be building confidence among investors, customers and clients. Questions remain about the bank’s ability to pay a large penalty in the United States over the bank’s role in the mortgage securities debacle in the years before the financial crisis. The Justice Department has laid out a $14 billion penalty as its opening position in negotiations.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Deutsche Bank’s chief executive, John Cryan, said that concerns about the settlement negotiations had overshadowed positive developments.“This has created uncertainty,” he said during a conference call with analysts. “Uncertainty that affects the market’s view of Deutsche Bank as an investment. Uncertainty that affected some clients’ view of Deutsche Bank as a counterparty. And uncertainty that even affects our financial planning and strategy execution.”Chief executives of banks rarely speak publicly about losing trust in the eyes of their clients, so Mr. Cryan’s comments were a reminder of just how tumultuous the recent months have been for the bank.The broad view among investors has long been that Deutsche Bank will not suffer a fate similar to that of Lehman Brothers, but the public scrutiny has nonetheless caused some to take their business elsewhere.“We know that when our name is in the headlines for the wrong reasons, the phone doesn’t ring as frequently,” Mr. Cryan said.One area that suffered more than others was Deutsche’s prime brokerage unit, which provides services to hedge funds, including lending money, trading and providing market intelligence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hedge funds, already skittish because of their own weak performance of late, have led the way among those seeking to reduce their exposure to the bank.Marcus Schenck, the bank’s chief financial officer, said that during the worst moments for the bank in late September, Deutsche’s cash cushion suffered. But since then, he said, the situation had stabilized.AdvertisementMr. Cryan, a 55-year-old Briton, said he was spending at least an hour every day talking with the bank’s clients. “I don’t just sit poring over spreadsheets, which is how some people define my personality,” he said.Bank executives said that they could not offer an update on when the bank might reach a settlement with the Justice Department, but that it was their main focus.“First and foremost, we must remove the overhang of our litigation cases and the regulatory investigations by settling those matters,” Mr. Cryan said. “This remains our — and my — top priority.”The bank reported 5.9 billion euros in legal reserves, up from 5.5 billion euros at the end of June.For the three months that ended Sept. 30, Deutsche Bank reported a profit of 278 million euros, or $303 million, after a loss of €6.02 billion in the third quarter of 2015. The improvement occurred in part because one-time items took a toll on the bottom line a year ago.Shares of Deutsche Bank jumped in early trading in Frankfurt but ended the day just 0.6 percent higher. The stock is down about 40 percent so far this year.The bank is facing other challenges as well.Low interest rates have weighed on Deutsche Bank’s retail banking performance in the last year, and uncertainty in financial markets is hurting trading and advisory activity.Regulators are also looking into raising capital requirements, which means lenders must store more of their money to provide a cushion against adverse developments instead of putting it to work.“The macroeconomic and geopolitical outlook has worsened over the past year,” Mr. Cryan said.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Deutsche Bank Returns to Profit, but Legal Woes in U.S. Cast a Shadow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.