AdvertisementSupported byBy Paul MozurHONG KONG — It may well take years to tabulate the full damage Samsung’s discontinuation of the Galaxy Note 7 will have on the company’s brand.But on Thursday, the South Korean electronics giant offered a quick glimpse of just how costly its combustible phone has been.The Galaxy Note 7 debacle virtually wiped out profits at its high-profile mobile communications division during the third quarter, Samsung said. The division posted an operating profit of $87.9 million. By contrast, a year ago the division posted a profit of about $2.1 billion.In a statement, Samsung said it hoped that in the next quarter its mobile operating profits would return to last year’s levels, also around $2 billion. Previously, Samsung had estimated the cost of the discontinuation of the Galaxy Note 7 after a number of the phones caught fire to be around $3 billion.Yet, in a reminder that the world’s largest maker of smartphones still has a thriving component and consumer electronics business, Samsung posted a net profit of more than $4 billion, in alignment with its revised forecast following the discontinuation of the Note 7.Earlier this month, Samsung killed the Galaxy Note 7, a large and high-priced smartphone that it believed offered its latest chance to gain ground against its longtime rival, Apple, maker of the iPhone. In September it voluntarily recalled more than two million Note 7s following reports that some caught fire, but as the reports continued to pour in it canceled the phone entirely.During a speech at Samsung’s general shareholder meeting, J. K. Shin, the company’s president, said the company was working with regulators and third-party experts to attempt to diagnose the problems that have led a small number of the phones to burst into flames.He said that of the more than 300 incidents reported with the Galaxy Note 7, a large number were found to have been caused by the battery. But a smaller portion were the result of some problem other than the battery.Along with scrutinizing the batteries, Mr. Shin said Samsung was “carefully revisiting every aspect of the device, such as its hardware, software and manufacturing processes, that could possibly have caused the incident.”Mr. Shin also apologized to shareholders and consumers and said it was “not acceptable” that the company failed to meet its own quality assurance standards.As the Note 7 story continues to unfold, China’s aviation regulator said this week that it was banning the phone from all flights. Samsung also said it was preparing a new software upgrade that would prevent the Note 7 phones from charging more than 60 percent — a way to both keep phones still in the market from overheating and a way to get customers to turn them in.Samsung said the phones would be automatically updated wirelessly, and the measure was designed to encourage those who still were holding on to their Note 7 phones to turn the handsets in “as soon as possible.”Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter @paulmozur. Advertisement