By BILL VLASICOCT. 26, 2016
The electric carmaker Tesla Motors said on Wednesday that it earned $22 million in the third quarter, its first profitable period since 2013, raising expectations for the success of its expansion plans.The company’s chief executive, Elon Musk, said in a letter to investors that the results reflected improvements in vehicle production, the addition of new stores and a steady increase in market share for its luxury models.“We were able to have our best quarter ever, and we are heading toward a great fourth quarter as well,” Mr. Musk said in a conference call with analysts.Tesla reported revenues for the quarter of $2.3 billion, more than double the results in the comparable period last year. The company said it delivered nearly 25,000 vehicles to customers in the quarter.AdvertisementMr. Musk has been pushing for efficiencies throughout the company, particularly in its quality levels and rate of production.Advertisement“I’m very proud of the team for executing so well,” he said. “It’s definitely one of the best moments in Tesla history.”Investors were looking for Tesla to break its string of unprofitable quarters before a Nov. 17 shareholder vote on its proposed merger with the solar-panel company SolarCity to form a diversified alternative energy conglomerate.“Finally Tesla has achieved a milestone that investors long awaited — a profitable quarter, and a surprise one at that,” said the analyst Michelle Krebs of AutoTrader.com.Tesla, with its core business of making and selling electric cars, has consistently posted losses over the last five years, as it has accelerated the expansion of its product line and its lone auto assembly plant in California.In the second quarter of this year, the company lost $293 million on revenue of $1.27 billion and missed its target of delivering 17,000 new vehicles to customers.But Mr. Musk affirmed on Wednesday that Tesla was on track to build 50,000 vehicles in the second half of this year, and to reach an annual production goal of 500,000 by 2018.Mr. Musk — who helped found SolarCity and is its largest stockholder — is under pressure to prove that Tesla can be a profitable foundation for the success of the combined companies.Advertisement“For investors, it’s crucial to treat Tesla just like any other company,” the analyst Clement Thibault of Investing.com wrote. “This means demanding deadlines be kept and promised targets achieved.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the past, Mr. Musk has been granted latitude by investors who have backed his long-term vision of a full lineup of zero-emission vehicles. That includes the coming Model 3 sedan, which will sell for a more mainstream price of about $35,000, less than half the cost of Tesla’s more expensive sedans.Enthusiasm peaked this year when Tesla received more than 300,000 pre-orders — and $1,000 deposits — for the Model 3. Mr. Musk has promised the car will be on the market by late next year.Yet the company has been dogged by questions since announcing the merger plan in June. The queries include a federal safety investigation of its Autopilot driver-assist system and the death of a Tesla Model S owner who was killed in a Florida crash.The investigation of the Autopilot system, which was engaged in the vehicle when it collided with a tractor-trailer, has raised doubts about Tesla’s decision to install an unproven “beta” version of the feature that drivers may not know how to use properly.Mr. Musk, however, has hardly dialed back his promises for the future. In a blog post in July, he pledged to eventually broaden Tesla’s lineup beyond electric cars into battery-powered pickups, semi-trucks and buses.And last week he said that Tesla planned to equip all of its models with technology for full self-driving capability — with the caveat that the systems would not be enabled until further testing had been done. No timetable was specified.The solar company — which, like Tesla, has also consistently lost money — is intent on providing panels and other equipment that create self-sustaining, solar-powered homes and businesses, with the capability of storing excess energy in large batteries for later use.Tesla has said the merger will help it cut costs and will open its electric-car showrooms to marketing solar energy equipment.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tesla Gives  Investors  a Surprise: Profitability.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.