AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelThe CBS Corporation shocked the television industry last year when it announced a streaming service for its broadcast network that would not require a traditional cable subscription.One year later, CBS is seeking to create a more robust offering that will stand out in the increasingly competitive market of streaming services and help the company stay relevant to a new generation of viewers.Leslie Moonves, chief executive of CBS, said on Tuesday that the company was exploring adding more original programming to its streaming service, introducing an option without advertising and bundling the services that it introduced for its CBS broadcast network and its Showtime premium channel.“There is no question, there is going to be a change from the 180-channel universe,” Mr. Moonves said in a conference call. “People want more specificity on what they are watching.”On Monday, CBS announced that it was reviving “Star Trek” for its subscription streaming service starting in 2017. “ ‘Star Trek’ is sort of the family jewels,” Mr. Moonves said.“We think that original programming is the next way to distinguish ourselves,” he added.CBS executives declined to divulge the number of subscribers to the company’s streaming services, but said that they should contribute to its bottom line starting next year.CBS, which many consider the most stable and traditional of the broadcast networks, is racing to position itself as an essential player in the future of television, regardless of how people watch and pay for it.The company reported Tuesday that its net earnings from continuing operations for the quarter ended Sept. 30 were $426 million, up from $400 million for the same period last year. Total revenue for the quarter declined about 3 percent to $3.26 billion, with declines in advertising and content licensing offsetting growth in affiliate and subscription fees. The company attributed part of the decline to the timing of television licensing sales. The CBS entertainment group, which includes the broadcast network, interactive, global distribution and studio business, registered a 1 percent increase in revenue primarily because of a 55 percent increase in affiliate and subscription fees, the company said.Revenue in the cable networks group, which includes Showtime Networks and CBS Sports Network, declined 15 percent.Network advertising revenue inched up 1 percent in the quarter, despite fewer sport events on the broadcast network.Despite worries about a weak advertising market, Mr. Moonves said that “network advertising has swung back in a big way” and predicted that it would be strong. “Clearly, the sky was not falling,” he said.Mr. Moonves called dire predictions of cord cutting — consumers canceling subscriptions to traditional pay television services — “overblown” and said that the company had proven itself to be an essential part of both big bundles, smaller bundles and à la carte streaming offerings because of the popularity of its programming. The results present a brighter picture of the media business, which has been plagued with worries about cord cutting, ratings declines and a weak ad market. Time Warner and 21st Century Fox will report quarterly results Wednesday. The Walt Disney Company will report earnings Thursday.Earlier Tuesday, Discovery Communications reported third-quarter results in line with expectations. Net income available to the company for the third quarter was $279 million, about flat compared to the same period last year. Total revenue for the quarter declined 1 percent to $1.6 billion, with currency effects in Discovery’s international business offsetting growth in the United States.Advertisement