AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Rob CoxGeneral Electric says it is not planning to acquire the $23 billion oil-services company Baker Hughes, contrary to news reports. But shareholders should not be shocked by the idea that G.E. might take a look.Since the panic of 2008 raised an existential crisis at G.E., the $258 billion company has been on an enormous diet plan. Today, the company, led by Jeffrey R. Immelt, is fit for an offensive.G.E. has sold $200 billion of financial assets since the crisis, in the process shedding its designation as a systemically important financial institution, which is subject to intense regulatory and capital requirements. It also sold its appliances unit to Haier of China and NBCUniversal to Comcast.In sizing up Baker Hughes, G.E. says it is only considering possible partnerships, but it is not a crazy acquisition target. Baker Hughes, an oil-field specialist, agreed to sell itself to its rival Halliburton before antitrust watchdogs scuttled the combination this year. Though that left Baker Hughes in the lurch — and worth less than the $35 billion Halliburton had offered — it pocketed a huge $3.5 billion breakup fee. And since then, energy prices have mostly stabilized.Investing in the oil and gas industry now would make sense if G.E. really is positive on the long-term outlook for the sector, as it indicated in its third-quarter earnings discussion last week. What it called a “challenging environment” in the short term is equally an opportunity to get in early before an upturn. G.E.’s energy unit, led by Lorenzo Simonelli, accounted for just $3 billion of revenue in the quarter, less than half the top line of G.E.’s power division.It is the power arm, under Steve Bolze, that is showing G.E.’s board and its investors that the company is ready to return more fully to the mergers and acquisitions arena with its handling of last year’s $13 billion acquisition of Alstom. G.E. has more than doubled its expectations for cost savings to $3 billion a year.No wonder other divisions might see the chance to get involved. G.E. is bidding for the Swedish 3D-printer maker Arcam and snapped up Concept Laser of Germany. These are relatively small deals, but it is only a matter of time before G.E.’s oil and gas business joins the action in a bigger way.Advertisement