AdvertisementSupported byBook EntryBy Jonathan A. KneeThe most successful animated films have made their fortune not just from endless repeat viewing by children, but from simultaneously engaging an adult audience.These movies explore profound life themes in ways that are meaningful to “children of all ages.” At their heart always lies amazing storytelling built around a compelling but simple human (O.K., sometimes it’s a mouse, dog, deer, elephant or lion) narrative. These masterpieces never pretended to supply the last word on love, friendship, forgiveness, loss, hope or possibility, but they added a dimension to how we think about these concepts that lodged in our consciousness, maybe permanently.A similar phenomenon is at work in Lawrence Levy’s enchanting memoir of his time at Pixar, the company responsible for the greatest number of modern animated masterpieces – beginning with “Toy Story” in 1995.The story that Mr. Levy tells in “To Pixar and Beyond: My Unlikely Journey With Steve Jobs to Make Entertainment History” (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) tackles a long list of complex subjects that have been covered in depth elsewhere: for example, movie accounting, Mr. Jobs, initial public stock offerings, commercial contract negotiations (and renegotiations) and corporate culture.What makes Mr. Levy’s contribution so insightful is not that he plows old ground in greater depth but that he uses his personal story as vehicle to add a new dimension to each of these topics.Mr. Levy has quite a story to tell. In response to a cold call from Mr. Jobs, he left a position as chief financial officer and vice chairman of an established public technology company to join a flailing Pixar with Mr. Jobs, the chief executive and owner. At the time, the business was still hemorrhaging cash after almost a decade of infusions from Mr. Jobs (amounting to $50 million at that point), who had failed to deliver on the promise of stock options for the employees.What’s more, to mitigate his personal financial exposure, Mr. Jobs had already agreed to a mind-bogglingly lopsided arrangement with the Walt Disney Company. Not only did it lock the company into an exclusive arrangement for more than a decade, it ensured meager returns to Pixar even in the event of bountiful film success.Despite the draconian structural limits on its financial potential, Pixar, with Mr. Levy’s help, managed to go public — an offering that both Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley passed on — on the back of the success of “Toy Story.” The Disney deal was subsequently renegotiated, a series of additional hits ensued and Disney eventually bought the company in a transaction that made Mr. Jobs a multibillionaire and continues to dwarf the personal wealth he created at Apple.When it was over, it is perhaps not surprising that Mr. Levy decided to immerse himself in the study of Eastern philosophy and meditation. In reading “To Pixar and Beyond,” however, one gets the sense that his personality was pretty “Zen” even before he departed on his spiritual journey.Mr. Levy’s ability to remain calm and cleareyed in the face of singular personalities and business challenges translates into a crisp, even elegant, narrative. When tackling complex or controversial topics, he manages to illuminate the core concepts without oversimplification. In Mr. Levy’s hands, the enigmatic and sometimes ruthless Mr. Jobs emerges as a surprisingly sympathetic character, even as the deep tensions with Pixar’s staff are explored.Anyone turning to “To Pixar and Beyond” for the secret to producing only wildly successful films and no flops will be sadly disappointed. William Goldman’s aphorism that “in Hollywood, no one knows anything” remains as true in the digital age as it did in the analog. Indeed, the decision to find a way to sell out to Disney was explicitly a response to the realization that the run of hits could not last forever — while the company’s public valuation suggested that it would. As Mr. Levy warned Mr. Jobs at the time: “We’re flying too close to the sun.” Mr. Levy’s narrative does, however, provide some management clues to how to keep exceptional talent — in this case, the remarkable Pixar creative team lead by John Lasseter — in place and productive.Other studios have had long winning streaks, although maybe none quite so spectacular. Disney itself, back in the Frank Wells era, came from nowhere to grab the No. 1 position based on a fraction of the number of films produced by its competitors. This came to an abrupt end with Mr. Wells’s death and Michael Eisner’s efforts to scale up the success with a slate of big-budget blockbusters. One of the many important lessons of “To Pixar and Beyond” is a kind of corollary to Goldman’s famous aphorism noted above: knowing what you don’t know in creative businesses is a necessary but insufficient condition to not screwing them up.Although never explicitly stated, the power of Mr. Levy’s writing and the success of his management at Pixar are both grounded in the same personal quality that is evident from the earliest pages of “To Pixar and Beyond”: humility.Jonathan A. Knee is Professor of Professional Practice at Columbia Business School and a Senior Advisor at Evercore Partners. His next book, “Class Clowns: How the Smartest Investors Lost Billions in Education,” will be released by Columbia Business School Publishing in November.Advertisement