AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerWall Street is on track to reverse three consecutive years of profit declines, but bonuses and jobs continue to shrink as the industry adjusts to a postcrisis world, a new report shows.The securities industry in New York reported pretax profit of $9.3 billion through June, putting it on pace to surpass the $14.3 billion of profit for all of 2015 and rebound from annual declines since 2012, according to an annual report released on Friday by the New York State comptroller’s office.But the city’s broker-dealer firms have set aside 7 percent less money for employee bonuses through June compared with the first six months of last year, and they have shed 2,600 jobs since March.Thomas P. DiNapoli, the state comptroller, said the industry — one of the city’s and state’s biggest economic drivers — appears poised to benefit from a recent trend in large mergers and positive economic news, like the American economy’s third-quarter growth of 2.9 percent reported on Friday. Wall Street reaps revenue from advising on deals as well as trading for clients, and robust deal activity and an expanding economy would bolster those businesses.“Of course, no one has a crystal ball, and we know volatility is the name of the game. At this point, we just don’t see anything on the horizon that causes concern,” Mr. DiNapoli said on a conference call Friday. “I guess we see some overall signs as far as the economy that are positive. We expect Wall Street will benefit from that.”But Wall Street is not as dominant a factor in the everyday economy of New York City as it used to be. The securities industry cut 8 percent of its jobs from 2007 to 2015, while other private sector jobs grew 17 percent. From 2010 to last year, Wall Street accounted for 11 percent of wage growth, far less than the 39 percent attributed to it from 1990 to 2007.Technology, advertising, media and information and business services have picked up the slack, the report said.And New York City had 19 percent of the securities industry jobs nationwide last year, down from 32 percent in 1990. Texas and Pennsylvania have picked up the most securities industry jobs from 2010 to 2015, the comptroller’s report notes.Still, the average salary of a New York securities industry employee dwarfs that of other local private sector workers even though salaries have been declining, falling another 4 percent last year, to $388,000. That compares with the average salary of $74,100 for other private sector workers.Bonuses are a big guessing game because factors can shift quickly as companies close their books on the year. Last year’s bonuses were down for the second consecutive year, falling 9 percent to an average of $146,000.Johnson Associates, a compensation consulting firm, projected in August that incentive pay for investment bankers could fall 5 percent to 25 percent this year, while for traders, it could drop 5 percent to 15 percent.The finance industry is a crucial component of the state’s and city’s annual tax revenue, with profits on the line for luxury retailers, restaurants and real estate, among other industries that feel the ripple effects from Wall Street’s waxing and waning fortunes. The securities industry accounted for 18.5 percent of the state’s tax collections last year and 7 percent of the city’s.Advertisement