By AMIE TSANGOCT. 28, 2016
First it was public pension funds, then insurance companies. Now private equity is joining in, too.Carlyle Group is turning its back on hedge fund investments. Put simply, performance was not good enough.Carlyle — which once had hedge fund investments worth $15 billion — is expected to have just $1 billion by the end of the year. It had turned to hedge funds in an effort to diversify, but has instead found its bottom line weighed down by them.Hedge funds have had a long list of investors bid them farewell recently.A growing list of investors, including Rhode Island and MetLife, are asking for their money back, leading to $50 billion flowing out of the industry this year.As for Carlyle, its next foray is in direct lending, although it has already faced skepticism.“I think in hindsight, you were late to hedge funds, made significant investments and it didn’t end well,” a JPMorgan analyst said on Carlyle’s earnings call this week. “Why is this different?”AdvertisementConsolidation is continuing in the chip industry with Qualcomm’s $38.5 billion acquisition of NXP Semiconductors.What’s the point of the deal? The internet of things.Everything from your fridge to your car is getting smarter and is connected to the internet. NXP produces chips for payment terminals and cars, giving Qualcomm, which focuses on smartphone chips, greater reach into what many think is the next big thing.AdvertisementThe race to put chips in cars is particularly competitive — companies are trying to improve autonomous driving technology, which requires more sophisticated semiconductors.But there is a sticking point: The market is still fragmented and the companies providing the many separate chips for the cars are not always working together, The Wall Street Journal reports.Like so many other megadeals, this one has its risks.Qualcomm has a spotty track record on big mergers, but it does at least have plenty of cash to pay for the deal.And, if nothing else, the boutique advisers have at least already been bolstered by the deal.“There is a basic truth: It is the consumer’s information.”— Tom Wheeler, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. We noted on Thursday that AT&T was pitching its bid for Time Warner on the promise of ambitious targeted advertising built on the companies’ combined data. This could be tricky now that the F.C.C. has approved new privacy rules preventing companies like AT&T and Comcast from collecting and giving out digital information about individuals without their permission.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We had a flurry of tech earnings yesterday. What did we learn?• Google is becoming more responsible with its money, housing “other bets” like its life science unit under the Alphabet parent company so that they can prove their financial worth independently.Revenue from those other bets rose, helping narrow operating losses. Expansion plans for Google Fiber were also delayed, demonstrating that the company can exercise some fiscal restraint.AdvertisementAlphabet’s overall revenue and earnings per share were up.• Amazon was looking less cushy. It had already warned that its spending on warehouses and original productions would affect its run of profits, but they were still much lower than expected, causing its stock to slump after the announcement.Amazon’s biggest quarter is yet to come, but analysts are already wondering whether the company is shifting into a big investment cycle.• Twitter has to go it alone, despite all the recent acquisition talk.It narrowed its losses but said it planned to cut 350 jobs (that’s about 9 percent of its global work force) to become profitable.• The Commerce Department publishes its initial estimate of economic growth in the third quarter. It is expected to have improved after a couple of weak quarters, but business spending and housing construction have been weak.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.