AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra StevensonProminent public pension funds have turned their backs on hedge funds, and so have a few big insurance companies. Now, one of the world’s biggest private equity firms, the Carlyle Group, is walking away, too.Carlyle told investors this week that it was pivoting away from its hedge fund investments, once worth $15 billion. Speaking to investors, the Carlyle co-founder William E. Conway Jr. said the firm’s performance in hedge funds did not meet the expectations of its investors. “And when our performance falls short, it is critical for both our fund investors and for the firm that we deal with the consequences,” Mr. Conway said.Six years ago, with its coffers swelling, Carlyle turned to hedge funds as part of a move to diversify from the core business of buying companies and taking them private. It took stakes in hedge fund firms that invested in corporate bonds, commodities like natural gas and coal, and emerging markets, taking a cut of the fees investors paid to the fund firms.But that experiment soured, and for the last two years Carlyle’s hedge fund investments have weighed down its bottom line. After a strategic review, Carlyle, which manages $169 billion, decided to close its hedge fund chapter and focus more on direct lending. It joins a growing list of investors who are reducing their exposure to hedge funds or getting out completely, faced with high fees and weak performance or even losses.Over all, hedge funds have underperformed the broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index for seven consecutive years. The average hedge fund returned 4.14 percent this year through September, according to the Hedge Fund Research Composite Index, the broadest gauge of hedge fund performance. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 8 percent over that period, accounting for reinvested dividends.Against this backdrop, more investors are leaving. On Wednesday, Rhode Island voted to pull $585 million of its money out of a handful of hedge fund firms. The Kentucky Retirement Systems decided this month to withdraw its hedge fund investments over the next three years. And the New Jersey Investment Council said it planned to take nearly $2 billion out of hedge fund investments. Insurance companies like MetLife and the American International Group have asked funds for their money back, too.More than $50 billion has flowed out of the industry this year, according to Hedge Fund Research. In the latest financial quarter investors took $28 billion, the biggest quarterly outflow since the depths of the financial crisis in 2009, the research firm said.But in 2010, hedge funds seemed to be a bright spot for Carlyle’s new global market strategies division. The firm began to take majority stakes in hedge funds, allowing it to profit from each firm’s bottom line. It was a lucrative business. The hedge fund industry was bigger than ever, with assets of nearly $2 trillion, as state pension funds and other institutional investors piled into alternative assets. Investors paid these firms 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of any gain each year.Carlyle’s first big investment in a hedge fund firm was Claren Road Asset Management, which was founded by four star Citigroup traders in December 2010. Carlyle took a majority stake. A few months later, it bought a stake in the Emerging Sovereign Group (E.S.G.), which started with a seed investment from Julian H. Robertson, the billionaire investor.It was part of a bigger push by Carlyle to branch out before its initial public offering in 2012. Soon after, it bought a stake in Vermillion Asset Management, a commodities investment manager. Other private equity firms like Blackstone have followed similar strategies, buying hedge fund stakes, as have the family investment offices of extremely wealthy people, like that of the Alphabet chairman, Eric E. Schmidt.But over the last two years, nearly $8 billion has flowed out of Claren Road. It is bracing for another $1 billion to be withdrawn in the next few quarters. This year, it announced plans to cut ties with E.S.G., selling its majority stake in the $3.5 billion hedge fund. Last year, Carlyle split with the Vermillion founders Chris Nygaard and Andrew Gilbert after deciding to redirect the business toward commodity financing and away from managing money. By the end of the year, its assets in hedge funds are expected to total just $1 billion.Now, Carlyle will focus on another part of its global markets strategies business: lending. It will focus on private lending to companies, buying distressed debt from companies in sectors like energy, and investing in complex pooled investments like collateralized loan obligations, stepping into the business as banks retrench after the financial crisis. Last month, it hired Mark Jenkins  from the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. Mr. Jenkins helped expand the pension fund’s direct lending.Carlyle may still face challenges in its global markets strategies unit, and its pivot to lending from hedge funds has been met with some skepticism. During a phone call with analysts after its third-quarter earnings announcement this week, an analyst from JPMorgan Chase questioned whether Carlyle’s experiment in hedge funds might be repeated in its new venture into lending.“I think in hindsight, you were late to hedge funds, made significant investments and it didn’t end well,” the analyst said, adding, “Why is this different?”In response, Mr. Conway emphasized that Carlyle had better expertise in private markets, its traditional business, than in the public markets in which its hedge fund investments were mainly invested.Christopher W. Ullman, a spokesman for the firm said: “We’re building on well-established firmwide strengths. This is a long-term strategic commitment. Credit is an attractive asset class and always will be.”Advertisement