AdvertisementSupported byDealBook 2015 ConferenceBy Leslie PickerFormer Vice President Al Gore said on Tuesday that there should be an investigation into Exxon Mobil over what he said was the oil company’s misleading the public about the risks of climate change.Echoing the views of the Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Rodham Clinton and Bernie Sanders, the onetime presidential candidate and current environmental activist and investor said  at the DealBook conference in New York that Exxon’s actions were similar to those of the tobacco industry in the 1980s, when it denied that smoking could cause health problems.His comments followed recent reporting by InsideClimate News, which said that Exxon Mobil knew almost four decades ago that it was adding to global warming. The company gave millions of dollars to groups that publicly denied global warming was real.In an emailed statement in response to Mr. Gore’s comments, an Exxon Mobil representative said: “We unequivocally reject the allegations that we misled anyone on climate research. The media reports upon which these allegations are based are inaccurate distortions of ExxonMobil’s nearly 40 years of climate research.”Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders have also called for an investigation into Exxon Mobil.While Exxon’s chief executive, Rex W. Tillerson, was not in charge of the company four decades ago, he famously said at a shareholder meeting two years ago, “What good is it to save the planet if humanity suffers?”Mr. Gore said that he “did not even know where to begin in responding to that.”Shortly after leaving politics 15 years ago, Mr. Gore became occupied in helping to run his firm, Generation Investment Management, which is focused on investing only in sustainable companies. He describes his portfolio as “concentrated” and is invested in global equities.With a “sustainability lens,” Mr. Gore said, he and his team research everything from how a company treats its employees to how it deals with its local community.“There is a very narrow slice of the value spectrum represented in quarterly reports,” Mr. Gore said. “To harvest information that lies elsewhere, you have to organize yourself and build a team with routines and vocabularies that will integrate that into more of a complete picture.”Advertisement