AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelViacom on Monday named Robert Bakish its acting chief executive, effective Nov. 15. Mr. Bakish, who started at Viacom in 1997, most recently served as chief executive of the company’s international unit.The appointment highlights the continued upheaval at Viacom. Mr. Bakish succeeds Thomas E. Dooley, a longtime executive at the company, who was appointed acting chief executive in August after the ousting of Philippe P. Dauman. Mr. Dauman’s dismissal was part of a settlement with the Redstone family that ended a contentious battle for control of Viacom, which owns the MTV, Comedy Central and Nickelodeon cable television networks and the Paramount Pictures film and television studio.Mr. Dooley announced in September that he planned to step down from the interim position in November. Mr. Bakish might not be serving in the position for long. A special committee of Viacom’s board is considering a request from the Redstone family to reunite Viacom with CBS in an all-stock deal that would leave them in control of the combined company.War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.The Redstone family controls about 80 percent of the voting stock in CBS and Viacom through National Amusements, a private theater chain company.Should Viacom remain independent, Mr. Bakish is considered a strong contender to remain as chief. He is well respected across the company, and even as the rest of Viacom has struggled, his unit has stood out for delivering strong results. Viacom’s international business now has more than 200 TV channels that reach a total of 3.9 billion subscribers. Under him, the company’s international sales have doubled.In a statement, Shari Redstone, vice chairman of Viacom, called Mr. Bakish “an exemplary forward thinker’’ who “embraces disruption and brings teams along with him.”Also on Monday, Mr. Bakish was named the chief executive of a new unit at Viacom that combines its international business with its music and entertainment group, including MTV, Comedy Central and VH1.Wall Street will have the chance to evaluate how Viacom has fared during this difficult period when the company reports its quarterly earnings on Nov. 9.Advertisement