AdvertisementSupported byDealBook 2015 ConferenceBy Michael J. de la MercedSilicon Valley may have become known as a land of exuberance and innovation — or one of irrationality as companies pursue the future. But two prominent investors counseled the tech center’s denizens to think of the future in other ways as well.Peter Thiel, the billionaire entrepreneur and venture capitalist, and Chris Sacca, the well-known investor who has backed Twitter and Uber, offered a wide-ranging look at the state of the technology world at the DealBook conference.Mr. Thiel acknowledged that the valuations of many private start-ups were currently high. But he argued that the multibillion-dollar appraisals of hot companies like Uber and Airbnb were not nearly as bad as during the dot-com boom, since not nearly as many average investors had piled into tech investments.“The reality is that the public has not been involved this time around, unlike in the late ‘90s,” he said. He added that if there were a bubble today, he believed it had arisen because of prolonged low interest rates that had spurred a huge wave of investing across sectors.Given the troubles that have weighed down a number of onetime tech darlings, from Twitter to Groupon, the two men considered the issue of when a start-up should consider selling itself.Mr. Thiel reflected on Mark Zuckerberg’s difficult decision to turn down a buyout offer — “I don’t know what to do with a quarter-billion dollars,” the investor recalled Mr. Zuckerberg saying — while Mr. Sacca remembered speaking with Twitter’s founders after they had heard, and eventually rejected, a takeover offer from Facebook.Part of the work of being an investor is betting on the right entrepreneurs. And both men spoke about what makes a successful company founder. While recent biographies of Steve Jobs have documented the Apple co-founder’s well-known temper, Mr. Thiel said that managers trying to copy that hard-charging style missed the inspiration that Mr. Jobs drew from his employees.Mr. Sacca said that he believed the best entrepreneurs were those with absolute certainty in the future success of their company. Kevin Systrom of Instagram, he said, once spoke of what he would do when the then-nascent photosharing service reached 50 million users.“I said, ‘Dude, have you looked around? You’re working in a coworking space,’ ” Mr. Sacca said.Founders, Mr. Sacca added, are often competitive — and weird. He recounted a story of Travis Kalanick, Uber’s combative co-founder, once playing Wii Tennis at his house, where he discovered that Mr. Kalanick was one of the top-ranked players around.Speaking of competitiveness: Mr. Thiel and Mr. Sacca jousted lightly over the two major car ride services, Uber and Lyft. (Mr. Thiel’s firm has invested in Lyft; Mr. Sacca was an early backer of Uber.)“Uber’s always been a superaggressive company,” Mr. Sacca said. Later he acknowledged, “There’s always a question of how aggressive you can get away with being.”Mr. Thiel later said that Uber “is not morally corrupt, just a little corrupt.”The two also addressed the relative dearth of women and minorities in Silicon Valley’s ranks of both entrepreneurs and investors. Mr. Thiel said that he had no great answers, but said he believed that there was a need to encourage more women to become entrepreneurs.Mr. Sacca, who has young daughters, took a more aggressive swing at the topic, criticizing culture broadly for failing to better groom women for leadership positions in tech.“We don’t have a culture that teaches girls financial literacy,” he said. “We have a princess manufacturing complex.”He also noted that people in the Bay Area tended toward “upspeak,” the use of a rising inflection in speech. While men can get away with it, he said, women who adopt that speech pattern are not taken seriously.Advertisement