
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 31, 2016
The disclosure of an investigation can have a devastating effect, as Hillary Clinton learned on Friday. But the targets of federal inquiries have few tools available to fight back. The government’s power to investigate is almost unlimited, with no real avenue imposed by courts to provide any redress for an individual harmed by the publicity surrounding a case.The Justice Department and Federal Bureau of Investigation usually prefer that their investigations stay under wraps, both to keep open the possibility of using undercover tactics like wiretaps and cooperating witnesses, and to avoid tarnishing the reputation of those involved. But sometimes the information does come out.For Mrs. Clinton, the disclosure that more emails were found that might be linked to her private email server came from a letter  sent to congressional committee chairmen by James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director. That was unusual because investigators are not in the habit of saying there is an investigation before it has even started, especially when it could affect an election. The former attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., issued a memo in 2012 telling Justice Department officials that they should be careful not to take steps in an investigation that might affect an election, but a policy statement does not prevent such a disclosure.In corporate investigations, information can come to light when a company receives a grand jury subpoena or an inquiry from the Securities and Exchange Commission that it concludes is material and should be disclosed to its shareholders. The strict rules on the secrecy of grand jury investigations do not apply to recipients of subpoenas or witnesses who testify, so they are usually free to discuss their involvement if they want.AdvertisementMore commonly, information about an investigation comes from an anonymous source. Thus, the media frequently attributes details to someone “close to the investigation” or “briefed on the status of the case.” Those types of disclosures can come from anyone touched by the investigation and not just agents or prosecutors.AdvertisementFor those in the government, there are some restrictions on what can be disclosed. If there is a grand jury investigation, Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(e)  prohibits the prosecutors and investigating agents from disclosing “a matter occurring before the grand jury.” A violation of the secrecy requirement can result in a criminal charge for contempt of court.The problem with that rule is figuring out exactly what “matter” is subject to the disclosure prohibition. Revealing what a witness said before the grand jury is proscribed, but it is less clear whether it covers information gathered through subpoenas and other steps taken by investigators to aid in a grand jury investigation.Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, found themselves in the middle of such a dispute in 1999 during his impeachment trial before the Senate. The New York Times published a story quoting “several associates” in the office of Kenneth W. Starr, the independent counsel who led the investigation of Mr. Clinton, about his conclusion that there was constitutional authority to seek the indictment of a sitting president even if the Senate did not vote to impeach.Mr. Clinton sought to have the sources, including Mr. Starr, held in contempt for violating Rule 6(e). But the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that disclosure of information about the prosecutor’s own investigation and the office’s decision about possible charges was not protected by Rule 6(e) because it did not reveal the grand jury’s own deliberations.When there has been a leak, the decision whether to pursue a criminal contempt charge for violation of the grand jury secrecy rule requires the Justice Department to identify the source, and then gather enough evidence to show that the person who disclosed the information knew that it was protected. Those types of cases are rare, largely because it is difficult to track down who provided the information, especially when reporters will not reveal the identity of their sources.Even if an investigation results in a person being charged with a crime, there are few avenues to combat any possible misconduct during the investigation. The prosecution of William T. Walters for insider trading shows the limits of what a defendant can seek when claiming that the government improperly leaked information.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A number of articles appeared in May and June 2014 that gave details about criminal and civil investigations of Mr. Walters, the renowned golfer Phil Mickelson and Thomas C. Davis, the former chairman of Dean Foods, for possible trading on inside information about the company. In a filing in September this year, Mr. Walters’s lawyer asked the court to conduct a hearing about “leaks of grand jury information during the investigation of this case, and to determine the appropriate remedy to prevent the government from benefiting from its improper conduct.”The Justice Department responded by disputing the claim that the information came from a government source, arguing that there was no incentive for a prosecutor or agent to leak information because the government did not want anything to become public while there was a wiretap on Mr. Walters’s phone. Prosecutors went on to assert that even if the information was traceable to a source inside the Justice Department, it was unclear whether anything disclosed constituted grand jury material subject to a secrecy requirement, relying on the appeals court decision in the case involving Mr. Starr’s office.AdvertisementPerhaps more important, the government questioned what remedy a court could impose because there was no obvious legal harm to Mr. Walters’s case from the disclosure. He can still defend the charges.Living under the threat of an indictment for two years, along with the negative publicity generated by a criminal investigation, can be quite costly to a target of the inquiry. But courts do not like to dismiss an indictment because of misconduct by the prosecutor during the investigation — even if it can be shown — unless it directly affects the case beyond bad press.The extent of that reluctance was shown in an August decision in United States v. Harmon by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco. The appeals court refused to overturn the guilty verdict of a lawyer — whom it compared to the Saul Goodman character in “Breaking Bad” — for using her trust account to launder funds received from a client despite the fact that the prosecutor allowed a key cooperating witness to lie to the grand jury about whether he received any financial benefits for his testimony. Although everyone agreed that the prosecutor’s actions “were wrong,” there was no remedy available because the error was harmless in light of the jury’s guilty verdict in the trial.If someone involved in an investigation is never charged with a crime, then the only avenue to challenge misconduct is by filing a lawsuit claiming a violation of their constitutional rights. But that, too, can be a difficult road, with only a small chance of any recovery.David Ganek, the founder of hedge fund firm Level Global Investors, sued a number of prosecutors and agents, including Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, for their conduct in obtaining a warrant to search his company’s offices in November 2010. The warrant application, which was later obtained by The New York Times, incorrectly stated that Mr. Ganek received inside information.The firm went out of business a few months after widespread media reports about the search as clients became skittish about dealing with anyone linked to insider trading. Mr. Ganek asked prosecutors to correct the misstatement about his involvement, but they refused.The lawsuit survived a preliminary motion to dismiss in the Federal District Court, but the Justice Department filed an immediate appeal, asking that the case be thrown out. The government argued that Mr. Ganek’s constitutional rights were not violated because there was no obligation for prosecutors to issue a public statement exonerating a person even though there was a misrepresentation in a warrant application.When an investigation becomes public, there is little anyone can do to slow it down, or seek to get their reputation back even if no charges were filed. Fans of 1960s music may be reminded of the refrain sung by The Bobby Fuller Four: “I fought the law, and the law won.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »