By MICHAEL CIEPLYNOV. 3, 2015
LOS ANGELES —  Two websites that film companies said had jointly become a clearinghouse for illegal movie viewing were closed last month by orders from courts in Canada and New Zealand, the Motion Picture Association of America said on Tuesday.The Popcorntime.io site, commonly referred to as Popcorn Time, was closed under an Oct. 16 order from the Federal Court in Ottawa. YTS.to, a BitTorrent site whose films were often reached through Popcorn Time, was closed under an interim injunction in a separate suit filed on Oct. 12 in the High Court of New Zealand, the M.P.A.A. said.Disclosure of the shutdown came after court documents in Canada were unsealed on Tuesday.For days, reports in tech media sites had noted problems with the two sites. “This week has descended into an incredible mess for Popcorn Time, and the end is not in sight,” noted an Oct. 23 post on TorrentFreak. That report cited tampering with infrastructure and possible conflicts among those who maintain the Popcorn Time and YTS sites.The M.P.A.A. said figures from comScore, a media measurement company, showed Popcorntime.io to have had 1.5 million unique visitors in July 2015. ComScore figures showed that the YTS site had 3.4 million visitors the following month, the M.P.A.A. said.AdvertisementAccording to the association, which represents major film companies in the United States, YTS has a library of about 4,500 film titles in violation of copyright laws.Attempts to reach developers cited in the Canadian suit as helping to maintain the Popcorn Time site were unsuccessful.AdvertisementAmerican film companies have persistently fought infringing sites in courts around the world, only to see new portals replace those that are shut down. A Popcorn Time site was closed in 2014, for instance, but was replaced by the Popcorntime.io site, which was endorsed by developers of the earlier site.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Courts Close Two Websites That Illegally Showed Films.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.