
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

NOV. 1, 2016
Gannett ended its takeover bid for its rival Tronc and in the process put a new era for newspaper moguls into prominence.The deal to combine the publishers of USA Today and The Los Angeles Times would have helped reduce costs as the industry faces a relentless downturn. Necessary business-model experimentation, however, works best away from the public markets.The primary reason for the merger’s collapse is instructive. Banks pulled their financing commitments after Gannett turned in weaker results than expected. Investors, too, see little promise in these embattled newspaper empires. Media companies like Gannett, Tronc, The New York Times Company, News Corporation and Lee Enterprises all trade at less than seven times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda.There’s little in the way of good news. Magna, a research firm, forecasts that newspaper advertising revenue in the United States will fall 11 percent from a year ago, to about $13 billion. That’s 20 percent of the sum generated back before internet companies like Craigslist and Alphabet’s Google started devouring market share.AdvertisementGetting readers to buy online subscriptions is helping, but not enough. The Wall Street Journal, one of the strongest in digital publishing, is offering a fresh round of newsroom buyouts and considering closing sections of the paper after falling behind budget by 30 percent, according to a report in Politico.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Success will require even more radical ideas. That could mean embracing some combination of what Buzzfeed and Business Insider have made work so far: combining populist headlines, slide shows, video clips, aggregated news stories and serious-minded original journalism.Since acquiring The Washington Post three years ago for $250 million and pulling its finances out of the public eye, Jeffrey P. Bezos, the founder of Amazon, has done something similar in a bid to expand paying readership across the world. Many American newspapers would benefit from a steward willing to sacrifice short-term profit for a longer-term vision.That would herald a return to a bygone era where families like the Chandlers and Bancrofts owned America’s periodicals. It might invite the sort of unseemly situation occurring with the casino mogul Sheldon Adelson, who bought The Las Vegas Review-Journal.At this point, however, it’s a chance that many ailing publications probably need to take.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »