AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangLet’s say Donald J. Trump were elected president. How would markets and the economy react?A Trump presidency, if nothing else, means uncertainty. And markets hate uncertainty.So the first thing some investors would do is sell, right?In reality, Andrew Ross Sorkin writes, it is hard to predict what markets would do. Some economists believe that whatever the result of the election, a few longer-term signs point to markets taking a hit."Given that we’ve had a financial crisis of some sort about every eight years or so for the last several decades, it is hard to believe that we will go through the next four years without a hiccup,” Mr. Sorkin writes. “If merger activity is a gauge of the market’s cycle, the recent spate of deals suggests we’re closer to the ninth inning than the first.”It is also hard to track the immediate consequence of the election on the broader economy, no matter who wins. Big investments like blast furnaces and buildings are probably affected, one economist notes, but coffee and doughnut sales? They are probably safe.Just days after AT&T announced its plans to buy Time Warner, its rivals in the telecommunications industry, CenturyLink and Level 3 Communications, announced a hefty deal of their own.The $25 billion agreement would make the combined company the second-largest provider of communications to business in the United States (after AT&T).CenturyLink’s investors, however, were not persuaded by the acquisition and the shares slumped after the announcement.Telecommunications is not the only business in which companies are teaming up — the same is happening in the energy sector.The price of oil has stabilized, but the industry is struggling.Technological improvements have driven down the costs of drilling a well — bad news for service companies, already faced with tightening regulation and heightened environmental activism.So General Electric hopes that by merging its oil and gas division with Baker Hughes, a fellow services provider, it can ride out these problems and increase its presence in the sector.There could be benefits beyond saving money, too.“Maintaining its oil-and-gas business as a publicly traded company also provides an acquisition currency to pursue other transactions in the sector,” according to Breakingviews.Zcash, a new virtual currency, is meant to be untraceable, so it will be difficult for it to win support from regulators and bankers.And yet investors were nevertheless paying more than $1,000 a unit for it on Monday. It has secured $3 million in backing from Silicon Valley venture capitalists.Unlike Bitcoin, there is no ledger for transactions. Cryptographers designed it so that transactions could be confirmed without recording the Zcash addresses involved.The team behind it says it is not intended to facilitate illegal activity, but to provide some privacy.“All of the conversations I’ve had with businesses, banks, regulators and law enforcement have been about the need for data security for commercial applications,” said Zooko Wilcox, the company’s founder and chief executive.“If the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results, then Mr. Caspersen’s options trading was not that of a sane person.”— Bruce Rosen, a former managing director at Tiger Ventures Capital. Andrew Caspersen pleaded guilty to charges that he defrauded friends, relatives and a hedge fund billionaire’s foundation of nearly $40 million. His lawyer contends that he was driven by extreme compulsion. He will be sentenced on Friday.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement