Adrenaclick, a cheaper alternative, has benefited from furor over EpiPen pricing. But its maker is struggling to meet demand, and a generic EpiPen is near.By KATIE THOMASNOV. 1, 2016
As the list price of a pair of EpiPen devices soared to more than $600 this summer, people scurried to find alternatives, occasionally throwing caution to the wind. Some bought cheap syringes filled with epinephrine, the medication in EpiPens; others made homemade auto-injectors, following the steps in a popular YouTube video.Few people, though, have turned to the one true alternative — known by the brand name Adrenaclick.The Adrenaclick auto-injector checks all the necessary boxes: The government declared it safe, national pharmacies sell it and its list price is a third less than the EpiPen’s. But selling a drug takes far more than that.The story of Adrenaclick is paved with blunders and missed chances, leaving it a largely unknown bit player with a single-digit share of the market. Six companies in succession have owned Adrenaclick since an earlier version became available 13 years ago, but few invested significant money in marketing. It has been sold under multiple names, and at one point it was taken off the market for more than a year. Recently, its owner, Impax Laboratories, has struggled to keep up with scant demand, resulting in sporadic shortages.During the same period, Mylan, the maker of EpiPens and the target of the public’s furor over the price increases, has done almost exactly the opposite — turning what was once considered a throwaway product into a prodigious moneymaker through branding and shrewd market expansion.Advertisement“EpiPen is like Kleenex — it’s ubiquitous,” said Brian Chapman, a consultant for ZS Associates, a pharmaceutical marketing firm. “What they’ve done with that brand has been amazing.”Impax has been moving to make Adrenaclick a competitive alternative. The company is striving to expand access to Adrenaclick by upgrading the outdated production line, improving the distribution system and lobbying states to make it easier for patients to get the product from pharmacists.It may be too little, too late, though. Mylan has said it will begin selling a lower-cost, generic version of the EpiPen before the end of the year, an effort to mollify critics of its high prices. In October, the makers of the Auvi-Q, a competing product that was recalled last year, announced that it would return to the market in 2017. And Wall Street analysts think that Teva Pharmaceuticals could release its own generic version of the EpiPen by late next year.Advertisement“Why use the drug? Why make the switch?” said Ronny Gal, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company. “Why do I need to go with the Adrenaclick, when a year from now I will have a generic EpiPen?”Like the EpiPen, the Adrenaclick is designed to be easy to use to stop severe allergic reactions: Users push one end of the device against the person’s thigh, triggering a needle to inject epinephrine into the muscle. There are subtle differences, too. Users must remove two caps to use the Adrenaclick, for example, while EpiPen users remove only one.Doctors who are aware of and prescribe the Adrenaclick say patients are often pleasantly surprised to learn that there is an alternative to the EpiPen.“I usually ask them, can you guys afford this? What’s your insurance coverage?” said Dr. Andrew Murphy, an allergy specialist in Pennsylvania. “If they say ‘I’m not paying $600 for an EpiPen,’ I say ‘That’s fine, then get this.’”Doctors say they have struggled to keep track of the product, and its availability, over the years. The product now called Adrenaclick got its start in 2003 as the Twinject, an EpiPen alternative that was designed to deliver two doses of epinephrine in the event that users needed a second one. But the Twinject was confusing and difficult to use, and after a series of design changes, it evolved into the Adrenaclick. The Food and Drug Administration approved those changes in 2009.By then, however, Mylan had begun its push to expand sales of the EpiPen. Executives there saw untapped potential in the product soon after taking ownership of it in 2007.EpiPen, which was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1987, already had good name recognition, but the market was relatively small. By 2007, it had annual sales of only about $200 million. Since then, Mylan has succeeded in turning the EpiPen into a billion-dollar-a-year product by raising prices and expanding the market through advertising, lobbying and giveaways to schools, practices that have all come under scrutiny as anger over its high price has grown.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the EpiPen became a blockbuster product, the Adrenaclick struggled to keep up, capturing only about 1 or 2 percent of the market.In 2013, after a period when the Adrenaclick was off the market, its owner at the time, Amedra Pharmaceuticals, made the tactical decision to stop competing directly with the EpiPen and instead created an identical, but generic, version of the Adrenaclick.AdvertisementThat move allowed insurance companies to begin covering the Adrenaclick as a generic product, lowering the out-of-pocket costs to most patients to $10 to $20. The list price for a pair of generic Adrenaclick pens, which uninsured customers may have to pay, is about $400, compared with more than $600 for a pair of EpiPens. Coupons for both products can lower the price further.Impax inherited the Adrenaclick, along with its generic version, in 2015 as part of a larger acquisition. Rather than investing in a costly marketing campaign, the company has opted to lobby states to make the generic Adrenaclick more widely available.Douglas S. Boothe, president of the generics division at Impax, says the company sees an opportunity in a little-known provision that allows pharmacists in 21 states to fill a prescription for an EpiPen with the generic version of Adrenaclick, even though the two are not identical. He acknowledges, however, that many pharmacists aren’t aware that his product exists, which is a major hurdle.The company also said it was spending tens of millions of dollars to upgrade its assembly line to meet heightened demand for the product after the EpiPen price increases. It now holds about 7 percent of the market, Mr. Boothe said.“Certainly the news has been a great form of awareness,” he said. However, he added, “we’ve been very prudent with how we’ve distributed the product.”Mr. Boothe rejected arguments that the Adrenaclick’s chances for success were limited. “This is not a flash in the pan for Impax,” he said. “We think this is a sustainable opportunity for us, and we’re making investments accordingly.”Still, the Adrenaclick has such a low profile that even people who consider themselves knowledgeable consumers said they were surprised to learn recently of its existence.Barbara Hollinger, a 57-year-old retiree and quilter in Northern Virginia, carried an EpiPen for 20 years because she is allergic to yellow jacket stings. But she said she became irate about the cost of EpiPens, which her insurance was forcing her to pay for out of pocket. “There’s got to be a better way,” she remembered thinking. “So when I asked my doctor if there was a generic, she said, ‘Yeah, but nobody ever prescribes it.’”After a few false starts at her local CVS, her quest was a success, and with her insurance, the product cost her $5. CVS now says the product is available in all of its pharmacies nationwide.Advertisement“Victory is mine!” Ms. Hollinger declared in an exuberant post on Facebook a few days later. The post has since been shared nearly 160,000 times.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Promising Rival to EpiPen Fails to Gain Traction.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.