By ELIZABETH OLSONNOV. 3, 2015
The global law firm Dentons has announced that it is planning to combine with two firms, one in Australia and the other in Singapore, to create the largest law firm in the world.Dentons announced earlier this year that it would combine with Dacheng, a huge Chinese firm. The combined entity, when approved by the firms involved, will create what Dentons is calling a “new legal powerhouse in the Asia-Pacific region.”The legal giant will have some 7,300 lawyers in 130 offices globally, and more than $2 billion in annual gross revenue after its tie-up with 500 lawyers from the Australian firm Gadens and 200 lawyers from Rodyk & Davidson in Singapore.The three-way tie-up is part of a wave of combinations sweeping the legal market. There were 68 law firm combinations in the United States in 2015 through the end of September, according to the legal consulting firm Altman Weil, the highest number in the last decade.AdvertisementMost recent tie-ups, though, have been mergers of smaller firms, especially intellectual property boutiques, and do not involve the huge numbers of lawyers involved in the cross-border combinations that Dentons is engineering. The combination, which creates a legal behemoth more along the lines of a global accounting firm, is sufficiently large that the firm created a website, dentonscombination.com, to lay out the details of the arrangement.AdvertisementDentons is amassing a broad base of expertise around the globe, according to Joseph J. Andrew, the firm’s chairman.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are pivoting from the base we already have in the Atlantic,” he said, “and finding new talent in new geographical locations.”Nearly half of Dentons’s top 200 clients have significant business in Australia and Singapore, and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a new trade accord that involves a dozen nations including the United States and Japan, is expected to generate new economic and legal activity.At the same time, Dentons has engaged in large combinations, it also has been adding hundreds of lawyers, often from other domestic law firms. So far in 2015, the firm has hired 431 such lawyers, according to Mr. Andrew.They include last month’s hiring of Nicholas W. Allard, dean of the Brooklyn Law School, as senior counsel to Dentons’s public policy and regulation practice, including health, energy and environmental law.Other well-known names on Dentons’s expanded rolls are Newt Gingrich, former speaker of the House of Representatives, and Howard B. Dean, former governor of Vermont. Both former presidential candidates are part of the firm’s public policy and regulation practice.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.