AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsNorman Brokaw, who rose from teenage mail clerk to top mogul at the William Morris talent agency, where he broke ground in the fledgling television industry for idled Hollywood stars and a black stand-up comic named Bill Cosby, died on Saturday in Beverly Hills, Calif. He was 89.The cause was complications of pneumonia, his son Joel said.Mr. Brokaw was virtually born into show business. His grandparents’ acrobatic dance troupe was imported from Russia in 1898 by a novice New York vaudeville agent who himself had recently immigrated and changed his name from Zelman Moses to William Morris.Mr. Brokaw’s uncle, the agent Johnny Hyde, later worked for Morris on the West Coast and hired Norman in the mailroom in 1943, when he was only 15, after the family moved to California from Manhattan. Once he got his foot in the door, there was no stopping him for nearly seven decades.Mr. Brokaw’s hustling paved a career path for future power brokers. He integrated actors, writers, producers and directors to develop what became known as packaging for television and films, and he widened the William Morris Agency’s net to corral major sports, broadcasting and political figures as clients.His roster eventually included, among many others, Susan Hayward, Kim Novak, Barbara Stanwyck, Elvis and Priscilla Presley, Hank Aaron, Natalie Wood, Clint Eastwood, Gerald and Betty Ford, Donna Summer and Mark Spitz.He claimed — and it became Hollywood legend — to have introduced another client, Marilyn Monroe, to her future husband, Joe DiMaggio. (She had been dating Mr. Brokaw’s uncle Johnny, who discovered her.)In 1965, Mr. Brokaw heard that the actor, producer and director Sheldon Leonard (whom he had enlisted to direct the Danny Thomas sitcom “Make Room for Daddy”) was seeking a black actor to star with Robert Culp in a TV series called “I Spy.” Mr. Brokaw persuaded Mr. Leonard to sign Mr. Cosby, making him the first black star in a prime-time network series that, unlike its predecessors “Beulah” and “Amos ’n’ Andy,” was not considered racial caricature.“It was to be as momentous for television as it was when Jackie Robinson broke the color barrier in baseball,” Mr. Brokaw wrote in an unpublished manuscript for a memoir.Mr. Brokaw helped shape Mr. Cosby’s career until Mr. Cosby left the agency (now known as William Morris Endeavor) in 2012. He also helped plot the aggressive media strategy mounted by Mr. Cosby in recent years against allegations of sexual abuse.Mr. Brokaw possessed “a rare talent for people — knowing who did what best and how to put them together for success,” Berry Gordy, the founder of Motown Records and a client, said.Norman Robert Brokaw was born on April 21, 1927, in Manhattan, the son of Jewish immigrants from Russia. His father, Isidor, was a lawyer who became a wealthy real estate developer and lost a fortune when the stock market crashed in 1929. His mother, the former Marie Hyde, was a member of her family’s dance troupe, which performed under its original surname, Haidabura.Norman was raised in suburban Larchmont, N.Y., and in Manhattan, where he played catch with his piano teacher’s neighbor Lou Gehrig. When his father died of a heart attack a few weeks after Norman’s bar mitzvah, his mother sold her last piece of jewelry to pay for the funeral.She and Norman (his older brothers were in the military) then moved west. He attended the Hollywood Professional School and the University of California, Los Angeles and served briefly in the Army.His first two marriages, to Florence Herdan and Suzane Weintraub, ended in divorce.Besides his son Joel, he is survived by his wife, Marguerite Longley; two other sons, David and Sanford (they and Joel, all from his marriage to Ms. Herdan, founded the Brokaw Company, a publicity firm); two daughters, Barbara Brokaw and Wendy Brokaw Kretchmer, from his marriage to Ms. Weintraub; another daughter, Lauren, from his marriage to Ms. Longley; and five grandchildren.The day Mr. Brokaw was hired as a $25-a-week mail clerk over lunch at the Hollywood home of his mother’s brother, Johnny Hyde, Mr. Hyde had signed a contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for a woman who had just emerged from his swimming pool.“Remember what I’m telling you,” Mr. Brokaw said his uncle had advised. “She’s going to be a huge star.”“He was right,” Mr. Brokaw added. “Her name was Esther Williams.”Promoted from trainee to junior agent, he was tutored by Ben F. Holzman, who represented Al Jolson and Eddie Cantor on radio. He was working in the agency’s movie department in 1949, he recalled, when Abe Lastfogel, a partner in the agency, told him: “I want to talk to you about something that’s going to become very important. There’s no locked-in name for it yet, but it’s going to be called television.”Mr. Brokaw signed actors whom he described as “no longer in high demand.” Before long, Barbara Britton was starring on “Mr. and Mrs. North,” Reed Hadley was appearing in “Racket Squad” and Loretta Young had her own weekly show and production company.In the early 1950s, Mr. Brokaw recalled, he took Marilyn Monroe to the Brown Derby restaurant after a stint on a local TV show. William Frawley, who played the friend and neighbor Fred Mertz on “I Love Lucy,” stopped by their table to say that he was dining with Joe DiMaggio and that DiMaggio had become mesmerized by Mr. Brokaw’s dinner partner. He wanted to meet her, Mr. Frawley said.“When he left, Marilyn looked at me and asked, ‘Who’s Joe Di?’” Mr. Brokaw wrote in his memoir. “We finished our dinner first, and on the way out, we stopped at their table. I introduced them. The next thing I know they were going together, and soon thereafter married.”Mr. Brokaw was named president of the agency in 1989 and later chairman. He retired in 1997. In 2010, he became the first agent to receive the Governors Award for substantial impact on the medium from the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.He once said that if he had the chance to relive his life, he would start again in the mailroom, because he had gained so much from being at the bottom — in part from going to the studios to pick up checks for the agency’s clients.“I got to know everyone in town, as well as what our clients earned,” he wrote. “Knowing that information was a steppingstone to my being promoted: When I served coffee to a group of agents having a picture meeting, one said ‘So-and-so got three thousand a picture,’ and the other said, ‘No, it’s thirty-five something.’ I said, ‘Sir, it’s thirty-eight fifty,’ and I was right.”Advertisement