
Breakingviews By                     
ROB COX

NOV. 2, 2016
Credit Suisse’s chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, is clearly frustrated with the investment banking operations of the institution he oversees.And with good reason: Wall Street banks seem to have won most of the battle for supremacy over who gets most of the fees that the world’s biggest corporations and investment managers pay to bankers and traders.At the same time, the cost of maintaining the Swiss bank’s business of financing companies, advising them on mergers and making markets in a bewildering array of stocks, bonds and other instruments remains high. And regulators keep demanding that banks put up more capital against these activities.So it is logical that Mr. Thiam, and perhaps other European bank executives, like John Cryan at Deutsche Bank, James E. Staley at Barclays, Stuart Gulliver at HSBC and Sergio P. Ermotti of UBS might consider more radical ways to reduce their financial commitments to some of these operations. Credit Suisse is talking to a rival about pooling costs, Mr. Thiam told The Financial Times, suggesting, “This is just the beginning.”AdvertisementIt is easy to see where this deliberation might lead. If they cannot make it on their own, Mr. Thiam and others may conclude that they should join forces to take on their American competitors.AdvertisementThe idea of merging investment banks may sound so last century and more than a little stupid. After all, Credit Suisse paid $11.5 billion for the New York investment bank Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette in 2000, only to see the firm’s rainmakers depart and their combined market share fail to materialize. It later wrote off the value of the acquisition.But many of the European banks that bulked up over the last few decades on Wall Street now stand at an existential crossroads. They are gazing at a future in which these businesses, even if they are able to make a profit, will probably struggle to cover their costs of capital in the foreseeable future. This puts them at a competitive disadvantage in wooing clients and retaining talent relative to the American companies. It’s an ugly cycle.Look at where the non-American banks stand in the industry league tables compiled by Thomson Reuters. Although not necessarily a reflection of profitability, it’s generally accepted that the industry’s high fixed costs mean scale allows a greater proportion of the fees to drop to the bottom line. Not one company with headquarters outside Manhattan ranks in the top three advising globally on mergers and acquisitions, underwriting debt and equity or arranging big syndicated loans so far this year.Credit Suisse’s best showing is as the sixth-ranked adviser in mergers and acquisitions, just ahead of Barclays. Deutsche came in 10th in mergers and seventh on debt, equity and loans. Barclays managed the fourth spot in debt, just ahead of HSBC. All of this although Credit Suisse bought DLJ and First Boston before that, Deutsche Bank spent $9 billion on Bankers Trust back in 1999 and Barclays picked up the American carcass of Lehman Brothers after the financial crisis for a bargain $1.8 billion.As the head of one United States bank told me last week: “It’s over — the Americans won.” The top slots in the rankings for core investment banking products are all held by some combination of Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup and Bank of America Merrill Lynch. The picture is broadly similar in the arenas of stock and bond market trading.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maintaining these subscale franchises is expensive. Credit Suisse squeezed out a profit before tax of 73 million Swiss francs ($74.1 million) in its investment banking and capital markets arm in the first half of the year, on 931 million francs of net revenue. Its global markets division lost 44 million francs on pretax income of 2.9 billion francs. These two divisions accounted for about 40 percent of the bank’s core risk-weighted assets. By comparison, Credit Suisse’s international wealth management, Asia Pacific and Swiss banking arms made a combined 1.9 billion francs on 6.8 billion of net revenue.Things are not much better over at Deutsche Bank, whose huge global markets division eked out a 3.7 percent return on tangible equity in the third quarter. For the bank to cover its cost of capital, my colleague Dominic Elliott estimated that it would need to slash costs 20 percent.One way to be more efficient would be for Deutsche and Credit Suisse to crunch their United States businesses together. They would also get bigger scale. If the banks were able to maintain their respective market share positions under one roof, they would vault up the rankings. A Credit Suisse-Deutsche Bank duo, for instance, would have challenged JPMorgan as the leading underwriter of global equity and equity-linked securities, raising $47 billion for clients, year to date. And it might figure as a top five merger adviser.AdvertisementMerging would undoubtedly be messy. Conflicts of interest would make it hard for the combined group to keep all its clients. The best employees might leave. Regulators, too, might balk at the idea of big balance sheets getting bigger. A merger of Credit Suisse and Deutsche’s United States holding companies would potentially create a $700 billion institution.Winning approval for such a deal would take finesse from the banks involved. The Federal Reserve would need to be persuaded that one better managed, more profitable and less risky institution was preferable to two weak subsidiaries.Analysts at Macquarie Research pointed out last week that “Deutsche Bank has the largest U.S. balance sheet of European peers and is also the most weakly capitalized of peers. This must be an uncomfortable position for U.S. regulators.”Over time, their parents in Switzerland and Germany could eventually spin off all or part of the combined enterprise to investors, reducing their exposure. But a successful combination — call it First Boston Bankers Trust — might even attract other banks facing a similar future of death by a thousand cuts.Who knows? One day, maybe Lehman Brothers and Dillon, Read & Company could join the reunion, too.Rob Cox is editor of Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »