By JULIE CRESWELLNOV. 3, 2016
E. Lee Hennessee, a pioneering woman in the male-dominated hedge fund industry and the creator of one of the first indexes to track its secretive transactions, was found dead on Oct. 29 at her home in West Palm Beach, Fla. She was 64.The cause was apparently a stroke, said Chase Scott, a spokesman for the family.Ms. Hennessee was a frequent presence at industry conferences and was an early supporter of the industry association 100 Women in Hedge Funds.Ms. Hennessee started her hedge fund index, tracking which strategies were making or losing money across the industry, in 1987.That same year, while working for E. F. Hutton, she founded the Hennessee Hedge Fund Advisory Group, a division of Hutton. The firm conducted research and advised clients about investments in hedge funds, an industry that at the time was growing quickly but was even more tight-lipped about strategies or returns than it is today.AdvertisementAfter E. F. Hutton was acquired by Shearson Lehman Brothers in 1988, Ms. Hennessee and the hedge fund advisory firm stayed on. It later moved to Republic New York Securities and then to the investment management firm Weiss, Peck & Greer before it was turned into a stand-alone operation, the Hennessee Group, in 1997.AdvertisementAt its peak it had more than $1.6 billion in assets. Ms. Hennessee ran the firm with her husband, Charles J. Gradante, whom she married in 1992.The reputation she built over many years on Wall Street suffered in 2005, when a fund her group had recommended, Bayou Management, based in Connecticut, collapsed. Bayou’s chief executive and founder, Samuel Israel III, pleaded guilty to conspiracy and fraud in cheating investors out of $450 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About 40 clients lost $56 million in Bayou funds after investing on the Hennessee Group’s recommendation, according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.In 2009, the firm paid a $100,000 fine and repaid $549,000, plus interest, to settle claims filed by the S.E.C. that it had failed to perform adequate due diligence on Bayou before recommending it. The settlement did not include any admission or denial of the claims.In 2013, the Hennessee Group’s advisory business was acquired by Terrapin Asset Management.Elizabeth Lee Hennessee was born on Sept. 1, 1952, in Raleigh, N.C., to Mary Frances Dillon and William E. Hennessee. Her father was a senior vice president in charge of advertising and tobacco sales at the Dillon Supply Company.She graduated in 1975 from Randolph-Macon Woman’s College (now Randolph College), in Lynchburg, Va. She started working on Wall Street a year later.Ms. Hennessee served as a finance chairwoman for Elizabeth Dole’s campaign for the Republican presidential nomination in 2000 and organized the Billy Graham crusade in New York in 2005. She was active in Palm Beach charities.Ms. Hennessee is survived by her husband, her mother and two brothers, William and Grover (who is known as Dillon) Hennessee.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2016, on Page A30 of the New York edition with the headline: E. Lee Hennessee, 64, Hedge Fund Pioneer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.