By VINDU GOELNOV. 3, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Federal prosecutors have brought eight fraud charges against Jeffry James Hill, a former Napa Valley winemaker and vineyard manager who was accused of stealing grapes and deceiving customers about the source and type of grapes in the wines he sold.Mr. Hill, whose business was the subject of a lengthy profile in The New York Times last year, was arrested in Clovis, Calif., on Wednesday after the indictment by a San Francisco grand jury in his case was unsealed.The indictment charged Mr. Hill, 38, with carrying out a scheme to defraud his customers by misrepresenting wine and grapes as Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon, when in fact the fruit came from other parts of California and was sometimes not even cabernet grapes. Napa cabernet, one of the nation’s most prestigious wines, commands higher prices than other wines from the state, and prosecutors say that Mr. Hill’s customers paid more than $1.5 million for fraudulently labeled products.Mr. Hill created false records purporting to document the wine as Napa cabernet, intercepted trucks hauling grapes to change paperwork and instructed employees who picked grapes to mislabel the origin and varietal that they had picked, the indictment says.AdvertisementThe grand jury charged Mr. Hill with four counts of wire fraud and four counts of mail fraud. Each count carries a maximum potential penalty of 20 years in prison and $250,000 in fines or twice the amount gained or lost in the fraud.AdvertisementMr. Hill did not respond to a Twitter message seeking comment on Thursday and no one picked up a phone listed in his name. He has no attorney of record in the federal case.The Hill saga shook up Napa Valley because he not only deceived consumers who purchased wine from Hill Wine Company’s own winery but also cheated other prominent Napa winemakers like Don Sebastiani & Sons and Trinitas Cellars by selling them mislabeled grapes. The Sebastiani winery was forced to recall the mislabeled wine it had sold and claimed $3 million in damages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federal alcohol regulators forced Mr. Hill to cede control of his business in April 2014 after an investigation into his activities. Hill Wine filed for bankruptcy soon after, owing more than $8 million to creditors.In July 2015, Mr. Hill pleaded no contest to one count of grand theft in Napa County Superior Court for diverting several tons of Napa grapes he had harvested for Del Dotto Vineyards in October 2013 to his own winery. He was sentenced to one year in jail and ordered to pay restitution to Del Dotto.Recently, he has been trying to rebuild his life by marketing his services as an agricultural pest control adviser in California’s Central Valley. As part of that effort, he has set up several blogs offering his farming advice.None of them mention his history of legal troubles, which also include a personal bankruptcy and a conviction for insurance fraud. Instead, the sites describe him as reliable and trustworthy.“He is known for his honesty and frank manner of speaking,” says his site on Weebly, a web hosting service. “He takes special pride in not hiding the truth of any situation through the course of conversation. He is also a stickler for doing the right thing and has a high moral compass. This is the reason why he has had a long success on a personal and professional level over the years.”A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Napa Winemaker Arrested in Fraud Scheme.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.