AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottThe chief executive of Credit Suisse, Tidjane Thiam, recently described Europe’s banks as “uninvestable.” His bank’s third-quarter results make Credit Suisse look just as bad.By limiting increases in its total expenses, the Swiss bank squeezed out earnings of 41 million Swiss francs, or $42 million, well ahead of expectations from analysts polled by Reuters, who had expected a loss of 120 million Swiss francs. Yet profitability is under pressure in Credit Suisse’s wealth management and trading businesses.Adjusted for one-time expenses, Credit Suisse made progress on cutting costs. The bank now exudes confidence that expenses will come in below its full-year target of 19.8 billion Swiss francs. Controlling overhead enabled Mr. Thiam and the bank’s chief financial officer, David Mathers, to absorb a fresh provision of 357 million Swiss francs for litigation, chiefly related to an expected settlement of an investigation into the sale of mortgage-backed securities in the United States.Struggles in the bank’s wealth management division should temper investor enthusiasm, though. In all of Credit Suisse’s private banking businesses, the net margin, which measures pretax profit as a proportion of assets under management, was lower than in the previous quarter. The overall net margin was 26 basis points, down five basis points from the second quarter. By contrast, its rival UBS managed to increase its net margin slightly over the same period to 27 basis points.A continued decline in equities trading is another reason to fret. Credit Suisse was once a top-three player by revenue, but after a year-on-year decline of more than one-third – worse than at its main rivals – it placed sixth this quarter. In the bank’s global markets division, which excludes trading revenue in Asia, returns are dropping well below its probable cost of regulatory capital.Mr. Thiam’s big push into Asia may also be serving up extra risks. Credit Suisse blamed loans secured against shares that had plunged in value for a 38 million Swiss franc provision for credit losses in its private banking business in Asia in the third quarter. The bank says there were only a few such impaired loans, that the average loan-to-value ratio for such lending is 55 percent, and that the losses were unusual.But it’s a reminder that Credit Suisse’s growth push in the region – which is central to Mr. Thiam’s ambitious targets – brings new dangers. In the meantime, Credit Suisse’s margin pains may continue to undo any diet-driven gains.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement