AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt RichtelWhen representatives of 200 nations meet at a crucial two-week climate change conference in Marrakesh, Morocco, on Monday, their goal will be to put some force behind the pledges they made a year ago in Paris to reduce the emissions responsible for global warming.But as anyone following the issue of climate change knows, setting environmental policy is a long and winding road, and a deeply bureaucratic one. The title of the conference alone screams bureaucracy: It’s officially the 22nd session of the Conference of the Parties (COP22 for short) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.To help understand the purpose of the gathering — and what might or might not happen there — I conducted an email round table with a notable group of climate change experts.Paula Caballero is global director for the climate program at the World Resources Institute; Sarah Ladislaw, director of the Energy and National Security Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies; Alden Meyer, director of strategy and policy at the Union of Concerned Scientists; and David G. Victor, professor of international relations at the University of California, San Diego, and co-chairman of the Energy Security and Climate Initiative at the Brookings Institution.Q. Broadly speaking, what is the purpose of the Marrakesh meeting? Does it continue what happened in Paris, or is it something different?Caballero: Paris marked a critical turning point toward a zero-carbon, more resilient world. It delivered an agreement that was ambitious and forward-looking. Now we must implement the commitments. COP22 is about action: on promoting implementation, on enhancing ambition, on ensuring that developing countries have the support they need. Everyone needs to act.Victor: Marrakesh keeps the ball rolling on the whole process set up in Paris. It is a way station rather than an endpoint. For example, Paris is what’s called a “pledge and review” approach to managing climate policy. Countries make pledges for the commitments they will honor.In theory, a review process then comes along to look at those national efforts and see how countries can do better — individually and collectively. Review is essential to this whole vision, but creating that process is one of the many things still on the to-do list.You’ve hit on a key word: review. How likely is it that a tough review process will come out of Marrakesh?Ladislaw: Anyone expecting a super tough review and enforcement process to come out of Marrakesh will be sorely disappointed. Rather than a gotcha type review process or a system of penalties for poor performance, the bar for success in international pledge-and-review is to maintain confidence that everyone is continuing to act in good faith, that progress is being made to reduce emissions, and that progress is at the right level of ambition.In this way, the structure is much more about aiding those countries who are having trouble, and not allowing those countries that choose not to — or fail to — meet their commitments from doing so without some sort of scrutiny.It sounds like a support group. Will it take something tougher?Victor: The Paris agreement isn’t like a Cold War arms control agreement, where all countries are obsessed by strict verification at the outset. Rather, it is about confidence building — as Sarah says — at least for now. Eventually, strict verification will be needed, of course, but we are a long way from that.On the outside, however, lots of nongovernment organizations and academics and others are already using the pledges made by governments under the Paris agreement to create their own review mechanisms that will help all of us learn what’s working. Striking the right balance between formal and informal will be tricky, but that’s where progress will come.Meyer: The issue of “measurement, reporting and verification” has been a tough one. Countries like China and India have expressed deep concerns about the idea of independent expert review of their national reporting. That’s why there is language in the Paris agreement itself that these provisions “shall be implemented in a facilitative, nonintrusive, nonpunitive manner, respectful of national sovereignty, and avoid placing undue burden on parties.”Victor: But we need to deal with the reality that if we are going to make rapid and deep, deep cuts in emissions, that will probably be expensive. And that will create incentives for countries to avoid honoring their commitments. So we probably don’t want to call this gotcha, but the reality is that that capability must be built not far in the future if we are going to have deep cooperation on this problem.What kinds of incentives?Victor: Right now, the main incentives are rooted in learning and confidence.The pledges that countries are making help reveal what governments care about and how they are planning to cut emissions. To me, what is most interesting is that most countries are making most of their efforts to control emissions mostly for reasons other than climate change. China, for example, is making a big effort to deal with local air pollution and to improve energy security. That will, as well, cut emissions of global pollutants.I doubt much will happen in Marrakesh that will define success or failure for the Paris process over the long haul. There will be some big disagreements, such as on funding, but there are no real deadlines in Marrakesh so no real opportunity to declare success or failure.Where does technology fit into this? Electric vehicles, for instance, or improved solar?Victor: The best analysis of options for cutting emissions shows, pretty clearly, that making deep cuts in emissions requires electrification. That’s because it will be easier to control emissions by shifting to power plants and then moving the energy to final users cleanly by wires. Even in transportation, one of the leading options for cutting emissions is a big shift to electric vehicles. I wouldn’t put all my chips on the electricity square, but I’d put most of them there.There’s no way to achieve deep decarbonization without radically new ideas and a transformation in the energy system. The bad news, unfortunately, is that we have seen little serious progress over the last year in actually delivering on that pledge.Ladislaw: Some countries are incentivized by the idea that leadership on clean energy technology will provide economic and commercial advantages both now and in the future. The idea that the future will include more clean energy technology than conventional energy technology is driving a competition to be the purveyor of those technologies.Caballero: Technologies for adaptation — not only mitigation — also need to be prioritized. Countries are already struggling with climate impacts, and putting the right technologies in place early on can greatly reduce longer-term costs — economic, social and environmental. There is an urgent need to further efforts to develop more resilient crops able to withstand longer droughts or excessive rainfall. Similarly, those in vulnerable areas need technologies for flood safeguards. This speaks to the need for more robust weather forecasting technologies.Given that climate affects all sectors, adaptive technologies for different sectors are needed, including, for example, the health sector, where hotter temperatures will trigger changes in disease vectors, leading to the wider spread of infectious and food-borne diseases.Meyer: Sharp reductions over the last several years in the cost of clean technologies — from wind turbines to solar photovoltaic systems to LED light bulbs, to name just a few — is rapidly altering the old perception that climate action must have negative impacts on economic development.Does this mean that everything is hunky-dory, and that these technology and market shifts have put us on a glide path to staying below two degrees Celsius? Far from it. It will take aggressive action by national, state and local governments, as well as by the private sector, to get the job done.One interesting trend is the growing number of cities, states/regions and companies that are committing to transformational long-term goals, such as net zero emissions by 2050, or getting 100 percent of their energy from renewable sources; this started before Paris and has picked up speed since then. Not only does this help on the emissions front, but it puts political wind in the sails of national leaders who understand the need to do more than they committed to in Paris. A final thought?Meyer: The heavy lifting in this effort will continue to take place at the national and subnational level, and in corporate boardrooms, not at the annual climate summits. But progress can be made.There won’t be the drama, media attention and high-level engagement by political leaders that we saw last year in Paris, or have seen at other key milestones along the way in this process, such as Rio, Kyoto and Copenhagen. But Marrakesh won’t be an afterthought. If successful, it will catalyze additional actions to build on the momentum coming out of Paris.Advertisement