By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDNOV. 3, 2015
Challenges have sprung up across Wall Street, making life more difficult for the industry’s big banks. But the president of Goldman Sachs, Gary D. Cohn, insists that the company will adapt and survive.Speaking Tuesday at the DealBook conference in New York, Mr. Cohn said that the Goldman of today has evolved meaningfully in recent decades — from private partnership to bank holding company — and would find new ways to work in the shifting environment.“The whole model is evolving, and that’s what life’s about,” he said. “The Goldman Sachs of 20 and 30 years ago is not what it is today.”Responding to a question about whether technology would ever remove the need for a financial intermediary to step in between the buyers and sellers of a financial security, Mr. Cohn defended the role of Goldman. Buyers and sellers will always need a middleman to help make compromises on the price, quantity and terms of any given transaction, be it a bond trade or a merger.Advertisement“If producers and consumers wanted to meet at the same time in the market, you’re right, intermediation would be a lost art,” he said. “The reality of it is, no one can ever really agree on price or terms. We as a financial intermediary are willing to mediate on price, terms and quantity.”As for one of Goldman’s signature businesses, advising on mergers, Mr. Cohn remained optimistic. Companies are still looking to combine with or buy businesses to cut costs and improve profitability.AdvertisementWhen pressed on corporate tax inversions, in which American companies buy foreign businesses to move their headquarters abroad and pay lower taxes, the Goldman executive was coy about whether such deals are good for the country as a whole.“If I were a policy maker, I would make sure that we have a competitive environment for corporations,” he said. “The next step? I would make sure that we have a really competitive environment for corporations.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Questions also arose about whether the culture of Wall Street — one where junior workers pull all-nighters several days in a row — would change and become less stifling for the well-being of workers. Mr. Cohn, who said he was speaking at the conference in between meetings to figure out promotions at his company, insisted that his bank was striving to find the optimal balance for work-life matters.“I don’t think we have a cultural problem,” he said. “In fact, I know we don’t have a cultural problem.”Asked about recruiting — an issue that was also raised with James P. Gorman of Morgan Stanley earlier in the day — Mr. Cohn said that Goldman was still a place where some of the best and brightest graduates would want to work. The bigger issue, he said, is how corporate America as a whole can improve ways to create jobs.“I’m not worried about what we’re doing at Goldman Sachs,” he said. “I’m worried about the rest of the economy.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.