AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.51 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Pasadena, Calif., Water and Power Department, $122.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Sequoia Union High School District, Calif., $120 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Dublin Unified School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Blount County, Tenn., $126 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Bristol, Tenn., Industrial Development Board, $122 million of Pinnacle Project sales tax revenue and sales tax capital appreciation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Chesapeake Bay Bridge and Tunnel District, Va., $348 million of first-tier general resolution revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Cook County, Ill., Community High School District No. 228, $50 million of general obligation limited tax debt certificates. Mesirow Financial.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $56.2 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Mississippi, $226.6 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Montgomery County, Tex., $141.4 million of unlimited tax road bonds and limited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $137 million of Higher Education Capital Improvement Fund revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency, Calif., $220 million of Consolidated Capital Assessment District No. 2 assessment revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Virginia Port Authority, $129.4 million of port facilities taxable revenue refinancing bonds series 2016A. Morgan Stanley.Virginia Port Authority, $99 million of port facilities revenue refinancing bonds series 2016B. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Advertisement