AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThree months after retiring as host of “The Daily Show,” Jon Stewart has signed a production deal with the premium cable channel HBO, the channel announced on Tuesday.As part of the arrangement, Mr. Stewart will work on some digital short projects that are expected to appear on HBO’s apps like HBO Now and HBO Go. Mr. Stewart could also pursue movie or television projects with the network. The contract covers four years.HBO said that the first project from Mr. Stewart, done in conjunction with the graphics company Otoy, will be the digital shorts, which the cable channel said would be focused on current events and could be refreshed on its HBO Now app throughout the day.As Jon Stewart’s 16-year run on “The Daily Show” comes to a close, writers, producers and guests look back on key moments and reflect upon his legacy.The length of the shorts is still being discussed but they are expected to be between two and five minutes, an HBO spokeswoman said. Mr. Stewart will not appear on camera but viewers can expect to hear his voice on the shorts, the spokeswoman added.“Appearing on television 22 minutes a night clearly broke me,” Mr. Stewart said in a statement. “I’m pretty sure I can produce a few minutes of content every now and again.”Mr. Stewart is the latest big name HBO has landed as it ramps up efforts to generate more content and bring in more sales for HBO Now, its $15-a-month stand-alone app. In March, HBO announced that Vice would produce a daily newscast, the first of its kind for the cable channel. (The former Bloomberg Businessweek editor Josh Tyrangiel was hired to run the show last month.) In July, HBO hired Bill Simmons, formerly of ESPN, to host a talk show, and in August, HBO secured the rights to run new episodes of “Sesame Street.”HBO has not released sales numbers for HBO Now, which debuted in April. In a statement, the channel’s president for programming, Michael Lombardo, said of Mr. Stewart, “He graced our network nearly 20 years ago, so we’re thrilled to welcome back his immense talents in this next chapter of his career.”Advertisement