By LIZ MOYERNOV. 3, 2015
At the DealBook conference, James P. Gorman says that Morgan Stanley has no trouble attracting talent despite decreased compensation.A difficult third quarter for the fixed-income trading business isn’t going to make Morgan Stanley’s chairman and chief executive, James P. Gorman, give up and go home, and it doesn’t mean the bank intends to turn away from the volatility-prone securities business.If Morgan Stanley is an aircraft carrier, he said at the DealBook conference on Tuesday, wealth management is the “ballast” and the securities business — underwriting stock and bond issues, bringing companies public, advising on mergers — is the “engine room.”“We’re in the business of facilitating capital flows between issuers and investors,” Mr. Gorman said, with the wealth management service an ideal place to distribute products like initial public offerings of stocks.Regulatory changes after the 2008 financial crisis forced banks to shed risks and expand in relatively stable businesses such as wealth management, which now makes up about half of Morgan Stanley’s business. But Mr. Gorman said the company’s traditional strength in equities, debt capital markets and merger advice were still a strong focus.AdvertisementThe bank’s top management spends a lot of time figuring out who in the organization will be the next generation of leaders, with attention to those who have the skills to lead through the next financial crisis, he said. The plan is to seed the management team with “collaborators and stirrers,” he said.Morgan Stanley reported a worse-than-expected 55 percent decline in third-quarter profit last month after difficulty in its fixed-income trading operations and declines in private equity investments. Mr. Gorman said Tuesday that two-thirds of the company’s problems in the quarter were related to a one-time regulatory settlement over financial-crisis-era issues he inherited and a decline in the private equity investments in China, which could reverse themselves.AdvertisementAlthough Morgan Stanley didn’t do well in fixed income, Mr. Gorman noted, neither did other banks.When Morgan Stanley reported its earnings on Oct. 19, he said, “I was the only person that day who was pretty relaxed about it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.