Solve a medical mystery with Dr. Lisa Sanders.The Challenge: Can you figure out what is wrong with a 27-year-old woman who develops nausea, vomiting, weakness and confusion after weight-loss surgery? Every month the Diagnosis column of The New York Times Magazine asks Well readers to offer their solutions to a real-life diagnostic riddle. This month’s case concerns a young woman who has severe nausea and vomiting after surgery to help lose weight. She then develops lethargy and has difficulty walking. We will provide you with the emergency room notes and test results, which were available to the doctor who made the diagnosis. The first reader to correctly identify the cause of the patient’s symptoms will get a signed copy of my book “Every Patient Tells a Story” and the satisfaction of cracking a tough case. A Missing DaughterThe middle-aged couple knocked loudly at the door of the small house. When no one answered either the knock or the bell, the woman pulled a key out of her purse and let herself in. She called her daughter’s name loudly as she hurried through the rooms. They’d been calling their daughter’s phone all day, and she hadn’t answered.  The woman found her 27-year-old daughter upstairs, lying in bed, her eyes open and mumbling incoherently. She rushed to the bed, but her daughter showed no signs of recognition. She dressed the young woman quickly, and her husband carried her to the car.The young woman seemed more alert in the busy emergency department at St. Mary’s Hospital in downtown St. Louis. But this wasn’t at all like her daughter, the woman told the doctor in the E.R. She’s like a different person.
The Patient’s StoryIt seemed as if it all started after the surgery. Her daughter had an operation to help her lose weight five months earlier. The operation, called a gastric sleeve, went fine. Her daughter came home just a couple of days after the surgery. She had no pain. She said she felt great. And she looked bright and eager. But then the nausea and vomiting started. It seemed as if she would go for days at a time hardly able to keep anything down. She would eat, but a lot of the time, she would throw everything right back up. The surgeon tried giving her medications for the nausea, but none of them seemed to do much good. She had the surgery in order to lose weight, but it seemed as if she was just melting away — she was losing weight so fast.After a month of constant nausea and vomiting, the doctors thought maybe it was her gallbladder, and they put her back in the hospital to take that out. But that surgery didn’t help. She continued to vomit almost every time she ate.It was after her daughter came home from the hospital for her gallbladder surgery that the woman noticed her child started to act different. She was quieter, slower. Recently she had even seemed a little confused at times. And she was weak. She told her mother that her legs felt like Jell-O. Even just walking was hard. And her mother noticed that when her daughter took a step, her foot would slap the ground in this strange way. She never used to walk like that. Sicker Than She LookedThe doctor turned his attention now to the patient, who had remained quiet throughout the discussion. She was alert and didn’t seem nearly as sick as her mother described her. However, her blood pressure was quite low, and her heart rate was nearly twice what it should have been — a suggestion, perhaps, that she had an infection somewhere. The rest of the exam was normal except that she did have some weakness in her hands and legs — maybe a little worse on the right side than the left. The results of the blood tests were more worrisome. In particular, a test measuring the amount of lactic acid in the blood suggested that the patient was sicker than she looked. Lactic acid, or lactate, is produced when there is not enough oxygen in the blood to feed the muscles and organs that need it. Those who exercise will know it as the compound that causes muscles to have a burning sensation during extreme exertion. In that setting, it is a reflection of muscles that are so hard at work that they are using up all the oxygen available in the blood streaming through them.In the emergency room, however, an elevated lactate level is worrisome because it indicates that a patient is extremely sick and at risk of dying. It signifies a system that is somehow not able to do one of the most important jobs of the body: to deliver sufficient oxygen to the organ systems that depend on it. This can be caused by extreme dehydration — and a patient who has been vomiting for weeks is certainly at risk of that. But it can also be because of other, even more dangerous conditions, such as an infection that is overwhelming the patient’s defenses or a heart that isn’t beating properly. Studies have shown that patients who come to the emergency room with an elevated lactate level are at a much higher risk of dying during that stay in the hospital. This patient’s lactic acid level was three times normal. She was started on intravenous fluids and antibiotics and admitted to the hospital. You can see the notes and labs from the E.R. here.A Worrisome ExamDr. Nigel Naman was the third-year medicine resident assigned to the case. As soon as he saw the patient the next morning, he knew something was terribly wrong. The mother sat at the bedside, looking tired but wide awake and worried. The patient was also wide awake but did not seem worried. Her eyes roamed constantly around the room, never landing for very long on any one spot. And when she looked at him, Dr. Naman had the strange sensation that she hadn’t really seen him at all. He thought she looked spacey and out of it.Dr. Naman introduced himself. “I’ve read the chart,” he said. “Tell me what’s going on.” As the mother quickly ran through the story, the young doctor observed the patient. Dr. Naman asked the young woman a question, but she couldn’t answer it. She just giggled, like a child. He stepped closer and looked at her eyes. When she looked either left or right, her eyes seemed to shake, a finding known as nystagmus. This isn’t like my daughter, the mother told him. My daughter graduated from high school. She was working, living on her own. This is different, she insisted. Very different. You can see a video of the patient’s eyes here.The doctor examined the patient’s eyes.Solving the MysteryDr. Naman wasn’t sure what was going on, why this young woman was weak and confused, but the rapid course of her symptoms suggested that whatever it was, it was possibly reversible. But only if they could figure out what it was. “I’m not sure what’s wrong with your daughter,” Dr. Naman told the distressed mother, “but I promise you I will figure this out.” The mother looked at him a little skeptically. She certainly hoped so, she told him. Dr. Naman did figure this out, and he did it using only the data you have. What about you? Can you tell me what this young woman has? Post your diagnosis and any questions you may have in the comments section. I will post the correct answer on Friday.Rules and Regulations: Post your diagnosis and any questions you may have in the comments section. The correct answer will appear Friday on Well. The first person to answer correctly will receive a copy of my book and that warm, wonderful feeling you get from solving a mystery. The winner will be contacted. Reader comments may also appear in a coming issue of The New York Times Magazine.Updated, Friday Oct. 2 3:09 p.m. | Thanks for all your responses. You can read about the correct diagnosis, and the winner, at “Think Like a Doctor: Dazed and Confused Solved.”
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.