Updated, 2:53 p.m. | March 31, 2015 The crash of the Germanwings jetliner has raised questions about mental illness and its consequences. Authorities have said that Andreas Lubitz, the co-pilot believed to have intentionally crashed the plane into the Alps, had a mental illness that he hid from the airline, that he was treated for “suicidal tendencies” before he got his pilot’s license, and that antidepressants were found in his apartment. Dr. Richard Friedman, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College, will be responding to reader questions about mental illness and its risks. Post your questions for Dr. Friedman to Ask Well. He will be responding to selected questions in the coming days.Q. Are most people who kill themselves depressed? What’s the relationship between suicide and depression?We know from psychological autopsies that more than 90 percent of people who commit suicide have a diagnosable and potentially treatable psychiatric illness, most often depression — very often associated with alcohol or other drug abuse. Psychotic disorders like schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder are also associated with an increased risk of suicide.Asked by Denise • 27 votesPsychological autopsy is a technique for understanding the circumstances and causes of a person’s death by the meticulous collection of data from many sources that can help reconstruct someone’s psychosocial environment and state of mind. So investigators typically interview friends and family, romantic partners, work colleagues, therapists and doctors with whom the deceased has had a relationship. Any available print or digital record that the person left behind is also closely examined for clues about what may have contributed to his or her death.Are antidepressant medications prescribed only for depression or also for other illnesses or conditions?Antidepressants are effective in the treatment of a wide range of psychiatric disorders, including depression and anxiety disorders like obsessive compulsive disorder, panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. They are also used in patients with certain personality disorders, such as borderline personality disorder, who may experience depressive symptomsAre people who commit mass murder and suicide typically depressed? Is there a pattern of mental disorders associated with such rare acts?Mass murderers are typically young men who are loners, harbor a grudge and are very often psychotic. Those who commit murder-suicide are likely a different group of individuals. Murder-suicide is very rare, about 0.2 to 0.3/100,000 per year. Most of the perpetrators are men (40 to 50 years old), and the most common mental problem by psychological autopsy is depression. Those who commit murder-suicide typically kill people with whom they have been close (spouse, parent or child) and the motive is very often revenge.How common are suicidal thoughts and is it possible to predict who will actually commit suicide?Suicidal thinking is probably fairly common in the general population and certainly much higher in people with psychiatric disorders like depression. While we know that there are clear risk factors for suicide — like having a mood disorder, being older or being male — most people with these characteristics do not go on to commit suicide, so our current ability to accurately predict suicide is low.Are you concerned that this case and coverage of it is further stigmatizing people who suffer from depression?I always worry about that. Horrifying outliers, like this case, create the false impression that psychiatric patients are dangerous, when we know the overwhelming amount of violence is perpetrated by normal people in the grip of normal human emotions. Still, there is no question that people with certain serious psychiatric illnesses are at a slightly higher risk of harming themselves and others compared with those without psychiatric illnesses, but the absolute risk is small.Reader Question • 19 votesAll antidepressants carry a black box warning from the Food and Drug Administration about the very small risk of nonfatal suicidal thinking and acts associated with antidepressants. The agency had conducted a series of meta-analyses of 372 randomized clinical trials of antidepressants involving nearly 100,000 subjects, which showed that the rate of suicidal thinking or suicidal behavior was 4 percent among patients assigned to receive an antidepressant compared with 2 percent among those assigned to receive placebo.   There were eight fatalities from suicide overall in the adult trials and there was no increased risk of suicidal behavior when analyses were pooled among adults; in a meta-analysis of 24 trials of antidepressants for pediatric patients, none of the suicide attempts documented were fatal.Subsequent analyses showed that this increased risk was significant only among children and adolescents under the age of 18 years; there was no evidence of increased risk among adults older than 24, and among adults 65 and over antidepressants had a clear protective effect against the development of suicidal ideation and behavior. It is critical to know that the risk of antidepressant treatment is dwarfed by the risk of untreated depression: 2 percent to 12 percent of patients with depression commit suicide.Asked by Denise • 18 votesWe can look at the function of different regions and circuits in the brain and correlate them with various behaviors and mental states like impulsivity, sadness and happiness with brain imaging techniques, but there is no singular neural signature yet identified for any psychiatric disorder.Reader Question • 16 votesDepression is often a chronic illness characterized by relapses and recurrences, but it is also very treatable. Antidepressant medication and psychotherapy are effective not just in treating acute episodes of depression, but in preventing relapses as well.Reader Question • 7 votesYes. Suicide risk in bipolar disorder is estimated to be about 0.4 percent per year, compared with a risk in the general population of about 0.014 percent per year. So the risk of suicide in people with bipolar disorder is roughly 25 times that of the general population.Asked by dre • 12 votesDepression is best understood as a result of a complex interaction between environmental stress and genetic factors; some people who have very high genetic risk require minimal emotional stress to become depressed. Others with minimal genetic risk do not get depressed unless they are exposed to extraordinary stresses.Have a question about depression and its risks? Ask Well.

For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page. 