By SAM ROBERTSAPRIL 13, 2015
Sheila Kitzinger, a British anthropologist who encouraged women around the world to reclaim from doctors their natural prerogative over pregnancy and childbirth, died on Saturday at her home in Oxfordshire, England. She was 86.Her husband, Uwe, said she died after a short illness. “She was an icon of home birth who decided also to choose home death,” he said.During Mrs. Kitzinger’s five-decade career, decision-making about childbirth underwent “a seismic shift in attention from the obstetrician to the laboring woman,” said Mr. Kitzinger, an economist and political scientist.Beginning in 1962 with her book “The Experience of Childbirth,” she championed informing women of the options available to them during pregnancy and delivery and empowered them, rather than clinicians, to choose which course they preferred.AdvertisementMrs. Kitzinger, who delivered her five daughters at home with a midwife, was widely considered a guru of natural childbirth, but she said she actually urged women to do what felt natural to them individually. She conducted research and campaigned against female genital cutting, the handcuffing of pregnant prisoners and restrictions on midwifery and other nonstandard medical care for prospective mothers in Central and Eastern Europe.“Sheila may be the most important individual in the whole field of childbirth reform,” said Judy Norsigian, a co-founder of Our Bodies Ourselves, a nonprofit group in the United States that offers information on women’s health and sexuality. She noted that many mainstream hospital practices were “quite harmful to women and babies and even fathers.”“It is partly because of these detrimental practices,” she added, “that there was a resurgence of interest in home birth and free-standing birth centers and midwifery.”Mrs. Kitzinger was born Sheila Helena Elizabeth Webster in Taunton, Somerset, England, on March 29, 1929, to Alec Webster, a tailor, and the former Clare Bond, a nurse who worked in an early family planning clinic. She trained to teach drama but switched to social anthropology at Ruskin and St Hugh’s Colleges at Oxford, where she met Uwe Kitzinger, whom she married in 1952.Besides her husband, her survivors include five daughters, Celia, Jenny, Nell and Polly Kitzinger and Tessa McKenney, and three grandchildren.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked how she reconciled motherhood with her career, she once told The Guardian: “I suppose there’s a little bit of me that thinks, if I’d stayed home, prided myself on my apple pie and not argued so much, then it might have been easier for some of the girls to have gone and done their own thing. But I don’t think you can prepare girls for growing up for the world in which we live today, a world which needs to be changed, by simply seeing yourself in the mother role. I wanted to have warrior children.”AdvertisementSince 1962 she had written nearly three dozen books, including “Birth over Thirty,” “Woman’s Experience of Sex,” “Breastfeeding Your Baby,” “Ourselves as Mothers,” “Becoming a Grandmother” and “Birth Crisis.”Her autobiography, “A Passion for Birth,” is to be published by Pinter & Martin next month.“It is now acknowledged that women have a right to full and accurate information about their bodies and to participate in all decisions made about them,” Mrs. Kitzinger wrote in her introduction to the 2003 edition of “The Complete Book of Pregnancy & Childbirth.”She frequently complained that “our culture of birth is heavily medicalized,” allowing doctors to routinely induce labor or to perform episiotomies just to make their own jobs easier.“I was fed up with women being blamed for everything that happened to them,” she wrote. She created a Birth Crisis Network in Britain, which offers “reflective listening” for women traumatized after delivery.While she accepted the pain that accompanied labor, in “Birth & Sex: The Power and the Passion,” she described her own five deliveries as exhilarating and sexually arousing, which was not surprising, she said, “since both childbirth and lactation involve the same hormones as in sexual arousal.”Tall, imposing and endowed with a lusty voice, even as a grandmother she would, on more than one occasion, unselfconsciously demonstrate the orgasmic corollary of birth pangs in public to interviewers, startling fellow railroad passengers or restaurant patrons, by moaning in the manner of Meg Ryan in the restaurant scene in the film “When Harry Met Sally.”Mrs. Kitzinger offered a caveat, however.“The only thing that compares with having your first baby,” she wrote, “is having your first book!”A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Sheila Kitzinger, Childbirth Revolutionary, Dies at 86.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.