By NANCY WARTIKAPRIL 17, 2015
Elder sex. Nursing home dalliances. The erotic lives of dementia patients.Those topics make many people squeamish. But many of the nearly 1,200 readers who responded to an article about a 78-year-old former Iowa state representative charged with sexual abuse after being accused of having intimate relations with his wife, an Alzheimer’s patient, in a nursing home discussed late-life sexuality in frank, often personal, and sometimes heartfelt terms.In the article, Pam Belluck described the case of Henry Rayhons, who had been told by nursing home administrators that his wife was too cognitively impaired to consent to sex. Mr. Rayhons pleaded not guilty to the charges and says that while he had sex with his wife when she had a private room, he did not have sex with her in the semiprivate room on the night in question.By all accounts, the Rayhons’s marriage was a loving one. Even in the nursing home, Mrs. Rayhons (who died last year) seemed happy when her husband came to visit. Many commenters were outraged that a sexual encounter between the two spouses could be criminalized, and recounted stories about their own family members.“When my wife was in a state of deep dementia, she would try to initiate sex with me,” wrote Joe, from Palm Desert, Calif., in a comment recommended by 238 readers. “Although still desirous of sex, I found myself unable to agree with her, but there would certainly have been nothing immoral about doing so. Leave the man alone.”AdvertisementPosting from Claremont, Calif., Elizabeth said, “I was a full-time caregiver for my grandparents, who enjoyed a 65-year marriage and a profound bond that continued through my grandmother’s dementia. Their physical and sexual connection (although, let’s face it, not always exactly what I really wanted to see in detail, as their granddaughter!) was inspirational. It is a sad and limiting fantasy to presume that people lose their desire as they age.”AdvertisementSome commenters offered perspectives based on their experiences in elder care facilities. EV, from Austin, Tex., once on staff at an assisted living center, commented, “Sexual relationships between dementia patients [were] the norm. It was almost like working in a high school with hormonal teens. They wanted to fight, gossip and have sex all of the time! Mind you, many of these people had full blown conditions but they still knew that sex felt good and was comforting.”SupportAZ from Arizona noted his father spent his final years in dementia care. “The people that took care of the six patients living in their section would tell me that they would often find men and women sleeping together (they all had separate bedrooms),” he wrote. “I don’t know if sex was involved but human touch is so important to all of us.”Nana, from Charlotte, N.C., wrote: “As a registered nurse caring for patients, I can attest that the desire for sex is the last thing to go! My heart goes out to Mr. Rayhons.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A smaller number of commenters discussed late-life sexuality in more negative terms.“There are types of dementia that include unfiltered sexual behaviors out of the norm of previous consensual sex between partners,” Marilynn of Las Cruces, N.M., wrote. “My former husband was consumed by sex, both verbally and behaviorally, at times in public places. It was very stressful caring for him.”Idlewild, writing from Queens, recalled, “My mother had Alzheimer’s disease and she became very afraid of the strange man in her bed. She told this strange man she was too old for sex. My father was an old-fashioned guy who believed in his marital rights, and it took a lot of work to explain that my mother was ill and therefore he had to back off.”Mrs. Rayhons had a roommate, the article noted. On the day in question, after Mr. Rayhons pulled the curtain closed around his wife’s bed, the roommate complained of hearing “sexual noises.” (Mr. Rayhons denied having sex with his wife at that time.) Some readers judged Mr. Rayhons harshly for the alleged encounter.“I think having sexual activity in a semiprivate room in a nursing home with the roommate present indicates a stunning lack of sensitivity,” H. Amberg from Tulsa commented, “which would lead me to conclude that the encounter was less about his wife’s needs for intimacy and more about his own.”Ms. Belluck pointed out that the case raises questions that will become ever more relevant as dementia rates rise. Some readers suggested the article might influence their future decisions.“As baby boomers in a very long term and sexually satisfying marriage, should my spouse and I consider adding a provision to our living wills which includes broad and irrevocable consent for sexual activity between us?” asked GjD from Vancouver. “After reading this horrible story, it seems like a reasonable idea I will discuss with my attorney.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.