AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsDr. Levi Watkins Jr., the first surgeon to successfully implant an automatic heart defibrillator in a human patient, and a civil rights pioneer who helped fling open medical school doors to hundreds of students who had been excluded — as he had once been — because they were black, died on Saturday in Baltimore. He was 70.His death was announced by the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, where he had been on the faculty for many years.The day before he died, Dr. Watkins had been welcoming students to a training program at Johns Hopkins University Hospital when he became ill, the school said. The cause of death was complications of a heart attack and a stroke, the school said.Dr. Watkins was baptized as a child in Birmingham, Ala., by the Rev. Ralph Abernathy, the civil rights leader and close aide to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. As a teenager he participated in the Montgomery bus boycott, a seminal event in the civil rights struggle led by Dr. King that was set off in 1955 when Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat to a white passenger.Dr. Watkins later volunteered as a part-time driver for Dr. King, who was his family’s pastor. He broke ground as the first black student to enter and graduate from the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.“All my work since the integration of Vanderbilt University has been about inclusion, equity and opportunity,” Dr. Watkins said in an interview with the University of Alabama at Birmingham, whose all-white medical school denied him admission in 1966.Dr. Watkins’s successful implantation of a defibrillator was performed on Feb. 4, 1980, at Johns Hopkins University Hospital just seven months after he had finished his surgical training. The device, which detects arrhythmia in the heart and emits an electric charge to correct it, had been developed at Sinai Hospital in Baltimore. Assisted by Dr. Vincent Gott, the chief of cardiac surgery, Dr. Watkins inserted the device in a 57-year-old woman from California.At the time, the defibrillator cost $7,000, about the price of a midsize car, and was connected to a battery-operated generator, the size of a cigarette pack, inserted under the stomach.Modern versions are implanted in as many as 100,000 patients in the United States every year.“His spirit lives on in the three million patients around the world whose hearts beat in a normal rhythm because of the implantable defibrillator,” his brother, Donald, who desegregated the University of Alabama’s Law School in 1970, wrote on Facebook.Dr. Watkins is also survived by another brother, James, and two sisters, Doristine L. Minott and Annie Marie Garraway.Levi Watkins Jr. was born in Parsons, Kan., on June 13, 1944. His father was a college professor who became president of Alabama State College in Montgomery. His mother, the former Lillian Varnado, was a high school teacher and homemaker. After moving to Montgomery, the family joined Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, where Dr. King was pastor. Levi was 8 when he first met him.He earned a bachelor’s degree from Tennessee State University, where a biology teacher persuaded him to pursue a career in medicine. He learned he was accepted at Vanderbilt from a headline in a Nashville newspaper. He was still the only black enrolled there when he graduated in 1970.After a surgical internship at Johns Hopkins University Hospital, he was named the hospital’s first black chief resident in cardiac surgery. His research at Harvard Medical School, from 1973 to 1975, led to the use of angiotensin blockers to treat congestive heart failure. He later joined the full-time faculty at Johns Hopkins and, in 1979, the medical school’s admissions committee. By 1983, the number of black students there had increased to 40, from 8. He retired in 2013.Among those he mentored were Dr. Selwyn M. Vickers, the first African-American dean of the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, and Dr. James E. K. Hildreth, an immunologist prominent in AIDS research. Dr. Hildreth, who was dean of the College of Biological Sciences at the University of California, Davis, and is the incoming president of Meharry Medical College, a historically black institution in Nashville, said that Dr. Watkins, as a lone black pioneer, “had to be his own role model.”“Dr. Watkins’s life and work illustrate how one person, at the right time and in the right place, can profoundly change institutions and their culture,” Dr. Hildreth said.Dr. Andre L. Churchwell, who said he had been inspired by Dr. Watkins in becoming a professor and senior associate dean for diversity affairs at Vanderbilt School of Medicine, said: “Levi, whether in his role as researcher, advocate for civil rights or pushing institutions as a soldier for diversity in medical education and admission processes, never forgot his roots or values taught him by his family, of humility, egalitarianism, grace and humor. He used these lessons as part of his tool kit to push for academic excellence and broad diversity.”He added, “We felt that we could do those things because Levi could do them.”In 1993, after Dr. Watkins’s father had a stroke at 81, his siblings asked him to recommend a heart surgeon. He suggested several whom he had trained. “We told Levi that we did not want a ‘trainee,’ ” James Watkins recalled. “We knew that Levi’s exceptional skill level as a cardiac surgeon, together with his unique postoperative micro-stitching technique, could give Daddy another year of life — enough time to say goodbye properly.”Dr. Watkins later recalled that before operating he prayed: “O Lord, my father’s heart is in my hands, but his life, truly, is in yours.”The surgery was successful.Advertisement