By CATHERINE SAINT LOUISAPRIL 29, 2015
In what experts say is likely the first legal decision of its kind, a jury in Wisconsin has found a former sheriff’s deputy not legally responsible in the shooting deaths of his wife and her sister because he has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease.The defense argued that because of his condition, Andrew Steele, 40, had developed a form of dementia and was not guilty because of a mental disease. The verdict, delivered last week, has confounded some clinicians, who fear that it may stigmatize patients of a disease that already is among the most dreaded.“I’ve taken care of A.L.S. patients for 15 years, and I’ve never seen any kind of violence,” said Dr. Catherine Lomen-Hoerth, a neurologist and the director of the A.L.S. Center at the University of California, San Francisco. “I just don’t want people to look at someone with A.L.S. and think, ‘Oh, what is this person going to do?’”The case was unusual from the start.Last August, Mr. Steele shot and killed his wife, Ashlee Steele, 39, and sister-in-law, Kacee Tollefsbol, 38, at the Steeles’ home in Fitchburg, Wis. Mrs. Tollefsbol, badly bruised and shot in the back, managed to call 911. She died later at a hospital in nearby Madison.AdvertisementOfficers found Mrs. Steele’s body in the bedroom, with a gunshot in the head and a zip tie around her neck. Mr. Steele was discovered in the laundry room with an outdoor grill and a charcoal fire, apparently trying to kill himself with carbon monoxide.AdvertisementMr. Steele was arrested and hospitalized, then charged with two counts of first-degree intentional homicide. He pleaded guilty to the double homicide, but defense lawyers put forth a novel defense, arguing that he had developed a major neurocognitive disorder associated with A.L.S.He maintains that he was having consensual bondage sex with his wife when the zip tie around her neck grew too tight. He said he remembered nothing further until waking in the hospital.At the trial, prosecutors argued that Mr. Steele had planned to murder his wife and sister-in-law, and then to kill himself.In a note written on his phone the day before the deaths, they told jurors, Mr. Steele fabricated a three-way suicide pact as a cover for the crimes he planned to commit. That day, Mr. Steele also bought charcoal for the grill.These were not the acts of a man who was cognitively impaired, they argued.Mr. Steele, who now uses a wheelchair, was diagnosed with A.L.S. in June. The disease causes the progressive degeneration of motor neurons, eventually leading to paralysis and death.Experts used to believe that A.L.S. left the mind relatively intact even as it destroyed the body. In the past decade, however, researchers have come to recognize that roughly half of A.L.S. patients also experience changes in behavior or thinking.Most of them experience mild cognitive impairment, but roughly 10 percent develop a severe form called frontotemporal dementia, or FTD.AdvertisementNicholas Gansner, a defense lawyer, argued that while Mr. Steele did not have FTD, he was experiencing some sort of cognitive deficit and his impulse control was impaired. In support of this contention, Mr. Steele’s mother testified at the trial that he was eating whatever he wanted, which was very unlike him.On a family cruise, Hailee Meisterling, his surviving sister-in-law, testified that Mr. Steele once started changing clothes in front of her. (She also said he was drunk.) Bill Steele, the defendant’s father, said his son had used the wrong club on the golf course.The jury agreed that these were signs of a cognitive decline and voted 10 to 2 last Thursday, finding Mr. Steele not legally responsible. In the coming days, the state health department will conduct its own investigation, and then Judge Nicholas McNamara must decide whether Mr. Steele requires institutional care or can be freed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The case has raised concerns among medical experts who worry that now A.L.S. patients will be branded as potentially violent, adding to the significant burdens already borne by caregivers.Susan Woolley, a neuropsychologist at California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco, rejected “any kind of assumption that there’s a homicidal or violent aspect to the illness.” Apathy is the most common behavior change in her experience, she said: “Overall, A.L.S. patients tend to be very kind, brave people.”FTD is the neurocognitive disorder most often developed by patients with A.L.S. Unlike those with Alzheimer’s disease, a patient with this form of dementia may not experience memory problems, but will show deficits in executive function, the ability to strategically organize facts in real time.“It doesn’t make sense that the cognitive problems that they are describing could be due to his disease, if they ruled out FTD,” Dr. Lomen-Hoerth said.FTD produces “a gradual, progressive worsening in cognition, behavior or personality over months to years,” said David Sabsevitz, a neuropsychologist at Medical College of Wisconsin, who was a paid expert witness for the prosecution. “There was no evidence to show that in my opinion.”Mr. Gansner, a defense lawyer, suggested to jurors that Mr. Steele’s deficits in executive function might be subtle. “They wouldn’t be obvious things,” he said.AdvertisementBut the American Psychiatric Association’s official manual of diagnoses, Dr. Woolley noted, “suggests there’s evidence of significant cognitive decline and substantial impairment in cognitive performance. That’s not the same as being subtle.”Asked if he thought an A.L.S. patient with dementia could commit murder, Dr. Mario F. Mendez, a professor of neurology and psychiatry at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that some patients “may have sufficiently poor impulse control, so reactive violence could happen.” But the act would be impulsive and rare.Of the note Mr. Steele wrote the day before the murders, he said, “It sounds like there was forethought.”“It’s hard to have a frontal-cognitive brain disease result in a planned forethought act of murder,” Dr. Mendez said. “You have to follow a series of steps, and that takes a lot of brain power.”In an interview, Jessa Nicholson, a defense lawyer, said that she was “acutely aware” of skepticism regarding Mr. Steele’s condition.“I understand it will be met with criticism, as well,” she said. “However, as our growing understanding of the brain continues to expand, it is vitally important that criminal defense practitioners force the law to catch up with the science.”Mr. Steele remains in jail, pending a decision on whether to free him. Doctors have given him two to five years to live.A version of this article appears in print on April 30, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Doctors Worry Verdict In A.L.S. Murder Case Could Stigmatize Disease.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.