AdvertisementSupported byBy David LeonhardtRichard M. Suzman once chased a Nobel-winning psychologist through a Washington rainstorm, as a scientific meeting was breaking up, to whet the psychologist’s interest in a new project. In the middle of the night, Dr. Suzman liked to email social scientists, urging them to take immediate action on a project. Other times, an email or phone call would all but order a researcher to apply for a grant.A social psychologist by training who left his native South Africa as a teenager, Mr. Suzman built a government career like few others.As a longtime official at the National Institutes of Health, with an ambitious definition of his job, he influenced economics, public health and other fields over three decades.He died at 72 on April 16 in Bethesda, Md. The cause was complications of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said Janice Krupnick, his wife and a clinical psychologist at Georgetown University.Dr. Suzman used his position as director of the Behavioral and Social Research division at the National Institute on Aging, part of the N.I.H., not merely to evaluate grant proposals but also to act as a scientific hub.“Richard was a uniquely entrepreneurial, proactive bureaucrat,” said Alan B. Krueger, a Princeton professor and former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under President Obama.Dr. Suzman connected researchers across disciplines and shaped their proposals. To do so, he relied on both his sway over federal research funds and an intensity that could be gruff, impish or affectionate.His signature accomplishment was the central role he played in creating a global network of surveys on aging, which have upended conventional wisdom about aspects of health and medical care. The original survey, the Health and Retirement Study, began in the United States under Mr. Suzman in the early 1990s. With his global evangelizing for similarly rigorous research, the survey has spread to Europe, Mexico, Brazil, China and India.The results have made clear how often financial problems cause health problems for people, and vice versa. The survey has shown that middle-aged adults in the United States are less healthy than those in Britain, in part because of childhood illnesses, even when both sets of adults have similar amounts of insurance coverage. And the data has increased understanding of why people of higher social classes live longer. James P. Smith, an economist at the RAND Corporation, called the survey “the most successful new study in the last 25 years.”Dr. Suzman also encouraged the rise of behavioral economics, a once-marginalized discipline that dared to point out that human beings were not as rational as classical economic models assumed. Behavioral economics is a core part of mainstream economics today, because of researchers whose work Mr. Suzman — as well as the Russell Sage Foundation in New York — helped finance. In some cases, he introduced the researchers to one another.“Descriptions of him sound like an oxymoron,” said Daniel Kahneman, the winner of the Nobel in economic sciences whom Mr. Suzman chased down in the rain. He was, Mr. Kahneman added, “an original and creative bureaucrat,” “a brilliant scientist who does not do science” and “a tyrant with a twinkle.”Richard Michael Suzman was born in Johannesburg on Aug. 9, 1942, one of four sons of a barrister. He became active in the anti-apartheid movement in the wake of the 1960 Sharpeville massacre. After his first year of college, his family grew nervous that Dr. Suzman would be arrested. Some of his friends had been.He left South Africa, with some haste, in the summer of 1961 and moved to London, where he planned to study at the University of London. But lacking the required Latin credentials, he could not enroll immediately. His father then called an acquaintance at Harvard and urged the university to look at his son’s transcript. Several weeks later, Richard entered the college with sophomore standing.After a postdoctorate program at Stanford University, he was preparing to move back east in 1975, most likely for a position at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, when he met a young woman — Ms. Krupnick — at a local pool and soon abandoned the plan.Instead he took a position in the human development and aging program at the University of California, San Francisco, which led to a job at the National Institute on Aging.He lived in Chevy Chase, Md. In addition to his wife, he is survived by their daughter, Jessica; their son, Daniel; and three brothers, David, Peter and Stephen.Mr. Suzman’s academic reach was wide, touching research on happiness, financial savings, the job market and risky behaviors. But his greatest impact was on the Health and Retirement Study and similar studies in other countries.James M. Poterba, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and president of the National Bureau of Economic Research, said that Mr. Suzman had recognized that the fractured nature of research on aging was hampering the field. Academics in different fields and different countries were each using small data sets to study the same questions — and not talking to one another about the results.“He dangled the lure of a rich new data set before researchers in each of these fields,” Mr. Poterba said. In return, Mr. Suzman insisted that they detail their research plans in advance, which then improved the quality of the survey.Reprinted from Sunday’s early editions.Advertisement