
Global Health By                     
 DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.
 
MAY 4, 2015
To draw attention to the connection between worms and prosperity, scientists recently created a “worm index.”The index ranks the world’s 25 most populous countries by how big a problem they have with three types of worms: intestinal soil-borne ones that cause stunting and anemia, especially in children; water-snail-borne ones that cause bloody urine and damage the bladder, vagina, rectum and liver; and mosquito-borne worms that cause the grotesque swelling of elephantiasis.The index then compares those countries by their rankings in the United Nations human development index, which includes not just income, but years of schooling and years lived in good health.The comparison was published last week in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, of which one of the study’s authors, Dr. Peter J. Hotez, is a co-editor. Dr. Hotez is also the dean at Baylor College of Medicine’s National School of Tropical Medicine.AdvertisementNot surprisingly, the richest countries have virtually no worms, and the poorest, like Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of Congo, have widespread infestations.But there were surprises among the middle-income countries.India, Indonesia and the Philippines had worse worm problems than they “ought” to, given their economic standing. Pockets of intense poverty — usually among ethnic minorities or aboriginal peoples — appear to have pushed them down the index, the authors said.AdvertisementMeanwhile, Egypt, Iran and Thailand did better than their economies would have suggested.Aggressive deworming programs, which are relatively cheap, eventually bolster economies, the authors argued. Dewormed children attend more school, and adults without swelling or organ damage earn more at farming or other jobs.A version of this article appears in print on May 5, 2015, on Page D3 of the New York edition with the headline: Ranking Countries by Worm Problems.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »