Gretchen Reynolds on the science of fitness.The recent death of the tech executive Dave Goldberg, reportedly during a treadmill workout on a vacation, has saddened and rattled the fitness community. The death of Mr. Goldberg, the chief executive of SurveyMonkey and husband of Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook, has left many people wondering if the exercise itself might have triggered a serious health event. Was it a heart attack? Another health problem? An unfortunate accident?While the circumstances surrounding Mr. Goldberg’s death are not fully known, the science on exercise and sudden death is both comforting and troubling. Someone who exercises has a much lower risk of dying from heart disease than someone who doesn’t. At the same time, it’s also true that during exercise, a person has a slightly higher risk of having a heart attack than when he or she is just sitting quietly in a chair.To learn more about the relationship between exercise and heart risk, I spoke with two experts on the topic: Dr. Michael Blaha, the director of clinical research at the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at Johns Hopkins Medicine in Baltimore, and Dr. Paul D. Thompson, the chief of cardiology at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut. Here are edited excerpts from our conversation.How frequent are heart attacks, especially fatal heart attacks, during exercise?Dr. Paul Thompson: They’re quite rare. Back in 1982, we published a study in JAMA, among the first on this topic, I think, where we tallied all of the deaths during jogging that had occurred in Rhode Island over a six-year period. We found that there was about one death for every 15,000 joggers. Since then, other studies have shown approximately the same number of deaths per number of joggers. But heart attacks during exercise do occur?Dr. Thompson: Yes, obviously they do. There’s no doubt that exercise substantially reduces the risks over all that someone will develop heart disease, but it doesn’t prevent them altogether. It’s important to understand, too, that deaths during exercise among young people are not usually due to atherosclerosis, but to previously undetected, inherited abnormalities, such as an enlarged heart. In older people, especially men, deaths during exercise are generally due to atherosclerosis, or narrowing of the heart arteries. Why would exercise lead to a heart attack in someone who’d been exercising? Wouldn’t they and their hearts be accustomed to the exertion? Dr. Michael Blaha: Exercise is a form of stress, and like any stress, it stimulates reactions in the cardiovascular system that can abruptly overburden that system, even if it’s withstood those stresses before. The same thing can happen if you get too little sleep, or you’re rushing down the hall to make it to a meeting, or you’re under a lot of mental pressure. We had a doctor here, a woman, who was having a very difficult, busy day and started having pain in her left shoulder, which she ignored. It was a heart attack associated with mental stress. It’s not that there’s something unique about exercise that triggers heart attacks. It’s just another kind of stress.Will an exercise stress test pick up heart problems? Dr. Thompson: The problem with an exercise stress test is that it identifies any narrowing of the arteries that already exists. But most exercise-induced heart attacks occur because a plaque abruptly ruptures, causes a blood clot and blocks the artery at that moment. An exercise stress test won’t predict these kinds of lurking heart problems. The best prevention is to pay attention to what your body is telling you. So what are the symptoms that someone who exercises should be most aware of? Dr. Blaha: Obviously, chest pain associated with exercise, especially if it’s persistent; any shortness of breath that you haven’t felt that before; numbness or tingling in your left arm or jaw. Those are the easy warning signs. But there are usually subtler signs, too. I’ve had so many patients tell me, “I just couldn’t run the way I could six weeks ago.” They’ll think that they had a cold. But unusual fatigue is a sign you shouldn’t ignore. If you can’t cover the same distance that you could a little while before, see a doctor. You may have a cold. But you also might not.  Dr. Thompson: I tell people, if you have discomfort during exercise that develops anywhere from around your earlobe to your belly button, that could be heart disease. It could be something insignificant, too, but it should be checked.Is it fair to say, though, that, over all, the benefits of exercise for the heart — and the rest of the body — outweigh the small risk of a heart attack during a workout? Dr. Blaha: Yes, although I’d argue that what’s really important is not exercise, per se, but fitness, meaning your body’s aerobic capacity. We published a study in February showing that there is no upper limit to the mortality benefits of fitness. The more fit you are, the less likely you are to die early — of a heart attack or anything else. Compared to the benefits of being fit, the transient risk of a heart attack during any given session of exercise is very slight. That doesn’t mean it can’t happen. But it is not a reason to avoid exercise.Dr. Thompson: The way I look at it is that exercise is medicine and it’s wonderful medicine, but like any medicine, it has potential side effects. So do most things. Having sex slightly increases the risk of a heart attack compared to not having sex, since it’s a form of exertion. But that doesn’t mean we should avoid sex. I tell people, if you want to live life as safely as possible, stay in bed alone. But who wants that? Related: “Treadmill May Be Riskiest Machine, but Injuries From It Still Rare.”For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page. A version of this article appears in print on 05/12/2015, on page D4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: A Death While Working Out.