Peter Way, an engineer in Fort Collins, Colo., was devastated when his black Labrador, Prince, developed melanoma in his mouth shortly after turning 10. “His upper palate was not looking so good, and he was getting worse,” Mr. Way said. On the advice of a friend, he enrolled Prince in a clinical trial at Colorado State University’s Flint Animal Cancer Center, where researchers were testing a subcutaneous delivery method for Interleukin 12, a powerful immune enhancer that is also under study for treating advanced cancers in people. The drug initially boosted Prince’s ability to fight off the melanoma, giving him eight months before the cancer “came roaring back” and the dog had to be put down. But Mr. Way has no regrets. The safety study will help with the design of later human trials, including the best way to administer the drug, and may lead to improved treatments for both pets and people. “That’s so important to all of us who love dogs,” Mr. Way said.Researchers hope more pet owners like Mr. Way will follow suit. Because dogs have a short life span compared with humans, enrolling them in clinical trials could fill a research niche in developing new drugs, shaving years off testing and making the process less expensive. Indeed, interest in comparative oncology — the comparison of cancer across species — has grown sharply over the past decade.Dogs, in particular, are a focus of research in the cancer community, after the preliminary mapping of the canine genome in 2005 and advances in veterinary medicine. Dogs that have cancer often undergo surgery, radiation and sometimes chemotherapy. A vaccine against canine melanoma is already on the market, with several other melanoma vaccines in development. And even genetic testing to customize treatments is now possible. Scientists are learning more about tumor markers shared by dogs and humans, and inherited genes that make certain breeds more susceptible to specific cancers than others. Golden retrievers, for example, have high rates of lymphoma; Bernese mountain dogs are especially prone to an inherited form of connective tissue cancer; and osteosarcoma, a type of bone cancer, strikes large dogs like Irish wolfhounds and Great Danes far more frequently than other breeds. Nearly 25 percent of all dogs are expected to develop some type of cancer during their lifetime, with incidence and deaths rising rapidly with age.“Breeds represent a closed population, offering tremendous opportunities for geneticists,” to study clues to cancer’s development and similarities with human disease, said Elaine Ostrander, chief of the cancer genetics and comparative genomics branch at the National Human Genome Research Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health. “With mice, you have to induce cancer. But in some dog breeds, there’s a 22-fold higher risk for cancer. They come with a label — their breed.”Dr. Ostrander’s lab regularly sifts through thousands of canine DNA samples, mostly from dog breeders, although some blood and saliva samples come from pet owners and the occasional stray dog. Recently, her team identified a genetic error that occurs in 85 percent of bladder tumors in dogs and plays an important role in many human cancers. “The reason it matters is we didn’t think it was important in humans before,” Dr. Ostrander said. “We now have drugs targeting that protein, called BRAF.” In addition, because dogs shed the cancer cells into their urine, a diagnostic test is being developed that holds promise for earlier intervention for dogs and for people with bladder cancer, in the future.In Europe, a drug first tested in pet dogs with osteosarcoma now makes up part of cancer treatment for children with those cancers. But the drug, mifamurtide, failed to win approval from the Food and Drug Administration.No medicine developed first in dogs has yet crossed over for human use, according to Lisa Troutman, a veterinarian in the F.D.A.’s Center for Veterinary Medicine. Until recently, she said, the only drugs available to treat cancer in companion pets came from cancer drugs approved first for human use and then used off-label in pets, although veterinarians can now draw upon three cancer drugs developed specifically for dogs. None yet exist for cats. But Dr. Troutman and others see the pharmaceutical landscape changing, as doctors and veterinary oncologists collaborate more closely to promote human and pet health and pharmaceutical companies take note of a growing market in animal health. “We believe in one medicine, one approach,” said Bernadette Dunham, director of the F.D.A.’s Center for Veterinary Medicine. “It’s too easy to separate human and veterinary medicine.” Moving the field forward, experts say, will require better biological tools for measuring canine immune responses and the development of a canine cancer genome atlas, similar to the more detailed human version that includes signaling pathways by which cancer cells communicate and mutations that drive the disease. “We’re really 10 years behind the human field in genetics,” said Rodney Page, director of Colorado State University’s Flint Cancer Animal Center. “But with better technology and the costs coming down, we can start investigating more drugs.” The infrastructure for carrying out animal research studies already exists in the Comparative Oncology Trials Consortium, a network of 20 academic centers nationwide that is managed by the National Cancer Institute. Pet owners can go to several websites for clinical trial information, including vetcancertrials.org. And the American Veterinary Medical Association will soon provide a central registry online, according to Amy LeBlanc, director of N.C.I.’s comparative oncology program, that will alert consumers to where clinical trials are available. For the most part, the costs of these studies are borne by pharmaceutical sponsors or foundations, except for routine laboratory and imaging tests before study entry, which veterinarians say usually run from $500 to $600.As more research is done and better therapies become available, the hope is that dogs and cats will undergo less toxic and more effective treatments, moving closer to the personalized or customized cancer therapies being developed in people. At least one targeted therapy already exists for mast cell tumors, homing in on an aberrant protein implicated in the unruly growth of these common skin masses in dogs.“Targeted therapies based on genetics is changing how we use our companion animals,” said Dr. Michael Kastan, director of the Duke Cancer Center in Durham, N.C., and a pediatric oncologist. “This is a wonderful gift for the pet community” and also may further understanding of human cancers.Treatments, though, can be prohibitively expensive: as much as $2,000 to $4,000 for surgery, $5,000 or more for chemotherapy and $6,000 for radiation therapy. Only about 3 percent of pet owners carry health insurance for their pets, researchers say. While some pet insurers may require a special rider for cancer coverage, most help with some of these costs, said Dr. Page of Colorado State University. “My experience with insurers has been very positive,” he said.Still, other obstacles remain. Even though many canine cancers resemble those seen in people, dogs rarely develop prostate or colon cancers, limiting their usefulness as models for some forms of the disease. And, of course, what’s true for dogs, as with other animals, may not be true for people. Finally, future studies will need to disentangle genetic risks for cancer from those in the environment, a challenge in many human cancers as well.“Dogs tumors have a lot of similarities to our own,” Dr. Kastan said, “but dogs don’t smoke, for example. They live in our environment, but they don’t have our bad habits.” Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.