By DENISE GRADYOCT. 20, 2015
Q. What are the new recommendations about mammograms, and how do they differ from the old ones?A. The American Cancer Society issued new guidelines on Tuesday, recommending that women with an average risk of breast cancer have mammography starting at age 45 and continuing once a year until 54, and then every other year for as long as they are healthy and likely to live another 10 years.Previously, the society recommended mammograms every year starting at 40.But the cancer society said that women 40 to 44 should still “have the opportunity” to have mammograms if they want them, and that women 55 and older should be able to have them once a year if they choose.The guidelines apply only to women with an average risk of breast cancer, not those whose risk is high because of their personal or family history.Q. Why did the cancer society change its position?A. The changes were the result of an exhaustive review of the medical literature, something that the group conducts periodically to keep its screening guidelines up to date, and to balance benefit against harm. It found increasing evidence that although mammography can prevent deaths from breast cancer, it is less helpful in women under 45, and carries risks like false positives and, potentially, the diagnosis and treatment of small, unaggressive cancers that might never have bothered the patient if left alone. For younger women, the harms appeared to outweigh the benefits.AdvertisementLess frequent screening in women over 55 was considered sufficient because if they develop cancer, it is more likely to be slower-growing and less aggressive than tumors in younger women.AdvertisementQ. What do the new guidelines say about clinical breast exams?A. They no longer recommend clinical breast exams, in which doctors or nurses feel for lumps, for women of any age who have no symptoms or abnormalities. Previously, the cancer society recommended them once a year for all women 19 and over. But the society said it found little evidence that they help, and some that they could cause false positives that would trigger more testing.Q. Do other health organizations agree with these new guidelines?A. No. Some recommend more screening, and some less. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network, an alliance of prominent cancer centers, recommends mammograms every year starting at age 40.The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends mammograms every year or two from 40 to 49, and every year after 50.The United States Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of experts appointed by the Department of Health and Human Services, recommends a later start and less frequent testing: mammograms every other year for women 50 to 74.Q. Given the conflicting advice, how are women supposed to figure out what to do?A. All the groups agree that mammography can reduce a woman’s risk of dying from breast cancer, by about 20 percent. But when it comes to when to start and how often to screen, many experts say there is no one answer that suits all women.Those who want to find tumors when they are as small and as early as possible should screen earlier and more often — provided that they can live with the high likelihood that at some point they will be called back to the clinic for more testing based on a false positive.Women who find screening onerous or nerve-racking can take advantage of the opportunity to start later and undergo the testing less often — provided that they can live with the possibility that if they do develop cancer, the tumor may be larger and more advanced than it would have been had they been screened more often.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Sorting Through the Conflicting Advice on Screening.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.