By CATHERINE SAINT LOUISOCT. 21, 2015
Knee replacement surgery relieves pain and improves function in patients with severe osteoarthritis much more effectively than nonsurgical therapy alone, researchers reported on Wednesday.Despite hundreds of thousands of knee replacements performed in the United States yearly, until now there had been no rigorously controlled trial comparing the operation with more conservative approaches.In the new study, 50 adults with moderate to severe osteoarthritis completed exhaustive nonsurgical treatment, including exercise and supervised weight loss. A similar group of patients received knee replacements, followed by the nonsurgical therapy.After a year, 85 percent of patients who got an artificial knee reported pain relief and functional improvement, the study found, compared with 68 percent of patients initially assigned to nonsurgical treatment. The study was published in The New England Journal of Medicine.Advertisement“Surgery is much better at improving pain than physical therapy,” said Dr. Jeffrey N. Katz, director of the Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new report.Advertisement“But at the same time, it’s a little bit surprising that this physical-therapy regimen was associated with substantial pain relief.”Most surgeons have assumed that total knee replacement provides superior results. But experts said this new trial suggested that patients with severe osteoarthritis and difficulty walking should not always go under the knife.“You can be 52 and have an awful knee and need surgery, and you can be 52 and get more years with the help of some of the interventions mentioned in this study,” said Dr. David Jevsevar, chairman of the committee on evidence-based quality and value of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. “It’s really still gray.”A quarter of the patients assigned to the therapy-only group eventually opted for operations anyway. The researchers still counted them as nonsurgical patients. So the difference between groups might have been even more pronounced.The number of knee replacements has risen drastically in the United States, the study’s authors noted. In 2012, more than 670,000 knee replacements were performed at a cost of $36.1 billion. And the rate of surgeries almost doubled from 2000 to 2010, according to a report published last month by the Department of Health and Human Services.Soren T. Skou, the study’s lead author and a physical therapist at Aalborg University Hospital and at the University of Southern Denmark at Odense, said the rationale for doing the trial was to pinpoint the degree of added benefit for surgical patients, compared with treatment alternatives.All 100 participants in Dr. Skou’s study were in their mid-60s, slightly obese and candidates for total knee replacement. They reported moderate pain and difficulty functioning, and X-rays confirmed moderate to severe arthritis. People with severe pain were excluded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. Jay R. Lieberman, the chairman of orthopedic surgery at Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, said the “very well done” study confirmed surgery’s advantages and might also help guide patients who do not want the operation. “This is the type of data you can provide to patients if they ask, ‘What are the success rates of conservative treatment?’ ” he said.AdvertisementDr. Lieberman, a paid consultant for DePuy Orthopaedics, said he wished the study had made clear which components of nonsurgical treatment — education, exercise, supervised weight loss, use of insoles or pain medication like ibuprofen — were most effective for patients.“Do you have to combine all five to get these results, or would some patients benefit from two out of five?” he asked.The study followed patients for a year, and no one knows if nonsurgical therapy will have a sustained effect beyond a year. Knee replacements can last a decade or longer before failing.Before participating in the trial, Kirsten Jensen, a retired shopkeeper in Vadum, Denmark, walked haltingly with a cane and a grimace. Her doctor recommended an artificial joint to restore her mobility, but she was assigned to the nonsurgery group.“If I wasn’t in the study, I would probably have a new knee today,” said Mrs. Jensen, 70, who teaches a spinning class.She is grateful to have avoided the operation. “It’s been a year and six months, and I’m pain-free,” she said.Knee replacements are not universally successful. Twenty percent of people with artificial knees still have residual discomfort six months or more later, a 2012 review found.In the latest study, the surgery group experienced a total of 24 serious adverse events like blood clots, deep infections or knees so stiff they had to be manipulated under anesthesia. (The nonsurgical group had just six.)”Patients aren’t all happy, there is no question,” said Dr. Mathias P. Bostrom, an orthopedic surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan.AdvertisementDr. Bostrom said that the study was “very well done from a methodological standpoint,” but that its complication rate was “higher than I would have expected.”A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Study Points to Benefits of Knee Replacement Surgery.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.