By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.OCT. 23, 2015
The leading candidate for a malaria vaccine suffered some setbacks this week even as two World Health Organization expert panels recommended going ahead with pilot projects to test it further.The medical charity Doctors Without Borders said it would not join any pilot projects, and a guest editorial in The New England Journal of Medicine said a new study, showing that the vaccine worked less well when parasites mutated, “should give pause” to efforts to deploy it.The vaccine, known as RTS, S or Mosquirix, has been in development for nearly 30 years, and is further along in the approval process than any other candidate. But it is no panacea. In clinical trials, it was less than 40 percent effective even after four shots.But because malaria kills more than 400,000 children a year and no defense against it is perfect, the vaccine is being considered as an addition to current defenses: insecticide-impregnated nets, indoor DDT spraying and rapid treatment of outbreaks before they can spread.AdvertisementOn Friday, the W.H.O.’s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts and Malaria Policy Advisory Committee recommended that several pilot projects be carried out in Africa to make sure the vaccine is not even less effective in real-world settings than it has been in carefully monitored clinical trials.AdvertisementIt is not yet clear whether anyone will pay for the projects, which could take another five years. The vaccine has been developed by the pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline, but with donor support for testing. Two obvious sources of funds — the GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria — said in a joint statement on Friday that their boards were still undecided.“We need additional information,” Dr. Vasee Moorthy, leader of the W.H.O.’s vaccine development team, said of the committees’ desire for testing in several hundred thousand more children before vaccinating millions.The vaccine requires three doses when a child is 5 months to 9 months old and a fourth at about age 2. In poor countries, children get most of their shots between their second and fourth months of life, and it is not clear that parents or African health care systems will be able to follow more complex schedules.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Children who miss even one dose are left unprotected, said Dr. Andrea Bosman, the W.H.O.’s chief of malaria prevention. Protection is known to last only four years, and it is unclear whether more boosters would be needed.Another worry is that parents will assume their children are immune after vaccination and will stop using nets and worrying about fevers. A reasonable pilot-project target, Dr. Bosman said, would be proof that 10 percent more children survive when vaccines are used.Dr. Micaela Serafini, medical director for Doctors Without Borders in Geneva, said that pilot projects were “rational,” but that her agency would not participate because its money and time would be better spent on what it does now than on “extremely challenging” vaccine regimens.The medical journal study, looking at blood samples taken from 4,600 vaccinated children in the last clinical trial, found that the vaccine worked only about half the time when it was a good genetic match for the parasites a child had, and only a third of the time in bad matches.More than 90 percent of the time, the matches were bad. Malaria parasites are famous for evolving drug-resistant strains, and scientists have worried that changes could make them impervious to vaccines as well.If RTS, S, is ever widely used, the editorial said, “the most prudent course” would be to work to improve it while using it only in areas where it is a good match.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Experts Give Mixed News on Vaccine for Malaria.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.