

 Paula Span
 

 THE NEW OLD AGE
OCT. 23, 2015
Daily, breathless announcements arrive in my inbox, heralding technology products for older adults.A “revolutionary” gait-training robot. An emergency response device said to predict falls. A combination home phone and tablet system that “transforms how older seniors connect with and are cared for by their loved ones.”Daily, too, I hear tales of technology failing in various ways to do what older people or their worried families expect. I hear about frail elders who remove their emergency pendants at bedtime, then fall in the dark when they walk to the bathroom and can’t summon help.About a 90-year-old in Sacramento who stored his never-worn emergency pendant in his refrigerator. About a Cambridge, Mass., daughter who has tried four or five telephones — not cellphones or smartphones, but ordinary landlines — in an ongoing effort to find one simple enough for her 95-year-old mother to reliably dial her number and have a conversation.Which scenario represents the likelier future for senior-oriented technology? It depends on whom you ask.AdvertisementEntrepreneurs are hard at work developing platforms, apps, sites and devices meant to help older adults manage their health, live independently and maintain family and social connections, all laudable goals. Let’s call their efforts silvertech.AdvertisementUntil a few years ago, “the whole tech world wasn’t sufficiently focused on this enormous opportunity,” said Stephen Johnston, a co-founder of Aging2.0, which connects technology companies with the senior care industry. “It’s changing quite rapidly.” He estimated that 1,500 silvertech start-ups had arisen globally in the past three years.A couple of recent developments have intensified American entrepreneurial interest, said Laurie Orlov, a business analyst who began the Aging in Place Technology Watch blog in 2008.Last spring, a start-up called Honor, which matches older adults with vetted home care workers, raised $20 million in venture capital from prominent Silicon Valley investors. “That gave all kinds of organizations hope for market potential,” Ms. Orlov said.In addition, Medicare has begun to broaden the kinds of remote health monitoring — a.k.a. telehealth — that it will cover, though so far only in rural areas or in a pilot program for accountable care organizations. Eventually, remote monitoring will be “the way people will stay out of emergency rooms and nursing homes,” Ms. Orlov predicted.Yet Mr. Johnston, whose organization convenes pitch events for silvertech developers, acknowledges that “there have definitely been a few missteps, and there haven’t been too many huge wins yet.”As a geriatrician at the University of California, San Francisco, Dr. Ken Covinsky often hears from Silicon Valley tinkerers with big ideas. He has become something of a skeptic, as he pointed out in a post for the GeriPal blog last month.“It’s incredibly well meaning,” he said in an interview. “But there are assumptions that are at odds with the problems our patients and families are facing.”AdvertisementTech people seem enamored, for example, with the prospect of continually monitoring older people using sensors that transmit information on when they get up, leave the house and open the refrigerator (or don’t).Aside from the question of whether older adults appreciate such scrutiny, Dr. Covinsky suspects that an hour or two a day from a skilled home care worker (one paid more than minimum wage, he added) would do them more good.“They don’t necessarily need someone to know when they open the fridge,” he said. “They need someone to make or deliver a good meal.”Remote medical monitoring — of blood pressure or blood glucose, say — presents potential problems, too. The data will have transient blips, and “sometimes acting on them leads to overtreatment that does more harm than good,” Dr. Covinsky said.Both he and Dr. Leslie Kernisan, a geriatrician in San Francisco who began publishing her Geritech blog three years ago, groaned when a company called Pixie Scientific proposed embedding monitors in adult incontinence briefs to measure urine pH and other signs of urinary tract infection.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“A disaster,” Dr. Kernisan said. While many older people are “colonized” with bacteria that will show up in urinalyses, they aren’t sick and don’t need treatment. “It would just lead to antibiotic overuse.”Developers, she said, aren’t taking advantage of geriatricians’ expertise. She has recommended some silvertech products for patients, with mixed results.A SafeinHome monitoring system did notify distant family members that a 92-year-old had fallen and broken her hip. Because the system had malfunctioned before, however, it took relatives hours to recognize that this time the crisis was real. Still, help arrived sooner rather than later. (Of course, the woman still suffered a broken hip.)Dr. Kernisan uses readings from a Blipcare wireless blood-pressure cuff to help care for a 76-year-old patient, with dementia, who lives in a senior facility. It works well, “but it was a huge pain to set up,” Dr. Kernisan said.AdvertisementShe even had to argue to gain access to the facility’s Wi-Fi network. How many physicians are willing to do that?Design will play a crucial role in how useful consumers find any of these products, but it presents tricky questions. Do you come up with something specialized for older adults? “You don’t want to be handing smartphones with shiny glass to people with Parkinson’s disease or hand tremors or macular degeneration, and say, ‘Have a nice day,’ ” Ms. Orlov cautioned.Yet with some exceptions — the Jitterbug phone, for instance — products aimed purely at older adults have often faltered. Sometimes they’re too complex, or too difficult for those with dementia, which is a lot of people.Or users may balk because the devices become an uncomfortably constant reminder of incapacity. Technology isn’t always the solution to a problem.“Our job is to make our patients’ health problems as little a part of their lives as possible,” Dr. Covinsky said. “My fear is that if you make people conscious of falling all the time, they’ll just stop walking.”Happily, developers are beginning to involve their potential customers. “A lot of start-ups trying to change the world are run by 25-year-olds who don’t know much about being 85 or being a caregiver,” Mr. Johnston said.So Aging2.0 has invited older adults to serve on consumer panels to evaluate ideas, and has brought entrepreneurs and pitch events into senior living facilities. “We get really interesting insights,’” Mr. Johnston said.For example, the founders of TrueLink, a prepaid debit card designed for older adults, learned through conversations with them that when problems arise, they don’t want to be funneled to a website or an app; they want to dial a number and get quick, clear answers. TrueLink responded with “predictive analytics” so that its phone system could quickly route callers to the right person.AdvertisementDuring this interim period — with rafts of supposedly transformative gizmos, most doomed like many new products to fail — I suspect older people and their caregivers will continue to find it difficult to distinguish useful technology from that which simply produces frustration.What we need is a Consumer Reports for silvertech. Until one emerges, Consumer Reports itself has looked at alert systems. And the United Hospital Fund has just published “A Family Caregiver’s Guide to Electronic Organizers, Monitors, Sensors, and Apps,” an online handbook that includes questions to consider before buying electronic products and services.There’s probably no substitute for discussing purchases with the intended user. It doesn’t matter how well designed an emergency response device is if someone stashes it in his refrigerator. Yet even if someone living alone does not exactly welcome a sensor system, she may find it an acceptable alternative to leaving her longtime home.Dr. Kernisan offers a bit of advice based on experience: “Choose something with a risk-free trial, so you can get your money back.”A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: The Tech Charge to Reach a Senior Market.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »