Jane Brody on health and aging.Shortly after my 60th birthday, my cholesterol level inexplicably began to rise despite daily exercise, a healthy weight and a diet low in saturated fats. I tried to bring it down by cutting cheese, eggs and most meat from my diet as well as taking a daily fiber supplement, fish oils and plant sterols. Yet at every three-month checkup, my total cholesterol — and especially artery-damaging LDL cholesterol — was higher than the one before.When my LDL level reached 171 milligrams per deciliter, almost double what it should be, my doctor concluded that my liver was spewing out more cholesterol than my body needed. Noting a paternal family history of midlife heart attacks, he advised me to try a statin. My LDL level soon dropped to well under 100 and has stayed there for more than a decade because of a daily statin and a plant-rich diet.Statins are the world’s leading cholesterol-lowering drugs, firmly established as safe and very effective at reducing the risk of heart attacks, strokes and deaths from atherosclerotic heart disease for most people.More than a quarter of Americans older than 40 are taking a statin, a number that could rise to 46 percent of people aged 40 to 75 under the newest prescription guidelines, especially now that almost all statins are available as inexpensive generics. A recent study showed that prescribing statins under the new guidelines could cut in half the number of people who develop clinical evidence of cardiovascular disease.Because statins are cheap, as well as effective and safe for most people, doctors often prescribe them for otherwise healthy patients like me with elevated cholesterol, even if they have no other cardiovascular risk factors, said Dr. Philip Greenland, a cardiologist at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.Yet many who could benefit — including people with established heart disease and serious risk factors like smoking, diabetes and high blood pressure — are not on a statin for reasons that include reluctance to take daily medication, concern about possible or actual side effects and, as one heart doctor once told me, “denial that they are at risk of premature cardiovascular disease and death.”Even those for whom statins are prescribed often take them inconsistently, undermining their potential benefits.While best known for their ability to lower serum cholesterol, statins also reduce artery-damaging inflammation that can result in a life-threatening blood clot. By lowering cholesterol, statins also appear to stabilize plaque, artery deposits that can break loose and cause a heart attack or stroke. And they may cleanse arteries of plaque that has not yet become calcified.Instead of striving for a target level of, say, under 200 for total cholesterol and under 100 for LDL, the new guidelines, put forth by the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association, focus on four main groups who could be helped by statins.■ People who have cardiovascular disease, including those who have had a heart attack, stroke, peripheral artery disease, transient ischemic attack or surgery to open or replace coronary arteries.■ People with very high levels of LDL cholesterol, 190 milligrams or above.■ People with an LDL level from 70 to 189 milligrams who also have diabetes, a serious cardiovascular risk.■ People with an LDL level above 100 who, based on other risks like smoking, being overweight or high blood pressure, face a 7.5 percent or higher risk of having a heart attack within 10 years.My friend Richard Erde may owe his life in part to the benefit of a statin. Mr. Erde, a former smoker, had a heart attack 22 years ago and has been on a statin ever since. Last winter, after two years with shortness of breath and vague chest discomfort, he had an angiogram that revealed three severely clogged coronary arteries — one at 100 percent, another at 90 percent and a third at 80 percent — in a then 74-year-old man who had been playing singles tennis three times a week. The cardiac surgeon who performed a triple bypass said Mr. Erde was a walking time bomb. A consulting cardiologist suggested that, if not for the anti-inflammatory and plaque-stabilizing effects of the statin, Mr. Erde might have had a second, possibly fatal, heart attack years earlier.However, not everyone responds well to statins. About 5 percent of people have distressing muscle aches, and some experience an unhealthy rise in blood sugar. Furthermore, Dr. Stephen L. Kopecky, a preventive cardiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said that about 15 percent to 20 percent of people were “hyporesponders” – their LDL level is only minimally reduced or actually goes up on a statin. They may be good candidates for one of three other newer drugs that lower cholesterol by different mechanisms.“Statins are the most studied drugs in the world,” Dr. Kopecky said. “We know from studies in tens of thousands of people what one statin will do in numerous patients, but we don’t know what numerous statins will do in one patient.” Thus, doctors are encouraged to try at least three statins before moving on to another option.Statins work by inhibiting an enzyme called HMG-CoA reductase that controls production of cholesterol in the liver. Best studied among the newer statin alternatives is ezetimibe, sold as Zetia, which acts in the digestive tract to block absorption of dietary cholesterol. Zetia, taken by itself, has not been shown to reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke, but it can enhance the cholesterol-lowering effect of a moderate dose of a statin in high-risk patients who can’t tolerate a high-dose statin.Ezetimibe does not get into the bloodstream and has not been linked to any serious adverse effects, according to Dr. Donald Lloyd-Jones, director of the Northwestern University Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute.There’s been considerable controversy surrounding the high costs of a third class of agents called PCSK9 inhibitors — monoclonal antibodies that must be self-injected every two weeks. They block an enzyme that can keep LDL cholesterol circulating in the blood. They are sold as Praluent, made by Sanofi Regeneron, and Repatha, made by Amgen, and cost more than $14,000 a year in the United States — double the cost in Europe.Definitive evidence for their long-term safety and effectiveness as cardiovascular preventives is currently lacking. At this time, these drugs, which are very potent reducers of LDL, are recommended primarily for people with familial hypercholesteremia, a genetic condition of extremely high levels of LDL that can result in fatal heart disease early in life.Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.