When Emily McDowell learned at the age of 24 that she had Stage 3 Hodgkin’s lymphoma, she discovered how difficult it is for people to talk about a life-threatening illness.“I got a lot of ‘Get Well Soon’ cards,” she said. “I was like, ‘I’ll try. I’m working on it.'”Fifteen years post-treatment, Ms. McDowell launched a stationery and gift company called Emily McDowell Studio. Her experience with illness inspired her to create a line of empathy cards that avoids clichés and offers the kind of supportive words that Ms. McDowell says she would have preferred to hear after her cancer diagnosis. The Empathy Cards line, described as “support for serious illness and loss,” includes cards that are insightful, relatable and, surprisingly, often funny. There’s a card that lists the five stage of grief, including “crying when you’re a little drunk.” Another quips, “If this is God’s plan, God is a terrible planner.”This week, Ms. McDowell is adding seven new cards to her empathy series. But instead of focusing on cancer, the new series focuses on people who have a chronic, potentially life-changing illness or are dealing with grief and loss. She wants help in deciding a new card, and is hosting a card contest with Well readers.“What cards do is hit on the emotional connections between people,” said Ms. McDowell. “There’s nothing more needed when someone has a chronic illness.”Submit your idea in the comments. Think about what you would want people to say to you during a tough illness, or think about comments from friends that touched your heart or made you laugh. The Well team will select our favorite submissions, and Ms. McDowell will create a new card with the best turn of phrase. Help us decide by recommending your favorites. You may choose more than one entry but you can’t vote for the same entry more than once.If you are using The New York Times app on an iPhone or iPad, please vote here. A few tips to help as you write your empathy card: Please read the full Rules and Regulations.We will reveal Ms. McDowell’s new design next week. The submission that is chosen will receive a gift certificate to shop on Ms. McDowell’s website, Emily McDowell Studio. 