Delicious no-meat recipes for your holiday table. View our Vegetarian Thanksgiving recipe gallery from 2012 and the ones from 2011 and 2010. When it comes to Thanksgiving Day eating, vegetarian diners aren’t looking for fake turkey or tofu. They want what everyone else at the table wants — delicious food that celebrates the fall harvest.For Well’s Vegetarian Thanksgiving celebration this year, we’ve asked readers to share their most successful center-of-the-plate vegetarian dishes. We want recipes that fill a vegetarian diner’s plate and make the meat-eaters at the table ask for seconds. To kick off Vegetarian Thanksgiving, we’re presenting Roasted Cauliflower Steaks. It may seem odd that we’re using the word “steak” in a series about vegetarian eating, but this recipe is all about the cut and presentation. Slicing the cauliflower down the center gives you a thick portion similar to a beef or tuna steak that you can brown and caramelize — and flavored with vegetarian gravy, it holds its own on the center of your plate.The recipe comes to us courtesy of Erin Wysocarski, of Redondo Beach, Calif., a 10-year vegan who has grown accustomed to bringing portable food to holiday gatherings. “Most folks who have never heard the term ‘cauliflower steak’ give a little chuckle,” said Ms. Wysocarski, who writes the Olives for Dinner vegan food blog. “This cauliflower steak tastes good because of the way it’s sliced — it gets a little crispy around the edges (especially if you use a cast iron pan) and stays succulent toward the middle.”The dish has the added benefit of being portable and easy to reheat.“Instead of coming up with a dish that would rival turkey or other proteins, I wanted to design a recipe for those one or two vegans at the table that would be easy to make beforehand at home and reheat — and wouldn’t take up any real estate in the host’s oven,” said Ms. Wysocarski. If you are serving a crowd, you should plan on serving two people per cauliflower head. Serve the “steaks” with a mushroom or other vegetable gravy or feel free to dress it up with a sprinkling of colorful vegetables. One added bonus of this recipe: Once you slice up the cauliflower into large portions, you will be left with small extra florets and bits of the stalk that can be saved for later. Slice them thin, coat with olive oil, add salt and roast to perfection on a baking sheet to serve as a snack.
Roasted Cauliflower Steaks
View all of Well’s Vegetarian Thanksgiving recipes.