Do you think the Sukkel twins are identical or fraternal? Take our quiz and see if you can figure out if Lilly and Abbie and six other twin pairs are identical or fraternal.It’s not always easy to tell whether a twin pair is identical simply by their looks. A study in Twin Research and Human Genetics found that one-third of parents of twins were unsure or incorrect about their twins’ genetic identity, and many doctors don’t do much better. According to Jeff Craig, a study author and an associate professor at the University of Melbourne’s Australian Twin Registry and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, two common myths about identical twins contribute to the confusion.First, many people inaccurately believe that all identical twins look the same. Identical twins, which arise when a single fertilized egg splits into two embryos, do share the same genes, but simply having the same genes doesn’t make two people look identical. (Fraternal twins, on the other hand, occur when two different eggs are fertilized at the same time, so their genetic makeup is typical of any siblings.)“If same-sex twins have the same eye and hair color and are often confused by family and friends, they are more likely to be identical,” said Dr. Craig. “However, the only surefire way of telling identical from fraternal same-sex twins is with a simple genetic test.”A second misconception is that unlike fraternal twins, who always have separate placentas, identical twins always share a placenta. While this is often the case, the Australian Twin Registry found that up to one-third of identical twins have separate placentas. That was the case for Sue Sukkel, a mother of twin girls in Melbourne, whose doctor told her that her twins were fraternal after her first ultrasound showed they had separate placentas. People would often say of her girls, Lilly and Abbie, “Of course your girls are identical!” and she would think, “These people are simply not very observant. Of course they look different! But slowly I began to think, ‘What if I’m wrong?'” As comments about how much her daughters looked alike continued to pile up, her doubt grew. “I just ended up having a burning desire to know the truth,” said Ms. Sukkel. It can be very practical to know whether a set of twins is identical or fraternal. Because identical twins share the same genes, if one develops a disease, the other is more likely to as well. If one twin needs an organ or tissue transplant, an identical twin will be a better donor than a sibling or parent. A woman who has had one set of fraternal twins is more likely to have another set of fraternal twins, though this is not the case for a mother of identical twins. Ms. Sukkel took Lilly and Abbie for a genetic test when they were 5. The test looks for commonality between genetic markers that are typically distinct in people who are not identical twins. For the Sukkel twins, these markers were shown to be the same. When Ms. Sukkel got the letter announcing that her daughters were identical, she said, “I remember staring at the girls with a completely new sense of wonderment. Suddenly everything made sense.” 
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.