AdvertisementSupported byBy Nancy WartikA front-page report on a study that found death rates rising among white, middle-aged Americans, tapped into deep roots of angst, compassion and frustration among readers. The article shot to the top of the most-emailed list, and attracted nearly 1,900 comments.“In years of reading The Times, I’ve not seen a finer set of comments than these – at once thoughtful and empathetic,” wrote Ron Cohen of Waltham, Mass.The data show that the current uptick in mortality rates is driven by increased levels of suicide, alcoholism and substance abuse specifically among less educated whites. But many commenters spoke of a broad sense of despair in the country that cuts across demographic lines.Hugh Sansom, 50, of Brooklyn, wrote, “I didn’t need Anne Case or Angus Deaton to tell me that things are getting worse for Americans like me. I cannot get a job to save my life. Literally. Age discrimination is de facto legal — even applauded — in the U.S. The great expectations people like myself were encouraged to nurture as we grew up in the 1960s and 70s have proved hollow. Our society is producing losers. And the losses can be too much to bear.”JenD of New Jersey remarked, “I was not terribly surprised by this finding. This past year, it seemed I could hardly go to the website of a NJ news organization without reading about yet another New Jerseyan who had walked in front of a NJ Transit or Amtrak train. Or jumped off a bridge. My own brother committed suicide at age 60 in 2012, after 5 years of unemployment and no hope of ever getting another job.”Writing from New York, Commentator said, “Just today an early-60ish guy was fired from my company. In the company’s view, he was falling behind. Younger people could perform better at a lower salary (their health costs are lower, too). Right now, I feel so bad for this nice, articulate, knowledgeable man and all I can think of is the movie, They Shoot Horses, Don’t They?”Readers also speculated about reasons other than job loss or the troubled economy that might explain increased rates of suicide among white Americans in their 40s and 50s. Some focused on lack of connection.“I have lived in the same house for over twenty years,” lamented Greg Donavan, from Denver. “After two decades, I would not know the woman who lives next door to me if I met her face to face. She drives her car into the garage, the door shuts and she never comes out of the house. My neighbor across the street has lived there for a couple years; same reality. It seems they go out of their way to make sure not to make eye contact or cast a friendly wave. We need human connection beyond our jobs and to come out from behind our doors. Without these bonds, we simply do not have much to live for.”Toro200 from Seattle, asked, “I wonder if the decline of community-building activities such as church going is a factor here? In our Episcopal community we pay close attention to the elderly and those who have struggles. I always wonder what people do who don’t have communities around them of people who are morally committed to their welfare. I was single for most of my adult life and always went to church, not so much because I’m so religious but because I knew I needed a group of friends who would help me in times of trouble, as I was willing to help them.”One woman, MidtwnAtl, from Atlanta, revealed that she herself has considered suicide. “I am unemployed and constantly getting rejections from each job application I make,” she said. “I am a college-educated white female over 45 and employers prefer young people. I have picked up temp gigs here and there, but not enough to live on. My savings are about to run out, and I have no husband, kids or living parents to help. I do not want to burden other relatives. If no one will hire me for a job that could pay my bills and I cannot support myself, then why live?”Her predicament drew a slew of responses from sympathetic readers. “Please know that there are many of us out here that care about your plight,” Chris from Chicago replied. “It is for this reason that we have banded together to create a safety net. I am personally happy to pay my taxes to know that you might benefit. You are not alone. Any of us could be in your situation. I hope that you find what you need.”Still, despite a general sense of despair in the comments, at least one reader refused to be dispirited. “For god sakes people — get a grip,” Soldriver from Calgary scolded. “Sitting around moaning about injustice, loss and how we have all been somehow cheated in some mythical contract that says we are owed some level of comfort and dignity will not make things any better for anyone. News flash. We are not owed anything. If we want to make it different, we need to make it different. This study could and should be a call to resolve, to invention and to community!”Advertisement