AdvertisementSupported byBy Sabrina TaverniseWASHINGTON — The share of American women on birth control who use long-acting reversible methods like intrauterine devices and implants has nearly doubled in recent years, the federal government reported Tuesday.The share of women on birth control who use the devices rose to 11.6 percent in the period from 2011 to 2013, up from 6 percent in 2006 to 2010, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. The share is still smaller than for the pill (26 percent) or condoms (15 percent), but it is the fastest-growing method. In 2002, just 2.4 percent of women on birth control in the United States used the long-acting methods.Women’s health advocates say long-acting birth control is giving American women more say over when — and with whom — they have children. About half of the 6.6 million pregnancies a year in the United States are unintended, and health experts contend that broader use of long-acting methods could help reduce that number, because the methods work better than other types.The methods are effective because, unlike the pill, a diaphragm or condoms, they do not require a woman to take action to work. Although an early incarnation, the Dalkon Shield, introduced in the 1970s, had disastrous results, the modern devices are safe and have been increasingly promoted by doctors. Last fall, the American Academy of Pediatrics published guidelines that for the first time singled them out as a “first-line” birth control option for adolescents, citing their “efficacy, safety and ease of use.”About 62 percent of women in the United States use birth control, according to the report, which draws on data from a nationally representative federal survey.The use of long-acting birth control was driven by a surge in the use of intrauterine devices. About 10.3 percent of women on birth control reported using those devices in 2011 to 2013, and about 1.3 percent used implants.Use was roughly the same across educational groups, the report found. Use of long-acting methods was lower among black women. About 8.6 percent of black women used long-acting methods, compared with 15.1 percent of Hispanics and 11.4 percent of whites.Female sterilization, the second most popular method after the pill and used by about a quarter of all women on birth control, was far more common among women with less education. About 40 percent of women with just a high school diploma or the equivalent used that method, compared with about 15 percent of women with a bachelor’s degree or higher. In contrast, the pill was used by about a third of women with a college degree or more but by just 13 percent of women with a high school degree or less.Advertisement