Being overweight doesn’t necessarily make a person distraught, researchers are learning. Rather, it’s the teasing, judgment and unsolicited advice directed at overweight people that can cause the greatest psychological harm. “People assume there is a direct relationship between how much people weigh and their psychological health,” said Jeffrey Hunger, a doctoral candidate in social psychology at the University of California, Santa Barbara. “Our research and other research is showing that no, it’s not about their weight, it’s the treatment they faced and what they worry they will face.”In a recent report published in Social and Personality Psychology Compass, he and his colleagues found that those who were overweight or obese were more likely to report problems like depression, anxiety, substance abuse and low self-esteem if they had experienced weight-based discrimination in the past. Being the target of weight discrimination can also lead to self-sabotaging behaviors like avoiding the gym or doctor’s office in order to protect against future stigmatization. “We know that obese and overweight people have an increased motivation to avoid exercising in public,” Mr. Hunger said. “They have reported delaying preventative health care, particularly screenings, to avoid stigma from their providers,” he said.Stigma from doctors is part of a larger cultural bias against the overweight that is amplified by the mass media, from reality television to advertisements to health magazines, said Courtney Bailey, a media scholar in popular culture and an associate professor at Allegheny College in Pennsylvania. “It’s very punishing. It’s very punitive,” she said. “And it’s done under the context of health, which makes it harder to critique.”Dr. Bailey says that fat stigma intensified after 9/11, when Americans’ sense of vulnerability translated into increased animosity toward the fat body. “Think about what fat bodies signify culturally,” she said. “Moral weakness, incompetence, the list goes on. Those are also things that threaten national security.”Negative stereotypes of fat people are reinforced in entertainment media, from children’s shows to reality television, said Sarah Domoff, a research fellow in clinical psychology at the University of Michigan. In one study, Dr. Domoff exposed undergraduate students to shows like “The Biggest Loser,” in which weight loss occurs rapidly and within a punishing context. She found that study participants who weren’t trying to lose weight expressed greater disdain of obese people than those who were. Many also expressed a stronger belief that weight is controllable and that a person who fails to lose weight is not trying hard enough. “We’re seeing a lot of responsibility put on the person themselves,” said Dr. Domoff, a notion that perpetuates stigma against the overweight and obese by assuming people who fail to lose weight are at fault. Fat stigma can have consequences on the body as well. Earlier this year, a study published in Obesity  confirmed how weight-based discrimination can increase levels of the hormone cortisol, a marker of stress. For the study, college-age women were told they were participating in an experiment about hormonal responses to shopping. They provided a saliva sample to measure cortisol levels, and their body mass index was measured. They were also asked whether they considered themselves overweight.The women were divided into two groups. Members of one group, who served as controls, were told that the shopping activity was full and that their participation was no longer needed. Meanwhile, members of a second group, meant to be the target of stigma, were told that their “size and shape” were not “ideal for this style of clothing.” They were further told that the researchers wanted “to return the clothing to the designer in good condition,” implying the participant would stretch the fabric. Participants in the stigma group who thought of themselves as heavy had a sustained increase in cortisol levels, whereas members of the stigma group who weren’t concerned about their weight didn’t show the same reaction. The researchers noted that high cortisol levels tend to drive eating, which could contribute to weight gain. And fat stigma does not even need to be experienced in person to have an effect, other research indicates. Last year, in a study by the Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity at the University of Connecticut, researchers divided female participants into a control group and a stigma group. Women in the stigma group watched a 10-minute video that included recent media clips of actors and reality show participants overeating, wearing ill-fitting clothes, struggling to exercise and being perceived as repulsive by others. After watching the video, their cortisol levels tended to be far higher than those who watched a neutral video.In a follow-up study, the researchers used the same research methods and the same videos to test caloric intake after exposure. Following the video, participants were offered snacks of M&M’s, jelly beans and SunChips while filling out a questionnaire. The overweight participants who viewed the stigma video ate more than three times as many calories as overweight women who saw the neutral video.Rebecca Puhl, one of the studies’ authors and the deputy director of the Rudd Center, said that both studies showed that the stigma and shame so common in our society do not motivate people to lose weight. “Research shows that the opposite is true,” Dr. Puhl said. “Messages that shame, blame and stigmatize people about their weight have a negative impact and interfere with efforts to improve health.”For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.