Reader Question • 1441 votesThe effectiveness of the Zostavax vaccine against herpes zoster, the virus that causes shingles, gradually fades with time, but a booster vaccine is not yet approved. A randomized clinical trial of Zostavax, published in 2005, followed more than 38,000 people and found that it reduced the incidence of disease by 51 percent. It also reduced the incidence of post-herpetic neuralgia -- the intense and enduring nerve pain that can follow shingles -- by more than 66 percent. But that study said nothing about efficacy beyond three years.A study published in March 2015 followed 6,043 people for 11 years after their vaccination. It found that the vaccine’s effectiveness declined with time and after eight years no longer worked to prevent disease.The vaccine is given in a single shot, and even though the Food and Drug Administration approved it in 2011 for people over 50, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still recommends it only for those over 60.The C.D.C. reasons that if a person gets vaccinated in his 50s, the vaccine may provide peak protection at a time when shingles is less likely to occur, since the risk of shingles increases with age. Therefore, with a booster vaccine not yet approved, it may be better to wait.This may change as research continues. A study published online in October in The Journal of Infectious Diseases has found that a booster dose of Zostavax was safe and effective in people over 70 who had first been vaccinated more than 10 years earlier.Physicians can legally and ethically prescribe approved drugs off-label, including vaccines, and this may happen with Zostavax.“Based on the encouraging boost in immunity seen in people who get a booster, it’s a reasonable expectation that they would be protected for some time after the second dose,” said the lead author of the new study, Dr. Myron J. Levin, a professor of pediatrics and medicine at the University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine. “But it’s not yet proven. Some physicians may think the evidence is strong enough to give the second dose now.”There may be another reason to delay the booster shot. Last spring, researchers reported the results of a phase 3 trial of a new zoster vaccine — one that uses only the antigens in the virus that stimulate the immune system rather than the live attenuated virus used in Zostavax. Shingrix, as it has been named, appears to be more effective than Zostavax and the manufacturer, GlaxoSmithKline, intends to apply for F.D.A. approval of the vaccine in the second half of 2016.Do you have a health question?
		 Submit your question to Ask Well.
Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.