



Wired Well
A special report on personal technology for health, family and fitness.


A special report on personal technology for health, family and fitness.It started with a stir fry. I ordered my usual at a nondescript cafe across the street from work: shrimp, tofu, broccoli and snap peas in spicy teriyaki sauce over brown rice.I’d had this stir fry dozens of times. Even on deadline, I savored the crunch of fiery broccoli and the nutty rice. It always brought me back from the brink of grumpiness.But two weeks ago, my routine was upended when I signed up for Rise, a nutrition app that connects the user with a registered dietitian who offers feedback on meals. Everything I eat, I photograph and upload for review, even snacks. Gabriella, my Rise dietitian, quickly graduated from the coach in my iPhone to the voice in my head.A face-to-face visit with a registered dietitian can cost $25 to $45 per 15 minutes. Rise’s everyday accountability costs $49 a month.But don’t take it lightly. On the Rise website, Suneel Gupta, the company’s chief executive, promises, “You will always feel the presence of your coach.”Of the five dietitians offered, I chose Gabriella because she’s a workout lover like me and described her mantra as “eat foods for energy and make them the foods you love.”I hoped we could strike a balance between whittling a few stubborn pounds off my 6-foot frame and joie de vivre (read: me not quitting wine).I told myself I signed up to lose five to seven pounds to make running easier on my knees. But as is so often the case, a fresh insult had spurred action. Last month, my primary care doctor eyed my midsection and asked, “Have you gained weight?”“Not really,” I said, defensively.He replied, “You carry 181 pounds so well.” He emphasized “so well,” as if he were delivering praise, not insulting me. After a barely perceptible shrug of disbelief, he said, “Must be the height.”So that’s how I found myself past age 40, uploading banal snapshots of everything I ate like a millennial foodie. At the end of her day in California, Gabriella reviewed each of my meals, rating them in green, yellow or red.After the first day, I fell asleep thinking I’d done well. In the morning, I found out I was a chump.She dismissed the previous day’s 7:11 a.m. breakfast of a homemade waffle and half a banana as “just carb.” Rating: Red. She wanted me to add lean protein. I wanted to scream, “I made those oat-rich waffles from scratch for my kid precoffee!”My 4:27 p.m. salad of cantaloupe and grapes? Another no-no. “Fruit is still fructose,” she wrote, suggesting string cheese and carrots instead.And the stir fry I had mistaken for virtuous? Its “great sources of protein” were commendable, she wrote, but that sauce was not. “Be cautious of too much teriyaki as it is high in sodium and has added sugar.” Yellow rating.At the supermarket, I’m on the lookout for added sugar. How did I not suspect the sauce? Then again, if that’s all my added sugar for the day, how bad is it, really?It pains me to admit I’ve asked half a dozen colleagues about L’Affaire Stir Fry, trying to get them to take my side over Gabriella’s. I whined to one friend that my online dietitian gave me zero points for choosing vegetable-loaded takeout instead of beelining for fried chicken and fries at the diner in my building.“I give you lots and lots of points,” he said, “if that’s any consolation.”Still, I cared what Gabriella thought. So after she deemed some roast chicken on sweet potatoes and broccoli “AWESOME!!,” I ate it again. And since Gabriella issued her edict, I have not ordered my stir fry again.Other Rise users probably have enough sense to not take a virtual dietitian so seriously. Chad K. brags on Rise’s website that he enjoys “eating more than ever.” In the face of constructive criticism, Chad K. was not a hot mess.But during my first week on Rise, I was paralyzed by what Gabriella would think. Sometimes literally: Once I stood 10 minutes in the lobby of the building where I work, unsure where to get green-rated lunch in Midtown.No dietitian is a mind reader. So to get more out of Rise, I had to disclose specifics in the caption, not just let an image speak for me. To feel less judged, I also needed Gabriella to explain why she pooh-pooh’ed some choices.The tipping point was a second breakfast of oatmeal, blueberries, raisins and walnuts. I was ravenous after an early run. By 10 a.m., I had to feed the beast.Earlier that week, Gabriella had set a goal of a “protein and healthy fat exchange at three meals per day.” Unsure what that meant, I asked, and she sent a helpful primer. Ah! Walnuts fit the bill.But the next morning, she said my oatmeal was “mostly carb and sugar.” She didn’t think fiber-rich oatmeal was worthy? Back to Square 1.A great new thing about Rise is you can now send messages to a Member Success Champion when your coach is out of pocket. “To have support in that moment is important for us,” Mr. Gupta said, adding they also had a Coachline, a kind of Batphone users can call from restaurants when a cheesy-saucy tagliatelle is whispering, “Choose Me.”After I wrote an exasperated email to my success champion, Mathew, saying I don’t know why my oatmeal drew scorn, he replied in 30 minutes. I also asked what each color rating meant. (Fingers crossed, red didn’t mean “You’ll burn in hell.”)Mathew, our mediator, said he would ask Gabriella to reply. It turns out she says red is a “cheat meal” that is not ideal. Yellow “is healthy but if consumed daily may not result in weight loss.”I was overreacting. It’s not that I could never have steel cut oatmeal with blueberries again. Instead, she suggested plain Greek yogurt, berries and nuts might help me stay full longer.I knew Gabriella and I were going to be O.K. when she texted, “I don’t want you to think I’m some carb hater!” In turn, I admitted that my husband had wanted to make grass-fed beef burgers, but I nixed the idea because I worried what she would say. She said have the burger, skip the bun.As her feedback becomes more predictable, every meal is no longer a pop quiz I’m doomed to fail.Related:
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on 11/17/2015, on page D7 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Dietary Advice, and a Little Scolding.