



Wired Well
A special report on personal technology for health, family and fitness.


A special report on personal technology for health, family and fitness.Parents often worry that technology interferes with a child’s ability to finish homework, but a number of new tech tools are helping students do their homework faster.Easybib.com — With so many different research sources to choose from — websites, podcasts, medical journals and news articles — it’s tough for students to know the proper style for listing and punctuating citations. With Easybib, students can type in the website or source name and Easybib will automatically generate a citation in whatever style format the teacher requires, slashing the time required to create a bibliography for a research paper.Prezi.com — Prezi is a cloud-based presentation tool that gives a cooler, more dynamic presentation than traditional slide programs like PowerPoint. Because it’s cloud-based, students can work together on the same presentation from different locations. Prezi zooms and pans to create a fun, energetic presentation, no matter what the topic.Quizlet.com — Quizlet takes the old-fashioned flashcard high-tech. Students use the free site to create flashcards and study guides that can be reviewed online or on a mobile device. The site was created by a high school student in 2005, and now contains over 40 million study sets generated by users. Students can find other study sets, create their own and use a variety of game modes to study for a test.Storybird.com — For students looking for a creative way to present material, short stories or poetry, Storybird lets them create a story using a variety of illustrations.Sparknotes.com — This trove of study guides to various literary works can certainly be used as a shortcut for students who haven’t read the book. But Sparknotes goes a step further with analysis of important quotes, key facts, study questions, essay topics and quizzes to help students prepare for an exam. Beyond literature, the site offers study guides on a range of topics, including biology, chemistry, economics and film. If you’re old enough to remember the yellow-and-black “CliffsNotes” some of us used to skirt high school reading, you may be surprised to know that Cliffsnotes.com offers a similar online service.Kindle — Students who read assigned work on their Kindle or Kindle app, the digital book reader from Amazon, discover a number of useful features, including highlighting and vocabulary help. The best feature — the ability to search a long book for a key passage — is a huge time saver for students writing book reports.HowLongToReadThis.com — Type in the name of a written work, and the site will give you a sample paragraph and a timer to determine your reading pace and how long it will take you to finish the book. The site has its quirks — sometimes it links to copy from the back cover rather than a paragraph in the book — but it’s a useful tool for students trying to juggle multiple reading assignments.KhanAcademy.org — An online math tutor that helps students find the answers they need based on their grade level and type of math. Need help doing arithmetic with polynomials? Click on the subject and you’ll be taken to a digital blackboard where a helpful voice guides you through various problems. The website also provides help in science, computer programming, history, art history and economics.Google Docs — Students and teachers love Google docs because it allows them to create, edit and store documents that can be opened from any computer with an Internet connection — making forgotten papers a thing of the past. Google docs can be shared, so students can collaborate on the same document at the same time from different locations, and teachers can add notes and comments to drafts.Related:
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on 11/17/2015, on page D2 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Help With Homework, Pixel by Pixel.