

      By ALBERT SUN

NOV. 16, 2015

Research shows that people who keep track of what they eat and weigh on a regular basis are more likely to succeed at losing weight and keeping it off. But as the food diary of Steve Lochner shows, food tracking and weight loss is far from simple.In February of 2012, he weighed a high of 337 pounds. But then he started tracking his eating habits using the Lose It food tracking app. Soon he became a "Super Tracker," detailing virtually every bite of food — good and bad — that he ate over a three-year period, losing more than 100 pounds. Here's how he did it.Mr. Lochner, 38, learns about the Lose It app on Facebook and decides to begin tracking calories. Weighing in at 337 pounds and with the goal of losing two pounds a week, the app sets a target of 2,500 calories for him. He tries to stay under, but can’t entirely stay away from some favorite high-calorie foods.Still he’s no longer eating them every day, cuts out soda and energy drinks, and loses six pounds in the first week.Mr. Lochner decides to weigh himself every Saturday morning, and after two months of disciplined eating he hits his first milestone, a 25-pound weight loss. He rewards himself with a tattoo of four characters from a favorite album cover. This would be the first of six tattoo rewards, one for every 25 pounds lost.At home he researches portion sizes and calorie counts for his meals and creates entries for them in the app to more easily track them.Mr. Lochner is still learning to track quantities accurately, especially for home cooked meals. His wife and relatives are supportive, but he feels awkward asking for measuring cups at his mother-in-law’s Sunday dinners.Someone at work notices he’s losing weight and Mr. Lochner starts recommending the Lose It app to others. After losing 50 pounds, Mr. Lochner rewards himself with an arm tattoo of the number “50” surrounded by 5/26/12 and the words “Never Look Back.”Mr. Lochner drops to 276 pounds, but is tempted by summer cookouts, ice cream and other treats. His weight loss slows and then reverses, and he gains back five pounds by his birthday, Aug. 18.His weight loss has stalled but he’s determined to keep going, so he starts exercising more regularly.Mr. Lochner makes a rule to combat exercise boredom: He will only watch favorite shows, like “Breaking Bad,” while on an exercise machine. This helps him do more cardio.After losing 75 pounds, Mr. Lochner tattoos “Today is the first day of the rest of my life” on his chest and celebrates with 10 slices of pizza.Mr. Lochner manages to stay mostly on track through the holiday season. He has been tracking for nine months and is now keenly aware of calorie counts and which foods are “worth it” to stay under budget. He goes easy on mashed potatoes and rice and loads up on turkey, mixed vegetables and his mother-in-law’s dessert breads and cookies.Mr. Lochner tries the Paleo diet in the New Year, eating foods high in protein and healthy fat and with very few carbs, and sees it work well for him. By the end of February he loses another 24 pounds and passes 100 pounds lost.To celebrate, he gets two wrist tattoos: the number “100” and the Bruce Lee quote “Walk On,” as a reminder to keep going.Mr. Lochner continues the Paleo diet. On weekdays at work he brings and eats a very limited diet, but on weekends he eats a broader variety of foods so he can eat with others.Still, his new diet is expensive to maintain. After abstaining from pizza entirely for two months, he indulges a craving in mid-March.Mr. Lochner continues to lose weight and the Lose It app automatically adjusts his daily calorie target lower. He’s now aiming for just 1,700 calories a day. Social occasions strain his commitment to a low-carb diet as it feels rude to turn down others’ cooking. Like the previous summer, his weight loss slows and he gains eight pounds in late June.Whenever his weight loss slowed, Mr. Lochner started trying new things. Now he adds strength circuit training to his exercise routine: push ups, sit ups, pull ups and weights.That helps get him to his 125-pound goal and he celebrates with a fifth tattoo. He puts the words “Veni Vidi Vici” and a branching tree on his chest.August brings highs and lows. After dropping 14 pounds to his 125-pound milestone, Mr. Lochner experiments with not logging his food to see if he can stay on track. It doesn’t go well. After a week on vacation without tracking he gains back seven pounds. Mr. Lochner starts tracking again and the following week has lost eight pounds, bringing him to 209.Mr. Lochner’s weight loss slows in the second half of 2013, but around Christmas he schedules his final tattoo appointment for June 10, 2014 — more than five months and 20 pounds in the future. With that goal set, he starts an intermittent fasting diet, limiting his eating to an eight-hour window each day. By Feb. 18 he’s under 200 pounds for the first time.Mr. Lochner redoubles his exercise routine and puts posters with “150” around his home and office. On June 10 he reaches his goal of losing 150 pounds, weighing in at 185.3 pounds. For his final tattoo he has a painful four-hour session to ink a dark champion figure rising out of sludge on the side of his chest. Then he celebrates with pizza.After hitting his goal, Mr. Lochner stops weighing himself for three weeks. He knows he will likely gain weight, but needs the break. He continues to log food and eat healthfully, but occasionally binges on the desserts and sweets he had been avoiding.When his clothes start to fit tighter, he gets back on the scale on July 3 and discovers he’s gained back 17 pounds. He starts weighing himself regularly again.By the day after Christmas, Mr. Lochner has gained back nearly 30 pounds from his lowest weight. He has alternated healthy eating with days of bingeing on thousands of calories of ice cream, cookies and other sweets. He tracks food inconsistently and his weight swings up and down. In two missed weeks he gains 10 pounds.Mr. Lochner buys a Fitbit Charge heart rate tracker to record the calories he burns and starts participating in step challenges to stay motivated.Through his weight loss journey he has learned many new habits — like cooking batches of healthy food for several days in advance — but worries he will be worrying about maintaining his weight for the rest of his life.Stress at his job causes Mr. Lochner to overeat and many of his tracking habits start to slip. He switches to a new job without supervisor responsibilities and also starts a new lawn business.The disrupted routine and using lawn work to justify eating more leads to his weight creeping up back over 200.Mr. Lochner struggles to get back to his low weight and still has bad days when he can’t control his eating. But when he does overeat he commits to logging his food honestly.On July 7 he records his biggest binge day since he began tracking — 6,420 calories from a hamburger, fries, crispy chicken sandwich and a box of chocolate chip cookies.Today Mr. Lochner’s weight hovers around 200 pounds and he worries about regaining lost weight. He wants to keep tracking his progress, but without specific goals, motivation is harder.“I don't like the fact that I can easily let myself go, and I'm trying to get past that,” he said.Tracking calories, exercise and weight worked well for Steve Lochner, and he managed to lose more weight than many other people using the Lose It app.The chart shows how Mr. Lochner compares with other people who used the Lose It app for a year and were trying to lose at least 50 pounds.Some people lost over 100 pounds but others had fluctuating weights and at least one person gained 50 pounds. The more regularly someone tracks their weight the better they seem to do. But no one can say in advance who has what it takes to succeed as a “Super Tracker.”Read more about tracking food and more in the rest of our Wired Well Special Section.We explore the lives of newly wired consumers and the consequences, good and bad, that arise from our increasing reliance on trackers, monitors, guides and a vast array of other devices to better our health.Sources: Steve Lochner, Lose ItAdvertisement