By SABRINA TAVERNISENOV. 17, 2015
WASHINGTON —  President Obama’s nominee to lead the Food and Drug Administration, Dr. Robert M. Califf, coasted through a confirmation hearing on Tuesday, with most members of a Senate committee — including some who have been skeptical about his ties to the pharmaceutical industry — seeming set to support his candidacy.Dr. Califf, 64, is a cardiologist and clinical trial expert from Duke University who has been a consultant to drug companies and ran a research institute that received a majority of its funding from the industry. Such ties have raised concerns among some public health groups and some Democrats that he is too close to the industry he is being called on to regulate. Many medical experts dispute that, saying that industry is a principal funder of research in the United States and that working with companies does not present an inherent conflict.Dr. Califf said as much during his two-hour hearing. The session, before the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, was largely friendly, but was punctuated with skeptical questions from Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, who is running for the Democratic presidential nomination.“It’s no secret that during your time at Duke, you received significant compensation” from the drug industry, Ms. Warren said. “It naturally raises questions about your relationships with the drug industry.”AdvertisementDr. Califf responded that the central repository of data for any given trial “is the really critical factor here. All of our contracts require that we have access to the database. Seventy percent of the studies we wanted to do we couldn’t because companies were unwilling to grant that right. We had to walk away.”AdvertisementHe said that Duke had “graciously agreed” to make public the contracts it had concluded with drug companies. “We publish the papers with input from the companies, but they have absolutely no right to change what we say,” he said, and added that he had donated his own consulting fees to nonprofits.Mr. Sanders reiterated that he would vote against Dr. Califf. Even so, Dr. Califf’s candidacy appeared to have broad support, and most observers expect him to be confirmed. A date for the confirmation vote has not been set.Dr. Califf has served as deputy commissioner of the F.D.A. since February. The previous head, Dr. Margaret Hamburg, stepped down in March. If confirmed, he will be steering a vast and powerful federal agency that regulates about a quarter of every dollar spent in the United States. It is at the center of some of the most difficult health policy questions facing the country. A crucial decision on how to regulate electronic cigarettes is expected this fall, and Congress is halfway through a substantial overhaul of the way the agency approves drugs and medical devices.For years, Dr. Califf ran the Duke Clinical Research Institute, a $200 million center that manages clinical trials in more than 65 countries involving more than 1.2 million patients. The budget is 37 percent government grants and 63 percent from the private sector.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. Califf’s supporters say his experience in clinical science could be a major asset in his new post. His nomination is supported by medical organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network.Another prominent issue at the hearing was drug prices.“We can bring in fish products and vegetables from all over the world, but we can’t bring from across the Canadian border brand-name drugs?” Mr. Sanders said. “It is beyond my comprehension.”Drug prices tend to be lower in Canada. Dr. Califf responded that “we have the capacity,” but that it would add cost.But most senators praised Dr. Califf.“I’m very impressed with what you do,” said Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, who told Dr. Califf he was concerned that drug companies were not getting enough time with exclusive rights to the drugs they develop. “You’d add a great deal to the F.D.A.”AdvertisementThomas Marciniak, a former cardiovascular drug reviewer for the F.D.A., said he believed drug companies had too much discretion over what data they submit, a power that gives them what he said was inappropriate sway over the drug approval process.“The clinical trial system run by drug companies in this world is really broken,” said Mr. Marciniak, who left the agency last year. “I think Rob Califf is one of the architects of that. I think he should be held accountable, not appointed to run the F.D.A.”Dr. Robert Harrington, chair of the Department of Medicine at Stanford University, who used to work with Dr. Califf at Duke, had a different view.“He has been a leading voice in academic circles for strict contractual relationships that guarantee independent access to research data and the full, unfettered right to publish regardless of findings,” Dr. Harrington said.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Senate Panel Questions Nominee to Lead F.D.A.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.