The photographs are riveting: Scantily clad men with impossibly chiseled torsos, stomachs rippling, biceps bulging. Only upon second glance do you realize that something is different, that these are not your basic beefcake shots. Some of the men are missing an arm, or a hand, or a leg. Others have hooks or metal rods where their limbs should be.They are all part of the work of Michael Stokes, a fitness and portrait photographer in Los Angeles who has been shooting amputee soldiers for the last few years.In many ways, the project is a natural fit for Mr. Stokes. Although he was never in the military, his maternal grandfather served in World War II, and his father was in the Navy and given what he called a less than honorable discharge for being gay.“He was put in the brig in 1951,” said Mr. Stokes, 52, who himself is gay. His parents divorced when Mr. Stokes was 3; a neighbor who had been a Marine became like a surrogate father.In 2012, a Facebook follower of Mr. Stokes’s suggested he photograph a Marine named Alex Minsky, who lost his right leg in Afghanistan. Mr. Stokes agreed, but he wanted to proceed with sensitivity.“Before I photographed Alex, I looked up photographs of all the amputees I could find — they were all somber and the emphasis was on loss, and not on the new life,” said Mr. Stokes. “It was more dwelling in the past, in the tragedy.”Mr. Stokes decided to shoot Mr. Minsky the way he would any fitness model, with everything on display: The muscles. The tattoos. The stump.Since then, 13 amputees have agreed to be photographed, including one woman, Mary Dague, who lost both of her arms dismantling a bomb in Iraq. The process can be labor intensive; Mr. Stokes often spends months getting to know his subjects and helping them to feel comfortable with him and his project.He recently released “Always Loyal,” a book of photographs of wounded veterans. Between this and sales from two other books, he has raised $30,000 for the Semper Fi Fund.In some instances, “I worried that I was in over my head,” Mr. Stokes said. “Is it glossing over the tragedy of war? I’m celebrating the fact that they survived and rebuilt their lives, but please don’t misunderstand this as a glossover of the horrors of war.”He has also inadvertently launched modeling careers. In addition to Mr. Minsky, BT Urruela, an Army veteran, has appeared on the covers of romance novels. “They don’t know he’s an amputee,” Mr. Stokes said.Earl Granville, 32, who joined the Pennsylvania Army National Guard with his twin brother, Joe, in 2000, said that posing for Mr. Stokes “was stepping out of my comfort zone, but I had a blast doing it.” In 2008, Mr. Granville’s Humvee hit an I.E.D. in Afghanistan; he lost his left leg to the knee.“I don’t think anyone thinks they’ll leave severely disabled,” said Mr. Granville, who is studying counseling and human services at the University of Scranton, and is a motivational speaker. “People think they’ll come home in one piece or they won’t come home at all.” His brother, who also was in combat, committed suicide in 2010.“I take pride in my injury because it was a job I loved to do,” Mr. Granville said.After the Sept. 11 attacks, Bobby Henline, now 44 and a father of four children and one grandchild, re-enlisted in the army, where he had served from 1989 to 1992. He was on his fourth deployment in Iraq in 2007 when his vehicle hit a roadside bomb. He lost his left hand and over 38 percent of his body was burned. Four of his mates died. He has since had 47 operations.In the beginning, he said, “I prayed to God to take me.” It has taken three years to get used to his “disabling good looks,” as he likes to call them. “There are days it would be nice to go to a store and have no one bother me, but people will ask or assume I’m military and thank me for my service, which is nice.”As for his own future, he is open to whatever comes his way. “I love Michael’s photos — they show the beauty without the arm, the leg,” said Mr. Henline, who is a stand-up comedian and motivational speaker based in San Antonio. “This is who I am. I’m sure some people are weird about it, but I think the majority really get what he’s doing.”“I’d like to do more,” he said. “I want to act, I want to model, I want to be out there. I know I have the courage and strength to help other people. If I can say, ‘look at me,’ then it’ll make it easier for other people. The more we see in the media, the easier it’ll be.”
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.