AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonah Engel BromwichIf social media is any indication, many people are suddenly very concerned about dying from the bite of “kissing bugs.”Don’t be. The bugs are not any more likely to kill you than they have been for the last couple of centuries.Despite news reports this week advertising the sudden presence of the bugs in various Southern states, triatomines, as the insects are formally known, have lived in the United States since at least the 19th century. Dr. Susan Montgomery, the epidemiology team leader in the parasitic diseases branch at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said that a sighting of a specimen “would not be news.”Many of the more alarmist news reports, Dr. Montgomery said, are “referring to information that we have had on our website for five years now.”Triatomine bugs were first identified in the State of Georgia in 1855, she said. They are known to carry a parasite that can cause Chagas disease, which the bugs transmit through their feces. They do feed on blood, but there’s no kissing.People can live for years without knowing they have Chagas. About 30 percent of those infected will go on to develop serious heart disease.But federal authorities do not recognize the disease as being very prevalent. There have been only about 30 reported cases of people acquiring the disease in the United States since the 1950s, according to the C.D.C. Dr. Montgomery said that more studies needed to be done regarding the frequency of infection and methods of prevention.Recent news reports have called the C.D.C.’s position into question. A joint investigation by The Dallas Morning News and a Texas NBC affiliate said that Chagas was “spreading in Texas,” and that 12 to 15 patients had acquired the disease in the state.Melissa Garcia, a research associate at the Baylor College of Medicine specializing in tropical medicine, said that it was possible that the C.D.C. considers Chagas to be rare in the United States simply because there have been very few epidemiological studies looking for instances of the disease.“It’s likely that transmission is going on at a higher rate than has previously been discussed or known,” she said, though she confirmed that “it’s not incredibly easy to get infected.”Dr. Montgomery said that most of the cases to which the Texas investigation referred were included in the C.D.C.’s official estimate of 30 locally acquired cases since the 1950s.“For others there isn’t sufficient evidence from careful public health investigations to say confidently that those cases were autochthonous, or acquired in the United States,” she said.Triatomine bugs feed indiscriminately on animal blood, though the parasite that causes Chagas disease can affect only mammals. The insects are known to live in brush or in woodpiles near human homes, as well as under porches and concrete.The C.D.C. recommends that people not touch or squash triatomine bugs if they think they have encountered one, but to instead place a container on top of it and take it to a local expert for identification.Advertisement