A group called the Global Energy Balance Network, led by scientists and created by Coca-Cola, announced this week that it was shutting down after months of pressure from public health authorities who said that the group’s mission was to play down the link between soft drinks and obesity.Coke’s financial backing of the group, reported by The New York Times in August, prompted criticism that the company was trying to shape obesity research and stifle criticism of its products..Public health authorities complained that Coke, the world’s largest producer of sugary beverages, was adopting tactics once used by the tobacco industry, which for decades enlisted experts to raise doubts about the health hazards of smoking. Last month, the University of Colorado School of Medicine said it would return a $1 million grant that Coca-Cola had provided to help start the organization.Monday night, the Global Energy Balance Network removed all content from its website and posted a brief statement  saying it was discontinuing its operations “due to resource limitations.”The group’s president, James O. Hill, a prominent obesity researcher and professor at the University of Colorado, declined a request for comment.The University of South Carolina had also accepted $500,000 from Coke to help start the group. But a spokesman for the university, Wes Hickman, did not return phone calls or messages on Tuesday asking what the university planned to do with the money it had taken from Coke.Yoni Freedhoff, an obesity expert at the University of Ottawa who first raised questions about the group’s funding, said he believed the group was disbanding because it had lost its credibility.“I think ultimately the Global Energy Balance Network was a megaphone for Coca-Cola,” he said. “And now that Coca-Cola is no longer providing the funds to support that megaphone, it’s shutting down. I think that speaks to the purpose of the establishment of this group.”For months, the group denied that it was allowing Coke to influence its message or the work of its scientists.But the public health community responded sharply. In August, a letter written by the chairman of the nutrition department at Harvard’s school of public health and signed by 36 other scientists criticized Coca-Cola and the Global Energy Balance Network for spreading “scientific nonsense.”Other health groups that had accepted millions of dollars in funding from Coke, including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, announced a short time later that they were ending their relationships with Coke.In a statement issued in August, Dr. Hill acknowledged that Coca-Cola had provided the money to start the Global Energy Balance Network, but insisted that Coca-Cola had “no say in how these funds are spent” and that it “does not have any input into our organization.”But a series of emails obtained by The Associated Press and reported last week suggested that Dr. Hill had allowed Coke to help pick the group’s leaders, create its mission statement and design its website.In one exchange with Dr. Hill, Coke’s chief scientist, Rhona Applebaum, shared a proposal outlining the establishment of the group and its purpose. “Akin to a political campaign,” the proposal said, “we will develop, deploy and evolve a powerful and multi-faceted strategy to counter radical organizations and their proponents.”Dr. Hill also proposed doing a study that would help Coca-Cola focus the blame for obesity on a lack of exercise and urged the company to pay for it.“This would be a very large and expensive study, but could be a game changer,” he wrote to executives at the company. “We need this study to be done.”Last week, Coca-Cola announced that Dr. Applebaum was retiring and that the company would not be seeking a successor. The company said it was dispatching a top executive, Sandy Douglas, to meet with public health advocates around the country.In a statement, Coke’s chief executive, Muhtar Kent, said the company was working on becoming more transparent.“Our support for scientific research was based on the desire to identify a more holistic, workable approach based on the best evidence,” he said. “Clearly, we have more work to do to reflect the values of this great company in all that we do.”