Susan Gubar writes about life with ovarian cancer.A hostile letter from a reader made me stop and think about the torments of waiting that cancer patients endure:  waiting for a doctor, waiting for radiation, waiting for the delivery of chemotherapy drugs, waiting through interminable infusions or transfusions, waiting for a scan or a biopsy, waiting for the results of a scan or a biopsy, waiting (sometimes starved and unclothed on a gurney in a hall) for surgery.  The email arrived the day after an essay I had written on cancer language appeared online. Without a salutation, it began, “I hate what I’ve read by you. Simple as that. Your style is dark and nasty.” Let’s just say that it did not get any better after that.  But toward the end my correspondent stated, “last week I needed to have a thoracentesis for a large pleural effusion” after a seven hour wait in an emergency room. “That’s a serious systemic issue,” she emphasized, especially for someone with metastatic disease and a shut-down lung who is forced “to sit five hours, then lie on a stretcher for two more and finally be transferred to a real bed at 4 a.m.”  From this account, which triggered memories of my own experiences in the ER, I could interpret her fury at me as anger deflected from its primary source: distress at her condition and at having had to wait so long under such frightful circumstances.Hurrying up to wait is, of course, the fate of most patients, whether or not they have cancer and no matter how impatient they may be.  But for cancer patients, waiting entails being enveloped in heightened fears about harmful protocols and the difficulty of eradicating or containing the disease. While I’m waiting, who knows what appalling cells are conspiring within my body to destroy my being?Back in a historical period before anesthetics and antisepsis, the novelist Fanny Burney anticipated a mastectomy with trepidation and decried “the arrogance of physicians” who dictated the timing of the event at their convenience and thereby instigated the “dreadful interval” of “never-ending” hours of waiting until she became “stupid-torpid, without sentiment or consciousness.”These days waiting for cancer patients frequently occurs in alienating environments. In “My One-Night Stand With Cancer,” Tania Katan waits in a medical waiting area that looks “like Queer Eye for the Sick Guy showed up and said, ‘We’re thinking sick plus waiting equals . . . . brown!’”  In a cartoon of a single piece of a jigsaw in the graphic memoir “Mom’s Cancer,” Brian Fies wonders why jigsaw puzzles appear in cancer waiting rooms: “I think it’s because you’re here SO OFTEN, sometimes daily, you can place eight or nine pieces, come back tomorrow, and find the same puzzle waiting, a bit more complete.”       Mr. Fies, whose mother underwent treatments for lung cancer, reminds us that caregivers may wait longer than patients but with similar degrees of trepidation. During endless hours in hospital waiting areas, I have watched patients and caregivers trying to pass time by puzzling, reading, playing electronic games, doodling, texting, phoning, chatting, knitting, watching TV and snacking. That we who mourn time curtailed by disease must kill time to gain more time turns the waiting area into a place like purgatory.Since limbo-land hardly constitutes a congenial place, especially for people physically depleted, it can spawn irritation bordering on the sort of outrage expressed by my correspondent. So I responded with apologies for upsetting her and encouraged her to follow her inclination to express her views in a protest letter to the editors.  Yet I remain indebted to this reader because she motivated me to return to the most incisive poem I know about waiting. In Elizabeth Bishop’s “In the Waiting Room,” the poet reflects on herself as a child, waiting in a reception area while her “foolish aunt” was seeing a dentist.As almost 7-year-old Elizabeth waits, studying images of mutilation and death in a National Geographic, she experiences a weird collapsing of her identity when the startling sound of her aunt’s “oh! of pain” seems to come out of her own mouth. All of a sudden the girl senses the unlikely collectivity of herself, her aunt and the grotesque images in the magazine. “Why should I be my aunt, / or me or anyone?” she wonders.  And then “What similarities,” she asks, “held us all together / or made us all just one?”The difficult lesson Elizabeth learns in the waiting room is our common vulnerability to pain and suffering, which patients and caregivers often intuit while we watch the comings and goings of the more debilitated inhabitants of limbo-land. Just as the child thinks “I was my foolish aunt,” we often shudder at our unlikely likeness to others, especially when they bear various impairments.  That bundle of skin and bones barely able to breathe on his own, the one parked in a wheelchair, wearing a mask, folded inside himself:  Is he a figure of my future?  At my darkest and nastiest, I want to jump out of my skin while I panic at being in his.   Elizabeth Bishop clarifies the famous words of her blind predecessor John Milton: “They also serve who only stand and wait.” For she reminds us that this sentence is spoken not by a human voice but by an abstract personification of Patience that understandably eludes us.Susan Gubar is a distinguished emerita professor of English at Indiana University and the author of “Memoir of a Debulked Woman,” which explores her experience with ovarian cancer. 

Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.