Solve a medical mystery with Dr. Lisa Sanders.On Thursday we challenged Well readers to solve the real-life case of a 28-year-old woman who had a long history of abdominal pain and constipation who suddenly started seizing and having hallucinations. It was a pretty classic presentation of a rare disease, and lots of you figured it out. The correct diagnosis is…Acute intermittent porphyriaThe first right answer came just nine minutes after the case was posted. Karun Kiani of Boston recognized the disease because he had read up on it after learning that a friend had it. Mr. Kiani is a researcher but hopes to be a doctor some day. He is applying to med school with the hopes of attending next fall. The Diagnosis:The porphyrias are a group of rare inherited diseases caused by a variety of abnormalities that interrupt the process of putting together the building blocks of heme, part of red blood cells (heme is a critical component of hemoglobin) and other essential body chemicals. Where the defect occurs in the construction of these building blocks, known as porphyrins, determines which type of disorder patients develop. Heme is built in a series of steps. When one of the steps is disrupted, the process cannot move forward and all the precursor porphyrins that would have been turned into heme begin to accumulate, the way raw and partially processed materials build up when a commercial manufacturing plant breaks down. Some of these precursors are toxic to nerve tissue and so cause pain and other symptoms. Acute intermittent porphyria is one of the most common of the porphyrias — and one of the most dramatic. It is usually characterized by diffuse abdominal pain, severe constipation, hypertension, muscle weakness and, rarely, psychiatric symptoms such as confusion and hallucinations. Attacks can be severe, occasionally even fatal. Acute intermittent porphyria is, as suggested by the name, an intermittent disorder. Attacks can be caused by certain foods or medications. The thinking is that these substances require the body to use some heme-containing chemical in order for them to be used or disposed of. Stress can be a trigger; so can fasting. Somehow these states also increase the need for heme-containing chemicals. Most of these diseases are inherited from a parent.  A child who gets the defective gene, the gene that causes the disorder, still has a normal gene, inherited from the other parent, so has the ability to make some heme. It’s only when the system is stressed by increased demand that symptoms begin.Strangely, not everyone who gets the defective gene develops the disease. Why that occurs is not well understood. But even without symptoms, anyone who has the inherited gene has a 50:50 chance of passing it on to his or her children, who then may have symptoms. Because the symptoms associated with A.I.P. are vague and can have many causes, and because the disease is rare, it often takes a long time for patients to be correctly diagnosed.How the Diagnosis Was Made: Dr. Stephen Holt had met the patient at the end of her previous hospitalization. At that time she was alert, funny and thoughtful. She’d come in then with very high blood pressure, abdominal pain and swelling in the back of her brain that caused her to have seizures and hallucinations. By the time Dr. Holt met her, the patient’s blood pressure had been brought down to normal with medications and her seizure controlled with a medication called Dilantin. So, while she still had occasional visual hallucinations, she was no longer confused and felt pretty good.Now she was back after only six days at home. And she looked awful. She had come in this time after a seizure, but she was complaining of abdominal pain, weakness and confusion. Lab tests revealed that some of her blood chemicals were at dangerously low levels. She had been stabilized in the ICU, but now she was on the hospital floor, and once again the cause of her symptoms was a mystery. Dr. Holt was determined that it shouldn’t stay that way. A Careful Review:After seeing the patient the morning she was transferred out of the ICU onto his team, Dr. Holt saw the rest of his patients and then returned to his office to try to figure out what his newest patient might have.The first thing he did was review her chart very carefully. He made a list of symptoms she had come in with over the past two years: abdominal pain, severe constipation, high blood pressure, seizures, confusion, hallucinations. In another note he read that she had been incontinent – and unaware of it. And on his exam she had profound muscle weakness. Although she had had the abdominal pain and constipation for at least a couple of years, the other symptoms, the ones that brought her to the hospital, seemed to start a few weeks after she started taking a new medicine called Harvoni to treat her hepatitis C. Could this be a side effect of that medication? Dr. Holt read everything he could get his hands on that listed the side effects of the medication. None of the side effects really lined up with what this young woman had. So what could it be? Suddenly, it was as if a bell went off. Could she have a porphyria? He quickly looked up the disease on the online notebook he kept of interesting diseases. He read what he had written for the porphyrias. Her symptoms matched those seen with acute intermittent porphyria. He was pretty sure that’s what she had. Treatment for porphyrias requires the infusion of a synthetic form of heme called Hematin. But first Dr. Holt had to make certain that was what she had. He ordered the test for A.I.P. The test looked for the presence of a compound called porphobilinogen, a heme precursor, in her urine. He then hurried to the patient’s room. I think I may have an answer for you, he told the patient and her mother. We’ll know more tomorrow.
Confirming the Diagnosis:
The test result came back the next day. She had acute intermittent porphyria. She was given infusions of hematin daily for two weeks and, slowly, began to recover. Was it the Harvoni? Dr. Holt thought it might be possible, but the medication was not one of the known triggers of the disease. On the other hand, it was a new medication. However, the Dilantin she had been started on when she came in two weeks earlier with seizures was a known trigger for porphyria. She hadn’t been getting the Dilantin since coming to the hospital because the level of the drug in her system was too high on admission.How the Patient Fared:By the time the patient left the hospital, a month later, she could use her arms. But it was months before she could walk. Even now, nearly a year after her diagnosis, she has trouble with stairs. A.I.P. is an inherited disease. The patient was adopted by her mother as an infant. She doesn’t know her biological parents, but one thing she does know is that at least one of them has this terrible disease, whether they know it or not. She and her adopted mother are reaching out to the agency that arranged the adoption to see if her biological parents can be found. Perhaps they already know the name of the disease that tormented her; maybe one of them had been diagnosed with it. But she wants to make sure. She can’t bear to take the chance that one of her parents is suffering, without a diagnosis, as she was.
