Reader Question • 1354 votesPolishing teeth may make them feel smooth and gleam, but the procedure isn’t necessary. “There is no health benefit to polishing,” said Julie Frantsve-Hawley, the editor of The International Journal of Evidence-Based Practice for the Dental Hygienist. “It’s not going to impact tooth decay, gum disease or oral cancer.”In its latest position paper, the American Dental Hygienists’ Association advises that polishing should not be considered a routine part of a dental cleaning. So feel free to skip it.Polishing with a gritty paste can remove stains on a tooth's surface. But to get rid of stains, hygienists should also be scaling, said Marcia Lorentzen, the dean of the Fones School of Dental Hygiene at the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut. Most of us are familiar with scaling, which typically involves removing tartar and plaque off the teeth with a metal hooklike instrument.It used to be standard for all teeth to be polished until research showed that doing so removed enamel. Then in the 1970s, an influential textbook, “Clinical Practice of the Dental Hygienist,” by Dr. Esther Wilkins, recommended “selective polishing” - meaning the hygienist should only shine stained parts of the teeth and not the whole set.As to whether enamel will be worn down, Dr. Frantsve-Hawley, a registered dental hygienist who has a Ph.D in biological and biomedical sciences, said twice-a-year polishing at the dentist’s office, even with the coarsest paste, is “not frequent enough to cause significant damage to the enamel.”Dr. Lorentzen agreed, saying, “Polishing is not a significant risk.” By contrast, not using a soft toothbrush or brushing too hard daily can damage the softer structures of the teeth, including the cementum, the surface layer of the tooth root.Patients who remained concerned about enamel damage but want polishing can request the dental hygienist use a finer-grained paste.Do you have a health question?
		 Submit your question to Ask Well.
Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.