AdvertisementSupported by Christine HauserThe number of cases of dengue fever in Hawaii has risen to 139, prompting health authorities this week to warn residents and travelers to the popular winter vacation destination to take precautions to avoid contracting the virus.The Department of Health said in its latest statement on the outbreak that 122 residents and 17 visitors on Hawaii Island, the largest of the state’s eight main islands, have been confirmed to have dengue fever.The first cases in the current outbreak were traced back to September, and over time they developed into what is now being treated as a cluster of 108 adults and 31 children. The cluster has now grown to rival the last major dengue outbreak, which took place in 2001 and lasted about 10 months with 92 cases on Maui, 26 on Oahu and four on Kauai.The outbreak is taking place at the start of the island’s peak tourism season, which usually begins around mid-December and lasts until March or mid-April. The Hawaii Tourism Authority published an alert last month instructing tourists to take precautions against the illness.The virus, spread by a bite from infected mosquitoes, is uncommon on the island of Hawaii. County health officials said that it was probably introduced to the island by a person who contracted it in another part of the world, became infectious while in Hawaii and was bitten by there by a mosquito, which spread the fever.Authorities are now trying to curb the spread by spraying mosquito-infested areas and advising people to wear protective clothing and repellent.The virus can cause fever, headaches and pain in the eyes, joints and muscles. It is spread by mosquitoes that bite during the daytime, and is usually found in tropical areas of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and the South Pacific, but is relatively rare in the United States.It is not immediately clear why the current cluster of cases developed at this time and to this extent on the Big Island. Early cases were traced to a popular camping site in South Kona.Dr. Lyle Petersen, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention division that covers diseases spread by mosquitoes, said one factor in the outbreak could be that the Kona coastal area had a heavier than normal rainy season because of El Niño.“But that is total speculation,” he said in a telephone interview on Monday. “Nobody can tell you that is the cause.”Dr. Petersen, who just returned from an assignment in Hawaii as part of a C.D.C. team studying the outbreak, said the measures needed to control its spread are challenging.One of the species suspected of spreading the virus, the Asian Tiger mosquito, breeds in a wide range of sites, making it impossible to eradicate. In addition, the species is active during the day, but air currents are not optimal for aerial spraying during daylight hours, on top of the danger that poses of exposing people to the pesticides.Dr. Petersen said he had no solid estimates about how long the current outbreak would last.Advertisement