AdvertisementSupported by The New Old AgeBy Paula SpanHer supervisors empathized. They knew why Marcy Sherman-Lewis, a customer service agent, was missing workdays: Both her parents, who lived an hour away, had Alzheimer’s disease.“My mother had doctors’ appointments; my father had doctors’ appointments,” said Ms. Sherman-Lewis, an only child. “I was constantly running up and down the highway.”Once she had used up her vacation, sick days and personal days, though, her bosses balked at giving her additional time away from the job. “I knew they wanted me at the office more,” Ms. Sherman-Lewis said. “They asked, ‘What’s your plan? What are you going to do? Put them in a nursing home?’”Her plan: She resigned in 2007 so that she and her husband, a retired engineer, could move from Overland Park, Kan., to her parents’ city, St. Joseph, Mo. “I was sure I could find work, and I did,” she said. “It worked out perfectly, at first.”But Alzheimer’s goes only one way. Ms. Sherman-Lewis got calls at the office. Her parents mixed up their medications. Her father was growing incontinent. Her mother, reaching over the stove, set her arm on fire.She was not badly burned, “but it put the fear of God in me,” Ms. Sherman-Lewis said. She left the work force again in 2009, possibly for good. Although her parents have since died, her 77-year-old husband received an Alzheimer’s diagnosis a year ago and requires her full-time attention.Just 60, Ms. Sherman-Lewis doesn’t regret her decisions, but she wonders if she’ll ever work again. Paid family leave, now mandated in three states and likely to come before several state legislatures next year, might have extended her career.We often hear family leave called “maternity leave.” But an estimated 34 million Americans cared for someone over age 50 in the past year, and the majority were employed, according to the latest caregiving study by AARP and the National Alliance for Caregiving.These workers face a particularly difficult juggling act. Child care, for those fortunate enough to have healthy kids, becomes reasonably predictable over time, aside from the inevitable ear infections and transient illnesses.Elder care, however, takes life-altering turns without warning: the crippling fall, the massive stroke. An older person’s need for assistance generally rises; given increased life spans, some workers will care for their parents longer and more intensively than they did their children.Moreover, “the emotional toll is different,” said Kenneth Matos, senior research director at the Families and Work Institute.“Someone raising a child is headed for happier events” and greater independence. “Someone caring for an elder is headed for sadder experiences.”The federal Family and Medical Leave Act helps some working caregivers — it protects their jobs, for one thing — but the law has significant limitations. It covers only about 60 percent of the working population (exempting employers with fewer than 50 employees) and only those caring for a spouse, parent or child — not in-laws or grandparents. And of course, it’s unpaid.So a few states that already provide temporary disability insurance for workers have begun adding benefits for those who need time off for family caregiving. California went first in 2004, followed by New Jersey in 2009 and Rhode Island last year.The lengths of leave and levels of income replacement vary, but all three states cover caregiving for both babies and older family members. The laws in California and Rhode Island — and, pending legislation, in New York State — define “family” fairly broadly, including siblings, in-laws and grandparents. New Jersey applies a narrower definition.In New York, the bill that passed the State Assembly in March calls for up to 12 weeks of paid leave each year for full- or part-time workers (in workplaces of any size) to care for a newborn or newly adopted child or a family member with a “serious health condition.” While on leave, workers would receive two-thirds of their average weekly wage, up to half the statewide average, which last year was $1,266. Small paycheck deductions — less than $1 a week — would fund the new benefit.The bill faces a tougher time in the Republican-controlled State Senate, and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo hasn’t committed to signing it. Medical organizations, family advocates, unions, and advocacy groups for women and older adults are pushing for passage.Business organizations have raised objections, although a 2011 study of the law in California, which provides up to six weeks’ leave, found minimal effect on employers.But because the New York bill requires no budget appropriation, people like Nancy Rankin, the vice president for policy research at the nonprofit Community Service Society, feel optimistic. Since state law already mandates disability insurance, “employers are used to it, and we have the administrative foundation,” she said.Other states, including Connecticut, are likely to consider similar legislation next year, along with Washington, D.C., Ms. Rankin said. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, and Representative Rosa DeLauro, Democrat of Connecticut, have introduced a federal paid leave bill, the Family Act.We know that employees with caregiving responsibilities struggle to hold onto their jobs. Among workers providing care for adults over age 50, half reported getting to work late, leaving early or taking time off, AARP and the National Alliance for Caregiving reported.Fourteen percent took formal leaves of absence; 13 percent reduced their hours or found less demanding jobs. Four percent retired earlier than planned, and 6 percent gave up work entirely.The financial consequences — the loss of current and future income — can prove especially troubling for women, who earn less on average to begin with and are more likely to become caregivers. To support herself, “I used all my retirement savings in my 50s,” Ms. Sherman-Lewis said. After years of unemployment, she also faces reduced Social Security benefits.Paid leave will not solve every caregiver’s dilemmas, of course. It may work best during those months and years when workers are helping parents recover from hip replacements, ferrying them to appointments, or pitching in with shopping and cooking.Maryann Manelski’s father, on the other hand, grew increasingly disabled by Parkinson’s disease. “He needed pills multiple times a day,” said Ms. Manelski, 47, a New York filmmaker. “He needed his sheets changed every day. And it went on for years.” She supports the proposed New York law, but 12 weeks of annual paid leave wouldn’t have salvaged all the years she spent caring for him. But it might have kept her working longer.Family members might combine their leaves, suggested Shelley Webb, 60, who left a nursing job in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, when her father developed dementia. “If you had a few siblings and each of them could take three months, you could care for a person with dementia,” she said.Marcy Sherman-Lewis had no such options when it came to her parents. No leave, no siblings. “It was me or no one,” she said. “It was me or they overdosed or set the house on fire.”So she did what she thought necessary, and as a result, “I may have to end up working as a Walmart greeter when I’m 80,” she said.She was only partly joking.OpinionBryce CovertAdvertisement