I set my personal record of 22:12 for a 5K when I was 25, in the first race I ever ran. I went through 12 weeks of training to prepare for it because a magazine I was writing for had asked me to run, and then write about, the experience. This was in 2006, at the lip of the second running boom. The previous year, 9.44 million people had completed road races in the United States, according to Running USA. By 2014, the number of finishers hit 18.75 million.When I ran that 5K, I had no idea if my time was any good. I also had no idea whether I’d stick with the sport. I did, and that number – 22:12 – stayed as a fixture in my rear view mirror over the next nine-and-a-half years.I moved up to 10 milers and half marathons, then marathons. Because I was training for longer distances and did speed work for those races, I figured my 5K  record was untouchable. Workouts designed to make me faster in the marathon focused on building speed over distance instead of in shorter bursts, which is what a 5K needs. As I crossed into my mid 30s, and my weight slid up the scale, I stopped trying to come close to that mark. Why bother? We get slower as we age, right?Then early this summer, I set out to lose 10 pounds, and wound up dropping 25. My times sped up, but even after I crushed my time goal in a one-mile road race, I didn’t think of trying for the 5K P.R., especially after I fell in the Sloppy Cuckoo Quarter Marathon on Oct. 11 and bashed up my knee. I pulled back on training runs, abandoned the track and took to the elliptical until most of the swelling went down — hardly a scenario for breaking a nine-and-a-half year old best time.  Then on Oct. 24, wearing long tights so my still-swollen knee had some support, I did my running club’s 5K in 22:36. I had no idea how close I’d come to my P.R. until I saw the results that afternoon. I nearly P.R.’ed in the 10K the next weekend, and then on Nov. 14, I negative split a half marathon by 10 minutes, even though my longest training run of the fall was eight miles. I had one race — a 5K on the Saturday after Thanksgiving — left on my schedule for the fall. Why not try? I thought. What have I got to lose? And even after hosting Thanksgiving and eating Thanksgiving like, well, someone not on a diet, why not try?From the first quarter mile, I knew why not: because running a 5K all out is torture. The race doesn’t carry the short but brief pain of a sprint, but it also isn’t long enough of a distance to spool out a hard but slower effort. I tracked close to my coach, who ran the race to pace me, through one turn, two turns, the one mile marker and then the two mile mark. I almost broke down after going up one hill, but charged through the second hill with him telling me to use my arms to help me get to the summit. Even after that second mile, when I wanted to stop and walk the rest of the way in, he told me that I still had a shot at a P.R. I kept those words in my mind as my chest burned, and my brain kept signaling me that something was wrong. We made the last turn of the race, and when I didn’t think I had anything left, I told myself that the pain was temporary, the race almost over, and that I might have 22:12 in sight.When I got within the last quarter mile and saw the finish line clock, though, on the last sprint to the finish, I knew I’d miss it. When the time flipped to 22:13 as I was still racing for the finish line, I let out a small cry. I crossed in 22:25, 13 seconds off my goal.I walked through the crowd at the finish, legs still twitching, and lungs begging for more air, disappointed. I hadn’t done it. I had missed my goal.But then, as I sucked down water and my coach told me that he was proud of me for giving it my all, I tried to think about the bigger picture — one beyond 22:12. Despite the holiday, I had run as hard as I possibly could, instead of taking it easy or staying home that day. Because of that effort, I ran 11 seconds faster than in my last 5K. I beat my best fall 2014 5K time by almost three minutes, and I crushed my time from when I ran the same race last year. Even though I didn’t break 22:12, I’d come a long way over the last year, and I brushed at its coattails despite not being 25 years old anymore, nor training 12 weeks exclusively for that race. Before the race, I told myself that if I’d set a new P.R., I would celebrate with a beer. I came up 13 seconds short, but I still grabbed one anyway, and drank it while watching my town’s holiday parade. Breaking 22:12 would have been nice — and maybe I’ll do it next year — but for me, right now, getting that close is its own victory. Jen A. Miller is the  author of “Running: A Love Story,” which will be published in March. For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.