Jane Brody on health and aging.Put eyeglasses on children who can’t see clearly and you can turn their lives around. That is the aim of a terrific program called ChildSight, run by Helen Keller International, which each year screens up to 100,000 middle school and high school children in poor communities throughout the country and provides glasses to those who need them.In New York City, the program has been expanded to serve older students in G.E.D. programs, to public schools with a high percentage of recent immigrants, and to teenagers living in homeless shelters, where the unmet need for vision services has been found to be particularly acute.Through a longstanding partnership with The Children’s Aid Society in New York, Helen Keller International last year screened and treated more than 6,000 students in 16 low-income public schools. Noting that between 25 percent and 30 percent of students fail routine vision screening, the city recently committed $10 million over four years to fund vision screening in 130 additional community schools, with an estimated 20,000 glasses to be provided free by the eyewear company Warby Parker.In addition to New York State, ChildSight now serves high-poverty communities in California, Connecticut, New Jersey and Ohio and in thousands of communities in Asian countries, where nearsightedness is an especially prevalent problem.The organization’s goal is to maximize children’s ability to “take full advantage of their educational opportunities,” said Nick Kourgialis, who heads the Helen Keller program globally. “It’s an easy problem to correct that can enable children to succeed academically.”Children with uncorrected vision problems often struggle in school. Those with the common refractive error called myopia, or nearsightedness, may not see what teachers write on the blackboard. Some children are unable to track words on a page, which makes reading an arduous, and sometimes impossible, task. Too often, despite average intelligence, such children become academic failures or school dropouts or are incorrectly deemed learning disabled and assigned to special education classes.Behavior problems are also common among children with vision problems, who may be mislabeled as having attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and mistreated with stimulants. In one study of 81 elementary, middle school and high school students considered “at risk” because of behavior problems, 97 percent failed at least one test of the New York State Optometric Association Vision Screening Battery.You may wonder how children can reach middle school or even high school and not know that their vision is compromised. But, as Mr. Kourgialis put it, “If a child has always seen the world as fuzzy, he may not know that he has a problem and that others don’t see it the same way.”For example, when Christian Merchan was a fourth grader in Queens, said he “found life really challenging” before the school-based ChildSight program revealed a severe myopia and gave him corrective lenses, which his family could not otherwise afford. Christian’s teachers had told his mother that he failed to complete homework assignments. His mother then realized that he couldn’t see the board well enough to copy them all down. But with glasses and annual vision screenings to update his prescription, he is now an honor student attending Cathedral Prep High School on a scholarship and exploring his prospects for a scholarship to college.One in five children who need glasses can’t afford them “and face each day without clear vision,” the organization reports. Even among those who get corrective lenses, about half the time the prescription is outdated and no longer very effective. As children progress in school, the demands on their visual abilities only increase.Although rigorous scientific data on the program’s effectiveness is lacking, Mr. Kourgialis said that teachers see “a very positive” effect. They report that children whose vision has been corrected with glasses “are better engaged, participate more in class and complete their assignments,” he said.A randomized controlled trial conducted in China among 3,177 fourth and fifth grade children with uncorrected myopia found that providing them with free glasses had a greater positive effect on math test scores than parental education or family wealth. And those who received the glasses scored higher than those who did not.In this country, nearly 12 percent of people age 12 and older have an inadequately corrected refractive error, with the problem most common among Mexican Americans, non-Hispanic blacks and young people 12 to 19.While all children should have vision tests early in their school careers, there is no standardized follow-up to assure that those who need corrective lenses get them or have them updated as their visual acuity changes with age. Impediments among children living in poor communities include insufficient family finances and a lack of access to the needed professional services, especially in rural areas, Mr. Kourgialis said.Even if families can afford an initial pair of glasses, if they are lost or broken — a common problem — the cost of replacing them can be prohibitive. The ChildSight program provides free replacements, much to the relief of Christian, who accidentally broke his current pair last month.To be sure, children in middle and high school, an age when self-consciousness soars, are not always thrilled to learn that they need glasses. But it helps when many of their classmates do, too, and when glasses enable them to participate in sports.To ensure that children get the glasses they need and wear them, the organization provides all the services within their schools and offers a variety of stylish frames.The initial screening is done by trained personnel who have every child in the school read the ever-smaller lines on a Snellen chart, one eye at a time, from a distance of 20 feet. Those with difficulty seeing below the 20-40 line on the chart are examined by an optometrist, who provides a corrective prescription that is sent to an optical lab along with the selected frames. When the glasses are ready, they are delivered to the children at school.While the primary task of ChildSight is to screen children for refractive vision problems revealed by reading the Snellen chart, other vision problems are sometimes also detected and the children referred to professionals for additional free or low-cost care.Parents should not assume that a child who passes a screening exam in school has no vision problems. Among signs that a further check is needed are frequent eye rubbing or blinking, avoidance of reading and other close activities, holding reading material close to the face, sitting close to the television, losing his or her place when reading, difficulty remembering what is read, frequent headaches and a short attention span.Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on 12/15/2015, on page D9 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Windows Onto a Better Future.