
Global Health By                     
 DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.
 
DEC. 14, 2015
Two countries that are models of effective public health intervention, China and Cuba, have recently embarked on important policy changes, leaving some experts wondering whether citizens will be left worse off.In September, Cuba and the Obama administration began moving closer to normalized relations, which may expose Cuba’s vaunted medical system to powerful new market pressures. In October, China renounced its one-child policy, under which most families were forbidden to have more than a single child.Both countries enshrine health care as a fundamental right.Cuba is a well-known anomaly: so poor that it is barely able to feed its people, yet able to equal or beat the United States in two important health indicators — life expectancy and child mortality.The nation has 30,000 family doctors and 500 local clinics, and every Cuban sees a doctor at least once a year. Former Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, a doctor, visited last year and praised aspects of Cuba’s primary care system, saying it “harkens back to the days of family physicians making house calls armed only with their deep personal patient knowledge and their stethoscope.”AdvertisementIn the last decade, Cuba has sent thousands of doctors on overseas aid missions. They have treated 3.5 million patients. During last year’s Ebola outbreak in West Africa, one American-built hospital was staffed by Cubans.AdvertisementChina, too, has made enormous strides. As the nation turned itself into the world’s factory town, the megacities intended to house millions of workers were built with water and sewer pipes, screened windows, air-conditioning and nearby hospitals — amenities mostly missing in the farm villages the workers came from.Clean water reduces deaths from cholera, dysentery and a dozen other intestinal pathogens. Stopping mosquitoes and flies reduces deaths and disability from malaria, yellow fever, trachoma, leishmaniasis and more.Whenever epidemiologists talk about how much the world has improved in the last 20 years — millions fewer children dying, being stunted by worm disease or living without running water — they usually have to add: “Of course, most of that progress was in China.”Chinese researchers now routinely publish work in top medical journals. In 2003, China crushed its exploding SARS outbreak and in 2009 largely held off the swine flu pandemic while scientists brewed a vaccine.Yet public health interventions in both countries have often had a coercive edge.When Mao decreed a campaign to wipe out rural worm diseases, authorities mixed deworming drugs into salt. Health teams arrived in Chinese villages with soldiers and ordered families to bring their salt to the public square. It was washed away with fire hoses and replaced.To stem its SARS outbreak, China closed every school and most large venues in Beijing. To keep the swine flu at bay, it escorted all foreign visitors with fevers off planes into quarantine.Cuba relied on harsh methods, too, to suppress its AIDS epidemic — and with great success.Until 1993, H.I.V.-positive Cubans were forced to live in bungalow colonies. Even now, at mandatory annual checkups, patients find it hard to avoid tests for sexually transmitted diseases if the doctor thinks they are warranted.AdvertisementExperts are just beginning to debate the effects of changing policies on public health in these two countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.China has almost a fifth of the world’s population. The one-child policy, in place since 1980, has averted an estimated 400 million births.It also lowered child mortality. One infant doted on by parents and grandparents is far more likely to survive than one of five children — to be taken to a doctor for pneumonia, for instance.Even after ending the one-child policy, China is very likely to hold onto its gains in public health, said Dr. Christopher J.L. Murray, director of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington.China’s “blistering rate of decline” in child mortality resulted more from new wealth than from low birthrates, Dr. Murray said.Over the last 25 years, according to a study by the institute and China’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention, the gross domestic product went from $60 per capita to $6,800. Health improved most in the wealthiest cities, despite drawbacks like the air pollution that has plagued Beijing.Also, because of exceptions for ethnic groups and rural families, the real birthrate was never just one child per woman, but closer to 1.7. While there may be some pent-up demand for more children, fertility “is almost a one-way street,” Dr. Murray said. Once countries prosper, fallen birthrates rarely rise again.Cuba’s path is a little harder to predict.The island protects children so well that it could improve only in neonatal intensive care, Dr. Murray said. An end to the United States’ economic embargo could help Cuba’s hospitals receive the advanced equipment they desperately need, along with new drugs for cancer and other illnesses.Cuba also has medical products to sell, including meningitis vaccines, a drug for diabetic foot ulcers and a lung cancer treatment, said Gail Reed, the American founder of Medical Education Cooperation With Cuba and editor of a medical journal there.AdvertisementBut ending the embargo also poses serious risks.The primary care doctors Cuba’s system depends on are poorly paid, even though salaries tripled recently. Earlier this month, the Cuban government reinstated a requirement that doctors traveling outside the country receive a special permit. The nation has lost thousands of doctors since 2013, the government said.And prosperity itself brings risks. In Mexico, obesity, diabetes and heart disease soared as incomes rose; Cuba could face the same fate. The nation’s doctors do not manage blood pressure or cholesterol aggressively, and its cancer death rates are about equal to those in the United States.“Cuba’s whole system has historically focused on top-quality outcomes for kids and mothers,” Dr. Murray said. “There’s not much emphasis on managing chronic disease in adults.”A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Changes, Perhaps Not for the Better.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »