The patient I was caring for, a woman in her 40s with leukemia, had been admitted to the hospital for the second of four monthly courses of chemotherapy. She was sitting quietly in a chair by the window of her hospital room, dressed in her street clothes and flipping through some photos on her iPad. The cancer drugs dripped from a clear bag hanging on a nearby IV pole through clear plastic tubing into the catheter in her arm.As we started chatting, I focused on a brightly colored drawing on the wall facing her bed. “Wow, what’s this?” I asked. She got out of her chair and stood, joining me in front of the artwork.“My daughter made that,” she said, smiling. “She’s 12 years old. She thought my room needed some decorating.”The picture showed a blue sky with an impossibly yellow sun and billowy white clouds at the top, and a tall building with the words “Cleveland Clinic” emblazoned on it rising from the picture’s base. Row after row of meticulously drawn windows were depicted on the building’s facade, and from each window a smiling face looked out.“She’s a great artist!” I said. “I’m so impressed with all the details.”“My son helped. He’s 9,” she told me.“Let me guess. The cars and garage?” I asked, pointing to a second drawing that had been taped to the first.“Yes, of course,” she said, laughing. “You know, boys and their vehicles!” I laughed along with her.I have made it a habit to scan the walls of my patients’ rooms, to gain some insight into their lives outside of the surreal experience of their lengthy hospital stay. Many of those walls are covered with photo upon photo of family members. Some are formal and posed — at a daughter’s wedding or a 50th anniversary celebration. Others are casual, even goofy. A patient and his wife at a costume party, each wearing large glasses and ridiculous hats. Or with their children on a summer vacation at North Carolina’s Outer Banks, everyone tan and in shorts looking happy, a half-eaten dinner spread across the picnic table in front of them.Other walls have large posters signed by coworkers or entire football teams (when we have cared for coaches) or classrooms of students when their teachers have been hospitalized with “Get Well Soon!” or “Kick Leukemia’s Butt!” splayed in oversize, block letters across their glossy surfaces.Religion features prominently in some displays, with crosses taped to the wall along with quotes from the Bible. So do super heroes. I recently cared for a woman whose hospital door was covered by black construction paper festooned with large stickers of Batman, Hulk, Ironman, Thor, Spiderman, and even Michelangelo, the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle. Cut-out letters in blue and orange declared “I’m beating leukemia! What’s your superpower?” I thought it fitting that, as I was admiring her door, another patient passed by it, holding onto his IV pole and sporting a Captain America T-shirt.I admire the creativity, the support, the love that I see on the walls of these rooms. I get to appreciate my patients from the time before they were sick and I can also see what they are trying to return to. I also breathe a sigh of relief that, when these patients are discharged from the hospital, they will be cared for.The displays increase manifold with approaching holidays, as families experience the loss of their loved one’s presence so much more acutely, and home invades the hospital, trying to bring them back.I worry about the patients whose walls are bare, though. These are the people who may not have a ride to the outpatient appointments and treatments that are so necessary for their survival, and who won’t have a partner at home who can call the ambulance when they spike a fever. We spend extra time with them on discharge planning, involving our social work team, to help ensure they are as safe as possible when they leave.I gestured again to the drawing on my patient’s wall.“Which one of these smiling faces is you?” I asked.“I’m over here,” she said, pointing to the window at the uppermost right corner of the building. It was on the 11th floor, just like our leukemia unit. Instead of a face, it had a question mark inside. I looked at her quizzically. She smiled again.“My daughter didn’t want my face in it,” she said. “She wanted to show that I wasn’t going to be in the hospital forever. That I was always going to return home to her.”I nodded as we shared the silence for a few moments, both thinking about her family.“You will,” I said, softly.Dr. Mikkael Sekeres is director of the leukemia program at the Cleveland Clinic. Follow him on Twitter @MikkaelSekeres.For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.