Reader Question • 741 votesIt’s not really surprising that you got shingles after being vaccinated. No vaccine is 100 percent effective and while childhood vaccinations get close, the shingles vaccine only cuts the risk of shingles by half for people who receive it at age 60 or older. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a single dose for those 60 or older, though the vaccine is approved for use starting at age 50. Even though the vaccine is not always effective, it still protects a lot of people, since nearly one in three adults develops shingles during their lifetime. And if you do get shingles, you may have a milder episode because you were vaccinated. A large clinical trial found that the vaccine reduces the risk of having very severe, long-lasting pain, a syndrome called postherpetic neuralgia. “It’s these extreme, prolonged painful episodes that the vaccine works better at preventing,” said Dr. Rafael Harpaz, a medical epidemiologist in the division of viral diseases at the C.D.C. “What would motivate me to run out and get the vaccine,” he said, would be “to protect myself from being that rare person who gets 10 years of life-shattering pain.”In the trial, there were 642 shingles cases among the 19,247 participants who got the placebo or dummy shot, and 315 cases among the 19,254 participants who received the actual vaccine (called Zostavax) -- a reduction of 51 percent. Those who did develop shingles after being vaccinated were at nearly 40 percent lower risk for having severe pain that lasted more than 90 days.The vaccine may be most effective at younger ages. If you get it in your 60s, it reduces cases by nearly two thirds, or 64 percent; it reduces risk by 41 percent if you are in your 70s when vaccinated and by 18 percent if you are in your 80s.The dilemma is that the risk of getting shingles increases as you age and the vaccine’s effectiveness rate after five years is not well-known, Dr. Harpaz said.Do you have a health question?
		 Submit your question to Ask Well.
Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.