Personal technology for health and fitness.Just in time for holiday revelry, a range of new devices promises to turn a smartphone into a breathalyzer that can quickly gauge your level of sobriety.While nobody should operate a vehicle if they have consumed alcohol, the reality is that many people choose to drive after a few drinks because they don’t feel impaired and believe they have not reached the legal limit for blood alcohol concentration, or B.A.C., which is 0.08 in all states.The law enforcement standard for determining sobriety is the breathalyzer, which estimates B.A.C. indirectly by measuring the level of alcohol in the breath. Until a few years ago, no one outside of law enforcement or the medical field had affordable access to devices that could quickly estimate B.A.C. Now there are more than 100 consumer models available, and breathalyzer sales are a booming $816 million market in the United States, according to the market research firm Wintergreen.But is a portable smartphone breathalyzer accurate enough to guide an impaired driver? To find out, I compared some of the newest portable smartphone breathalyzers against the $890 Alco-Sensor IV unit used by the California Highway Patrol.In testing the devices, only one was spot on with the police-grade model, while one consistently overstated my level of inebriation. But it’s certainly better for a personal breathalyzer to err on the high side — a driver may otherwise see wiggle room and decide to drive anyway. Of greater concern is that one popular model failed miserably compared with the police standard.The larger lesson from the test is that several variables can affect your reading on a breathalyzer, including how long after a drink you take the test. And because your B.A.C. rises in the 30 to 90 minutes after a drink, a person could test sober at the bar and become legally drunk on a 45-minute drive home.To begin the test, Officer Sean Wilkenfeld of the California Highway Patrol set up a minibar on my dining room table, and we lined up four alcohol-sensing devices: the police-grade stand-alone Alco-Sensor IV, and three smartphone breathalyzers with attachable nozzles — the $100 BACtrack Mobile Pro, the $100 Alcohoot and the $80 Breathometer Breeze.All four of these devices work in a similar fashion. Blow into a strawlike nozzle attached to the device, and the ethanol content in your breath creates a chemical reaction, measured by the device and translated into a B.A.C. reading. The consumer models use a downloadable app that allows the user to enter sex, age and weight, which can influence B.A.C. readings. To take a reading, the devices advise waiting 15 to 20 minutes after your last drink. If you don’t, the alcohol vapor in your mouth can make the reading too high.I began the test by drinking a Bloody Mary. About 20 minutes afterward, none of the devices, including the law enforcement version, had registered any alcohol except for the Breeze, which displayed a 0.054 reading.I started to worry that the devices weren’t working, but Officer Wilkenfeld reminded me the highest B.A.C. occurs when the body has had more time to absorb the alcohol. To speed things up for our test, I made a stronger drink.Twenty minutes later, with five shots of vodka in my system, all four devices showed that I had indeed been drinking. Officer Wilkenfeld’s Alco-Sensor IV declared my B.A.C. an official 0.048, still under the limit, but close to the level many experts say is still too impaired to drive. Of the smartphone breathalyzers, the BACtrack Mobile came close with 0.047 and the Alcohoot declared my B.A.C. on the high side, at 0.055. And oddly, the reading on the Breeze had actually gone down, to 0.038.“You may experience reduced coordination and exaggerated behavior,” the Alcohoot app told me after the latest reading.After testing, each app offers a way to call a cab at the tap of a fingertip. One even shows you nearby hotels where you can sleep it off.Because I hadn’t reached the legal limit yet, we made another stiff drink. As we waited for another 20 minutes to pass, Officer Wilkenfeld walked me through the field sobriety test. I could balance on one leg, point my toe, and count. But I got a little confused following his somewhat complicated directions.“You’re starting to smell like a drunk,” Officer Wilkenfeld said as he leaned over to hold the Alco-Sensor IV nozzle to my lips.With three cocktails, some of them double or triple shots, in my system over two hours, I had now exceeded the legal limit with a 0.092 on the Alco-Sensor IV. The BACtrack Mobile checked in at 0.091, and the Alcohoot read 0.102. The Breathometer Breeze, inexplicably, had dropped to 0.The Breeze, which gained popularity after an appearance on the television show “Shark Tank,” simply didn’t seem to be detecting the alcohol. I had experienced fluctuations with the Breeze in the past. Last summer, during a similar round of testing, an error message on the Breeze asked if I’d let it “take a break.”I never got it to work again; the company sent a replacement unit in overnight mail. This new unit, however, wasn’t faring well, either.I was done drinking, but we waited another 15 minutes before taking my final readings: Alco-Sensor IV, 0.106; BACtrack Mobile, 0.102; Alcohoot, 0.204; and Breathometer Breeze, 0.000.“You can’t rely on a personal breathalyzer to tell you if you’re too drunk to drive,” Officer Wilkenfeld warned as he packed up to leave. “You shouldn’t drive if you’ve been drinking, period.”Related:
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on 12/22/2015, on page D4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Belly Up and Then Breathe.