By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.DEC. 21, 2015
Following up on a preliminary recommendation it made a year ago, the Food and Drug Administration said on Monday that the agency would scrap a decades-old lifetime prohibition on blood donation by gay and bisexual men.The agency continued to bar men who have had sex with men in the past year, however, saying the measure was needed to keep the blood supply safe.Gay rights groups considered the lifting of the lifetime ban a major stride toward ending a discriminatory national policy, but had wanted blanket bans for gay men to be removed entirely.Donations should be considered on an individual basis, critics said, as some gay men — like some heterosexual men and women — are at far higher risk of H.I.V. infection than others.AdvertisementGMHC, the advocacy group formerly known as Gay Men’s Health Crisis, harshly criticized the 12-month delay. Kelsey Louie, the group’s chief executive officer, said it “ignores the modern science of H.I.V.-testing technology while perpetuating the stereotype that all gay and bisexual men are inherently dangerous.”AdvertisementThe Food and Drug Administration enacted the lifetime ban in 1983, early in the AIDS epidemic. The virus that would become known as H.I.V. was discovered that year, and no way to test for it in donations existed.Now, however, tests can tell whether donated blood contains the virus in as little as nine days after the donor has been infected. The “window period” — during which a unit of donated blood might test negative but still infect the recipient — is the reason for continuing time-based bans on people who engage in various kinds of high-risk behavior.Both men and women have sex with strangers who might be infected, of course, but H.I.V. is much more common among gay men, so the perception that they have a higher inherent risk was used to justify the lifetime ban and now underlies the continuation of a 12-month deferral period.In a news conference on Monday, Dr. Peter W. Marks, the deputy director of the Food and Drug Administration’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, said the 12-month period was “supported by the best available research” and was similar to deferral periods imposed in Britain and Australia.It is based, he explained, both on how the disease circulates in this country and on how donors here are screened.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other countries try to assess donors’ risks individually, but their H.I.V. epidemics and blood-collecting practices differ in important ways from those in the United States.In South Africa, many heterosexuals are infected, so blood-collection agencies try to assess risks by asking, for example, how many sexual partners a potential donor has had. In Italy, screening is done by doctors trained to spot risky donors.In the United States, donors answer a list of routine questions posed by a computer or a “blood technician” who often has little training. But no screening method or more probing set of questions has been proved better at spotting higher-risk donors, Dr. Marks said.AdvertisementTwelve-month waiting periods are used in other instances. Anyone who has had a tattoo, a piercing or an accidental needle stick in a hospital, for example, must wait 12 months before donating blood. So must anyone successfully treated for syphilis or gonorrhea.The newest blood tests are “highly accurate but not perfect” because of the nine-day window, Dr. Marks said. “That is why the elimination of all deferrals is not feasible at this time.”Even with the newest tests and current policies, the risk of a patient receiving an infected unit of blood is now one in 1.5 million. The Food and Drug Administration calculates that dropping all time-related deferrals would quadruple that risk, Dr. Marks said, making it unacceptably high.The new guidelines recommend that the gender of donors “be taken to be self-identified and self-reported.” Some experts had raised the possibility that transgendered women would not be covered by a rule change specifically pertaining to men having sex with men.The new guidelines say any woman who has had sex with a man who has had sex with men should also wait 12 months after that encounter before donating blood.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: F.D.A. Ends Lifetime Ban on Blood Donations by Gay Men, but Caveat Draws Scorn .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.