Susan Gubar writes about life with ovarian cancer.At times, I was so encased in the stoicism needed to endure cancer treatments that I could not feel much of anything unless someone else felt sorry for me.Several years ago, debilitating infections threatened my life. Depleted by chemotherapy and a series of drains inserted into my body by interventional radiologists, I could barely creep from the hospital parking garage to post-surgical appointments. During the ordeal, I managed to put one foot in front of the other, but only by shutting down my emotions.On one trip, when it turned out I had to be hospitalized, a nurse practitioner patted my arm. “You’ve really been through it,” she said. Summoned by her words of commiseration, tears coursed down my cheeks. Curiously, they were a relief. I needed her sympathy to experience my own sadness.The oddity of my emotional dependency reminds me of the ending of a novella I have often taught: Tolstoy’s “The Death of Ivan Ilych.” After Ivan finally stops denying a mortal illness, he becomes so absorbed by his physical degeneration and pain that he feels encased inside a black bag.When his son arrives at his deathbed and begins to cry, Ivan falls through the bottom of the black sack, catching “sight of the light.” A compassionate witness — another suffering his suffering — delivers Ivan from confinement. The dying man perceives the anguish of his survivor and this interpersonal witnessing — the son grieving for his father, the father for his son — ruptures pain’s carapace.Pain threatened to engulf Christina Middlebrook during a harrowing bone marrow transplant that she recounts in her memoir, “Seeing the Crab.” Unable to swallow and vomiting blood, she could not think, remember, watch a video or do anything except hope for an empathetic companion to perceive her suffering.If such a person was absent, Ms. Middlebrook tried to disentangle her psyche from her body; somehow, she had to split herself off from the physical wreckage. Doused in doses of chemicals, platelets, diuretics, anti-nausea and sleeping and pain medications, she found herself “called back” from vacuity only by a caring spectator.Without those periodic witnesses “who knew who I was,” she explains, “I could not know myself.”When I was completely incapacitated, my most precious moments with my daughters and stepdaughters involved their sitting nearby, sometimes in silence, on one occasion reading aloud a children’s book, on another singing a song I used to sing to them.What of the parents who sing those special songs to babies and toddlers undergoing cancer treatments? These surely must be the most heroic caregivers: residing in hospital rooms, endlessly dispensing medicine, coping with nasogastric tubes and catheters and sleep deprivation while attempting to give their offspring a sense of a normal life and, at the same time, lamenting the afflictions of children too young to express their own lamentations.These days I know I am better off because when my husband is asleep, I can pop in a CD of Beethoven’s “Cavatina,” reread your comments on my essays and start bawling all on my own. Blowing my nose, I think that I cannot possibly deserve such thoughtful readers.Although cancer patients are repeatedly enjoined to gird their loins and fight the disease or to invest in the powers of now or in positive thinking, many realize that welling up can be cathartic. Quite a few cancer memoirists describe staging a pity party: a private event at which they listen to the music or look at the pictures or read the poems that will lead them to cry over their losses. Such scenarios should not be dismissed as excuses for self-indulgence; sometimes we need to serve as our own sympathetic companions.Weeping over cancer can provide an intermission from fighting it or, for that matter, raging at or fearing the disease. Call it wallowing, but I find myself tapping into sadness periodically, as if a deep reservoir of sorrow lies just below the seemingly calm surface of my existence.This gulf of grief has everything to do with what my friend Andrew H. Miller calls the “unled lives” or “the counter-factual histories” that disease generates. Cancer makes me ask: How would my life have evolved if I hadn’t gotten the disease? Worse, it makes me worry: Why didn’t I or my doctor detect it earlier and wouldn’t I be better off if we had? And shouldn’t I have taken the advice of my gynecologist 20 years ago about having a hysterectomy?The haunting person I might have become — the life I might have led — breeds regret until I wipe my eyes, turn off the record player and remind myself that I easily could have died several years ago during all those infections. Then, in this holiday season, I think of Scrooge visiting his own grave.While I enjoy sobbing through multiple adaptations of The Christmas Carol after Hanukkah this year, I will be blessing those who have saved me and many other patients from devolving into automata: all those compassionate witnesses, near and far, known and unknown, each and every one of you.Susan Gubar is a distinguished emerita professor of English at Indiana University and the author of “Memoir of a Debulked Woman,” which explores her experience with ovarian cancer. 
Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter. 