

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

DEC. 28, 2015

As the year ends, the Science desk at The New York Times asked its reporters to choose the stories that were the most memorable. These are the selections, with a focus on health and medicine news. Visit this link for an additional collection from reporters who write about other sciences.Months after Dr. Ian Crozier thought he was cured of Ebola, his doctors were horrified — and fascinated — to find that his left eye was teeming with the virus. It was a fierce, painful infection that blinded the eye for weeks and even changed its color from blue to green. But with careful treatment, Dr. Crozier’s sight, and his eye color, gradually returned.Dr. Crozier, who was infected while taking care of Ebola patients in Sierra Leone, called his eye trouble “an odd canary in this coal mine.” His case was an early warning that Ebola can lurk undetected in parts of a recovered patient’s  body. The disease infected more than 28,000 people, killing more than 11,000 of them, in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Lingering eye problems are not uncommon among survivors.In October, another survivor fell mysteriously ill again, nine months after her recovery. Pauline Cafferkey, a Scottish nurse also infected while volunteering in Sierra Leone, had a severe case of meningitis caused by the virus’s lingering in her nervous system. She again recovered.Certain parts of the body — the eye, the testes, the central nervous system — are “immune-privileged” sites, meaning they are off limits to the body’s natural defenses, the immune system. But if a virus like Ebola manages to invade those sites, immune privilege can backfire.Doctors have long known that Ebola could lurk in the testes, but until the recent epidemic, they did not realize how long it could hang on. A report published in October said that a male survivor in Liberia had infected a female sexual partner six months after his own illness. Another study published in October found that genetic material from the virus was still present in some men’s semen nine months after they were infected. The possibility of sexual transmission is suspected in a few recent cases that have popped up in West Africa after the epidemic was thought to have been over. There is still much to be learned about Ebola. – DENISE GRADYProgress was made against several epidemics this year, and an old public health lesson was reinforced: The world doesn’t necessarily have to wait for a new miracle drug or vaccine to beat back an outbreak. Officials just have to find the political will — and the money.The explosive Ebola epidemic in West Africa that claimed more than 11,000 lives in 2014 was slowly ground out by treatment in tent hospitals and by relentless tracing of the contacts of each confirmed case. Ebola vaccines, tested in Africa appeared promising, but by the time they became available, there were so few remaining cases that scientists could not do the large, definitive trial they had hoped for.Polio has probably been wiped out in Africa, where smallpox and rinderpest, the only two diseases eliminated from the planet, made their last stand. The last polio case on the continent was a Somali child paralyzed on Aug. 11, 2014. The only two countries that have not wiped out the virus are Pakistan and Afghanistan.And, although the crucial discoveries were made earlier, it was only in the last year that a new approach to fighting the AIDS epidemic in the United States began to take hold. More city and county health departments began making serious efforts to find and test everyone likely to have the virus and get them on antiretroviral drugs immediately rather than waiting for their immune systems to weaken. Patients taking the drugs are about 96 percent less likely to infect any of their partners, even when condoms are not used.More people at risk of H.I.V. infection — gay men and drug injectors, in particular — are beginning to take Truvada, a pill that can protect them. In gay men, evidence is mounting that it is nearly 100 percent effective at preventing H.I.V. infection if taken daily.Although a viable H.I.V. vaccine is still far off, using one of those methods is just as effective as any vaccine could be. – DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.Anxiety — and its extended family members “stress” and “worry” — cast long shadows over much of my reporting in 2015, as I looked at adolescent and young adult behavior, and  the growing research area of human-animal interactions. New job title this year? “Chief Anxiety Correspondent” — extensive professional and personal experience.There was lots of bad news about anxiety (to accompany all the bad news to be anxious about). But there was surprisingly good news, too, as researchers found an upside to being a worry warrior. On college campuses, mental health centers are being overrun with students whose most common diagnosis is now anxiety, outnumbering depression.  Longtime therapists note a generational shift among students, who seem less able to withstand the normal buffeting of life away from home. The centers are increasingly offering group sessions to address social anxiety and test anxiety, and to teach students more coping skills. Petting playful therapy dogs is also a popular stress-busting activity during finals week at many universities.  But do animals really alleviate stress and anxiety? The research about long-term effects is equivocal at best. Nonetheless, there is a growing belief that companion animals can be a source of comfort, particularly for people with depression and anxiety. As a result, many college students who say they have mental health disabilities are successfully petitioning to keep pets in their dormitory rooms — dogs, cats, guinea pigs, snakes — with mixed results for other residents.  It turns out that anxiety can be contagious at home, too. Researchers found that math-anxious parents, who struggled mightily to help their children with homework, wound up contributing to their children’s escalating math anxiety. And the news, of course, added another element to parental anxiety: guilt. But researchers found that as people waited for test results, worrying and anxiety turned out to be reasonably excellent strategies.  Compared with their composed colleagues, the anxiety-ridden were better prepared if the news was bad and more elated if the news was good. At long last, two cheers for us! – JAN HOFFMANTwo new drugs that make levels of LDL cholesterol, the so-called bad cholesterol, plunge to new lows, were approved this year by the Food and Drug Administration. Millions of Americans with high cholesterol levels cannot, or will not, take statins, the cheap cholesterol-lowering drugs already on the market. Others who take statins cannot get their cholesterol levels low enough with them. The new drugs can fill that need.There’s no question the new drugs are potent – people taking them in studies have gotten their LDL into the single digits, levels almost never before seen in adults. For people at high risk of heart disease, the goal is to try to get LDL below 70. Yet even though most scientists think that the lower the LDL level, the better, it remains to be seen whether the new drugs, known as PCSK9 inhibitors, prevent heart attacks and deaths. Clinical trials are still underway.But even if the results are disappointing, the F.D.A. cannot take the drugs off the market. Once a drug is approved, the agency cannot rescind its approval. With the PCSK9 inhibitors, the world enters a new, and expensive, era in heart disease prevention. Praluent, made by Sanofi Regeneron costs $14,600 a year and Repatha, made by Amgen, costs $14,100 a year. As an executive in the health insurance industry put it, “If this is the new normal to treat common and chronic conditions, how can any health system sustain that cost?” – GINA KOLATAIt’s not a lot of money: $86 for a 30-minute conversation with your doctor. That’s the amount Medicare decided this year to pay physicians for talking with patients about the medical choices they would make if they become so sick they are unable speak for themselves.But that $86 payment marks a watershed in a long-running, controversial debate over whether doctors should encourage patients to discuss the care they would and wouldn’t want at the end of life. For years, the idea of reimbursing doctors for such “advance care planning” conversations – originally proposed as part of the Affordable Care Act – had been castigated by conservative Republicans as a vehicle for establishing “death panels.”But in 2014, I wrote that the tide was changing, as more patients, doctors and even some private insurers were seeing value in discussions about interventions like feeding tubes or ventilators. Whether patients would want every possible measure to keep them alive or whether they would want pain relief and comfort care, many liked being able to specify beforehand, partly to save family members the angst of having to decide. Later that year, a national nonpartisan panel recommended advance care planning discussions as part of a sweeping report on end-of-life care.In July 2015, Medicare proposed covering end-of-life conversations, and after a public comment period, the proposal was adopted. Starting in January, doctors, nurse practitioners and other medical professionals can be reimbursed for face-to-face meetings with patients, as well as any relatives or caregivers patients want to include. There is no limit on the number of meetings, and because private insurance companies often follow Medicare’s lead, advance care planning is on track to become a regular part of medical care. – PAM BELLUCKBy far the most memorable work I did this year was in West Africa, where I wrote two articles about how families cope with schizophrenia in places where there is little or no access to modern mental health care.The trip itself was hair-raising, particularly in Togo, where I visited a number of so-called prayer camps – religious retreats that held people with mental illness as captives, chained to trees or in bunkers, offering prayer as the only treatment. Walking among people in shackles and talking to them left me wide-eyed and exhausted. (Lord only knows what they thought of me; another hallucination, perhaps.) I was fortunate enough to find a family willing to tell the story of the eldest – his mental decline; the need to “capture” and restrain him; his eventual escape from chains –- Togolese carpenters and seamstresses, mechanics, village elders, putting all aside to save their son and brother. The chains are a terrible cruelty, and that son and brother spent two years shackled to a tree in a patch of woods a long way from anywhere. But the decisions the family had to make reveal the lack of alternatives, and the real, if grim, place that institutions like prayer camps occupy when no one can afford psychiatry. – BENEDICT CAREYIn recent years, the incidence of Type 1 diabetes among children has increased by 21 percent, and it is not known why. Now, an estimated 167,000 schoolchildren nationwide must have their glucose levels checked during school hours; and insulin must be administered via injections or a pump before lunch. This care can be a challenge for school staff, made tougher by the fact that school nurses are in short supply. My investigation found that too many schools are failing to give students with Type 1 diabetes the help they are entitled to under federal law. Children have been barred from attending their zoned schools or abruptly transferred after diagnosis to schools with nurses, even when their doctors say nursing care is not warranted. Others are forbidden from participating in extracurricular activities. Many parents of children with Type 1 diabetes do no know what their rights are; many don’t realize what accommodations can be made at school and don’t think reach out to national organizations like the American Diabetes Association for help. Though doing so is illegal, school officials sometimes attempt to shift responsibility for diabetes care onto parents. Some parents risk their livelihoods, leaving jobs to provide insulin injections to their children at school or traveling to sports events in case student-athletes develop low blood sugar. “There are so many women who have lost their careers over taking care of a kid with Type 1 diabetes,” said Dr. Judith Fradkin, the director of the division of diabetes, endocrinology and metabolic diseases at the National Institutes of Health. The Justice Department and the Education Department rely on parents to report suspected discrimination against students with Type 1 diabetes, but if parents don’t know their rights, they are unlikely to reach out for help. – CATHERINE SAINT LOUISAdvertisement