AdvertisementSupported byReactionsTO THE EDITOR: “Ebola’s Deadly Escape” (Dec. 30), recounting the missed opportunities in fighting the virus in West Africa, should become a formal case study not just for epidemiologists, policy analysts and crisis managers, but for all academic programs involved in international business and management. The issues raised here — centralized versus decentralized control, understanding of local cultures, local politics and the marshaling of adequate resources to fit the task — can be applied in many, many arenas.Joel BrillLarchmont, N.Y.Among the lessons of this excellent article is: medicine and politics don’t mix. When political pressures trump proven epidemiological control of disease, especially for illnesses without effective drugs, the disease rapidly runs amok. Didn’t anyone learn from the early days of the AIDS epidemic? Political pressure prevented reporting the disease and tracing exposed individuals. Unfortunately, history has repeated.Margo, Portsmouth, R.I., posted to nytimes.comWhat does it mean that in an age of increasing globalization, funding for the W.H.O. has been cut? There are record amounts of money accruing to particular industries and individuals, but there isn’t money to monitor and contain health emergencies? The human capacity for making boneheaded decisions based on short-term considerations informed solely by profit seems to be a constant of the history of our species. This is yet another example.Don Hulbert, New York, NY, posted to nytimes.comWithout major efforts by health organizations to improve the medical ability of African countries, Ebola and others will always recur. Far more Africans die from malaria than from Ebola. We see nothing, or minimal comments, about that African scourge in the media. One must go to the medical and scientific journals for that information. Ebola has taken resources in the Ebola-affected countries normally used for malaria patients. It is time for North Americans to get away from Ebola thinking and concentrate on mainstream funding and help for needy African countries.Pushkin, Canada, posted to nytimes.comAstrotheologyAdvertisement