Susan Gubar writes about life with ovarian cancer.When my oncologist told me about her various job offers, she laughed and reassured me that the only position that could lure her away would be a professorship named for Princess Diana. Of course I knew she was kidding.Dr. Daniela Matei would not relocate to another institution unless doing so benefited her work as a research physician. Throughout the months of her recent negotiations, an old country song kept running through my mind:  “I’ve Got Tears in My Ears (From Lyin’ on my Back in my Bed While I Cry Over You).” For more than six years, Dr. Matei and I have been meeting regularly in a sterile cubicle equipped with two plastic chairs, a stool, an ugly poster of the stages of ovarian cancer, a computer near a sink, an assortment of labeled trashcans, and one of those hideous gynecological contraptions.  Even in such an inauspicious setting, oncologists can become more than doctors if  — and it is a big “if” — circumstances and temperament allow them to derail the usual power dynamics that subordinate patients to a subservient role. In doing so, they become the crowning glory, the royalty, of oncology.At the start of our conversations, Dr. Matei served as my wise counselor, advising me on the lay of cancer-land. She knew my prognosis, the nature and duration of the gold standard treatment, as well as the medications that would offset its side effects. Brandishing my list of questions, I flirted by dressing up in a newly pressed shirt and skinny pants with cute flats — well, as cute as they could be, given the neuropathies immediately triggered by treatment — because I knew she always looked at my ankles, sometimes tapping them, and because she wore beautiful shoes.During the first cycle of chemotherapy, while she listened intently to my anxieties and responded without discounting them, she became my shrink. Just as I projected onto her various attachments I have to younger people who have shaped my identity, she probably projected onto me various attachments to older people who shaped hers. Despite the analyst’s superior status over the analyzed, transference and counter-transference transformed me into a parental figure, her into the brilliant yet less seasoned offspring. If she resembled my adult daughters or step-daughters, then I could boss her around . . . at least a bit.When my situation took a decided downturn, Dr. Matei arrived at the infusion room, plunked herself on the floor by my feet, and mournfully said, “You are my worst-doing patient.” She was doing her best, to no avail. At that moment, paradoxically, she became my friend. She renounced the aloof detachment of the researcher-physician by expressing sorrow over our shared helplessness.  Yet she subsequently ordered me to have an operation that I did not want to undergo:  “You have to do this,” she said, countering all my objections. So she became a friend with unique benefits — like a respected teacher with authoritative insight into my condition on which I had to rely, which I did, and then we continued through my second and third recurrence, decrying the persistence of ovarian disease.Since oncologists have to be not only tenacious but also creative, scratch one and you will discover a singer, a pianist, or, in the case of my doctor, a poet. As Dr. Matei and I read each other’s work, I learned about her values, she about mine. In this capacity and also because she works at the same university in which I taught for decades, we became colleagues. Throughout our dialogues, Dr. Matei reiterated her belief that a new sort of drug in the pipeline could extend my life. How she managed to gain me a place in the Phase I clinical trial that has kept me alive for three years, I do not know. That she did so made her my savior, for I will probably still die from ovarian cancer, but I will be a very grateful corpse.While we discussed the possibility of her leaving the Simon Cancer Center, I asked her, as if I were some sort of package in her keeping, “Who would you give me to?”  She came up with a name, but also the assurance that we would stay in touch. Therefore even as I sing that country song —“And the tears in my ears, they’re off the beaten track / Since you said, ‘It’s goodbye, we are through’” — I feel unjustifiably proud of her achievements. As her senior colleague, I must take into account her best interests while I counsel her on her prospects. It is a great boon to mentor my mentor, to serve as a sounding board to a young woman who has served as my sounding board, to be a cheerleader to someone who has been my cheerleader.One bright summer day, I went to a party store where I found a $4 gift:  a silver tiara with pink fluff and a heart-shaped pink gemstone. If Dr. Matei leaves, I will have to deal with damp ears. But whether or not she accepts the Diana, Princess of Wales, Endowed Professorship in Cancer Research, she will always be Her Royal Highness to me. Susan Gubar is a distinguished emerita professor of English at Indiana University and the author of “Memoir of a Debulked Woman,” which explores her experience with ovarian cancer. 

Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.