
Global Health By                     
 DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.
 
JAN. 12, 2015
There were only 126 cases of Guinea worm reported in the world last year, a 15 percent drop from the year before, according to former President Jimmy Carter, who has fought for decades to eradicate the debilitating disease, which once affected millions.But the last outbreaks are in four African countries, which complicates the final push: 70 cases in South Sudan, 40 in Mali, 13 in Chad and three in Ethiopia.Mr. Carter made the announcement Monday at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, where he presided over the opening of a new exhibition, “Countdown to Zero: Defeating Disease.”The exhibition, which lines a brightly lit passageway near the Hall of African Mammals, is a combination of photographs from African villages and samples of the tools used in the Guinea worm fight, such as water-filtration pipes worn on beaded necklaces and dashikis made of cloth printed with pictures of the worm.AdvertisementAlso included are smaller displays on polio, river blindness and other diseases that public health specialists hope to eliminate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It was mounted before the worm could be eradicated “because it’s very important for people to recognize that these diseases still exist,” Mr. Carter said at the opening ceremony.It also might inspire scientists, drug companies and donors to seek new cures or vaccines, he added.Dr. Donald R. Hopkins, the vice president for health programs at the Carter Center, was asked at the ceremony what was needed for the final push.Advertisement“Blood, sweat, tears,” he instantly responded. “And money. Lots of money.”A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: At Museum, New Front in Guinea Worm Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »