Solve a medical mystery with Dr. Lisa Sanders.On Thursday we challenged Well readers to solve the case of a 27-year-old woman who had vomiting, weakness and confusion months after having weight loss surgery. More than 200 readers offered their perspective on the case. Most of you recognized it as a nutritional deficiency, and nearly half of you totally nailed it.The diagnosis is:Wernicke’s encephalopathy due to thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency.The very first reader to post a comment, Dr. Adrian Budhram, figured it out. His answer landed on our doorstep just five minutes after the case went up. Dr. Budhram is a second year neurology resident at Western University in London, Ontario. He says that Wernicke’s is on the list of diseases he thinks about every time someone is brought to the hospital because they are confused.The Diagnosis Thiamine, or vitamin B1, is a nutrient essential for the body to break down and use sugars and proteins. It is found in many foods, including beans, brown rice, pork and cereals. Although the body only stores enough of the vitamin to last three to four weeks, deficiencies are rare when a full and varied diet is available.Diseases caused by a thiamine deficiency were described in Chinese medicine as early as 2600 B.C. – well before the vitamin was identified chemically. Western medicine came to know the disease as beriberi – a Sinhalese term meaning weak (apparently from the phrase “I can’t, I can’t”) characterized by either numbness and weakness in the legs (dry beriberi) or a weakened heart leading to hugely swollen legs (wet beriberi).Although the cause of the disease wasn’t understood until the early 20th century, when thiamine was identified, the Japanese navy, which had historically lost up to half their sailors to this disease, developed an effective treatment nearly a century earlier. By adding meats and vegetables to the usual diet of polished white rice, the navy virtually eliminated the deficiency.At the end of the 19th century, Dr. Carl Wernicke, a Polish neuropsychiatrist, described a disorder he observed in several alcoholics under his care. Their symptoms consisted of a triad of odd neurological findings: a wide-based gait (ataxia), eye motion disturbances (ophthalmoplegia) and confusion. At autopsy, the brains of the affected men had discrete areas of bleeding and injury. Since then, it’s been shown that heavy use of alcohol reduces the body’s ability to absorb thiamine. That plus the reduced nutrient intake seen in many alcoholics was thought to explain why this disease was more common in those who had a long history of alcohol abuse.Though alcoholism is the most common condition linked to Wernicke’s, it is not the only one. Diseases that cause extended periods of fasting or persistent vomiting have also been linked to the disorder. Newest among these are patients who have a history of gastric surgery – particularly weight loss surgery. Several recent studies suggest that the disorder is often unrecognized.  If not treated promptly, the brain can suffer permanent damage – usually to the ability to learn and form memories, a condition called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.It’s not clear why some of those with thiamine deficiency develop the confusion characteristic of Wernicke’s while others develop the heart or gait problems of beriberi.How the Diagnosis Was MadeDr. Nigel Naman was the third year resident assigned to care for the young woman who presented with a several month history of nausea and vomiting, and more recently weakness and confusion. As soon as Dr. Naman saw the patient he was worried. She looked completely out of it. Although she was wide awake, she didn’t seem to be aware of where she was or what was happening. Her eyes darted around the room without seeming to really see what she was looking at. And when Dr. Naman asked even a simple question, she couldn’t answer correctly. She just gave a girlish giggle.Her mother was at the bedside and told Dr. Naman how she had been vomiting almost daily since she had weight loss surgery performed five months earlier. She had lost over 60 pounds, nearly a third of her entire body weight over the past few months, because she just couldn’t keep anything down.Then a few weeks ago, her daughter complained of weakness in her legs, telling her parents they felt like Jell-O. And a few days ago when her daughter came to visit them, she seemed strangely quiet and maybe a little confused. So when her daughter didn’t answer her phone, she and her husband got worried, and went to look in on her at home. Her daughter was completely confused — she didn’t even recognize them — so they brought her to the hospital. This is not who my daughter is, the anxious mother told Dr. Naman. What’s wrong with her?Dr. Naman wasn’t sure. Given how quickly all this had come on, he thought that it could well be reversible. If only he could figure out what it was.In the nurses’ station, Dr. Naman sat down to think. Her symptoms were clearly linked to her gastric sleeve operation. He was certain of that. But how?He turned to the computer and Googled the terms: gastric sleeve, ataxia, confusion. The entire page was devoted to only one diagnosis: Wernicke’s encephalopathy. The first title he read concerned a patient who died from this. He quickly read up on the disorder.This patient had all the classic findings of thiamine deficiencies. She had to get high doses of the vitamin immediately. He ordered a blood level to check the diagnosis but didn’t wait for the results. He went to the hospital pharmacy to pick up the first dose himself. The nurses hadn’t been able to place an I.V. line yet – probably because the young woman was so dehydrated – so he grabbed the ultrasound probe, found a blood vessel in her neck, inserted the I.V. then started the vitamin infusion.She needs this vitamin because she’s been throwing up so much, he explained to the mother. I think that’s why she’s weak and confused.How the Patient FaredThe results of the blood test came back a couple of days later. The amount of thiamine in her blood was less than half what it should have been. But Dr. Naman didn’t need those results to prove the diagnosis. Her eyes, which had been jerking up and down, as well as left and right, improved almost immediately. And her confusion began to wane.After a week she was able to walk with a walker and a lot of help. She went to a rehabilitation hospital to try to get more of her strength back. After two months she could walk on her own.She’s still not quite back to normal, she tells me. She feels a little slower mentally than she used to be. And she’s more forgetful. But she’s certain she’ll get it all back.If she does, she will be in the minority. Studies suggest that fewer than half of those with Wernicke’s fully recover.
