
Global Health By                     
 DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.
 
JAN. 19, 2015
The Asian tiger mosquito, which can carry the dengue and chikungunya viruses, appears to spread from place to place along highways, according to a study of its recent dispersal throughout Panama.That discovery has important implications for mosquito control, the authors said. Spraying cars and trucks at highway checkpoints could be effective. And tactics already used against the local Aedes aegypti mosquitoes might need to be adjusted because the Asian tiger — formally known as Aedes albopictus — has different habits.In the paper, published by PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, scientists from the University of Panama and the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute analyzed the spread of the tiger mosquito since it was first detected in eastern Panama City in 2002. (Scientists think it may have crossed the ocean in freighters carrying tires, which hold freshwater puddles.) By 2013, it was common in half the country.Panama does a large amount of mosquito sampling for a relatively poor country. Patterns in the sampling suggested that mosquitoes had hitchhiked on vehicles using the Pan-American Highway rather than fanning out gradually to areas with warmer climates or with more people to feed on. After 2009, there may also have been a separate introduction from Costa Rica near that border, they said.Panama already sprays some vehicles to stop the spread of a cattle parasite known as a screwworm; the authors suggested expanding that program.In residential areas, they said, control efforts should target each species differently, because A. aegypti likes to rest inside houses while A. albopictus prefers bushes and trees.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Mosquitoes in Panama Travel the Highways.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »