It is with a good deal of trepidation that I start any new medication in my patients who are very old, for fear of disrupting the myriad forces of genetics and environment that have allowed them to live so long. Such was the case for the 90-year-old patient sitting in front of me, who had been getting an injection every three weeks to treat her anemia. I had started her on the drug six months ago, and whenever she came for a visit, I took seriously my responsibility to make sure both that she was benefiting from it, and that it wasn’t affecting her quality of life. I asked her what she had been doing recently to have fun. Her 93-year-old husband of 60 years sat in a chair across the room, cocking his head to place the ear with his hearing aid closer to me. I repeated the question to him, too.“I went bowling yesterday,” she told me. Her husband nodded, as if validating her report. I raised an eyebrow.“Bowling?” I asked. “What was your score?”“I did best in my third game – a 138! But only bowled a 109 in my fourth game.” I stared at her, incredulous that she had the strength to bowl four games, and turned to her husband. “Did you bowl too?” He shook his head. “Not me. I don’t bowl. I do the jump rope.” He stood up and pantomimed this, jumping up and down. “Two-hundred times a day!” Hearing this my jaw must have dropped, because my patient and her husband stared at each other, laughed, and looked back at me.“What do you think we do when we’re home, doctor?” my patient asked. “Sit on the couch and watch TV?”The people I care for tend to be in their 70s, and while I try to not make assumptions about their activity levels, I probably do so subconsciously. I also have to be sensitive to the reverse – that patients sometimes put on their “best face” for me, to show me how well they’re doing, while outside of my office their ability to function may in fact be much worse. As a result, I’m often ginger in my treatment recommendations.That evening, I arrived home just as the phone was ringing. My wife’s parents were calling, and together we got on the phone. At the ages of 79 and 75, their social calendar was much fuller than ours, and they enjoyed regaling us with their most recent adventures. My father-in-law, the older of the two, told us he was getting ready for a costume party.“I’m hunting around for some long black socks and sandals, and I need a straw hat,” he said. We asked him why.“I’m going to the party dressed as an old man,” he answered. When my wife suggested that he didn’t necessarily need to don any special outfit to pull off his costume, he got offended and handed the phone to my mother-in-law.Perhaps I’m doing a disservice to my older patients by not treating them as aggressively as I might someone younger. One study in women with breast cancer clearly showed that older and younger women had similar reductions in breast cancer mortality and recurrence when comparable chemotherapy regimens were used. Toxicities can be higher for older women treated with chemotherapy, though, as can hospitalization rates.But for my 87-year-old patient who continues to ride her bike around my hometown of Shaker Heights, and my 88-year-old patient who still plays bridge with her college sorority sisters weekly, is it possible I’m doing harm in trying to do no harm?I got up from the chair and held the door open for my patient to leave the exam room so she could get her injection in the infusion area. As she and her husband got to their feet to leave, on an impulse I stopped these people who had lived to twice my age to ask them one more, slightly selfish question.“What is your secret to remaining so active, and to being married for as long as you have?”They both thought this over for some time, with serious expressions on their faces, until finally my patient’s husband spoke.“I take a bath every day,” he answered. My patient nodded her agreement, vigorously.“He really does,” she confirmed.Dr. Mikkael Sekeres is director of the leukemia program at the Cleveland Clinic.