Many Americans know Tim Howard as the star goalie of the United States men’s national soccer team, whose dramatic saves in last year’s World Cup in Brazil led to a tournament record. But fewer know about his struggles off the field with a neurological disorder that is fairly common but widely misunderstood.The first symptoms crept up on him when he was 10, when he developed intrusive thoughts and compulsive behaviors. He blinked obsessively, constantly cleared his throat, and often found himself shrugging his shoulders and rolling his eyes repetitively to relieve anxious thoughts. A doctor diagnosed Tourette syndrome, marked by tics and repetitive movements, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, an anxiety disorder. The conditions are closely related and often occur together. Mr. Howard felt powerless to control his tics and obsessive thoughts, but sports gave him an outlet: On the field, his symptoms would subside as he focused all his energy on stopping the soccer balls whizzing toward him.Today, Mr. Howard is a goalkeeper for the English Football Club Everton and an outspoken advocate for greater awareness and research into Tourette syndrome, which affects roughly one out of every 160 school-aged children in the United States. Last year, the Tourette Association of America gave him its “Champion of Hope Award,” calling him the most notable person in the world with the condition.Recently, we caught up with Mr. Howard to discuss growing up with compulsive behaviors, the Tourette misconceptions he is trying to dispel, and whether soccer fans can expect to see him in goal at the next World Cup. Here’s an edited version of our conversation.I was surprised to learn that Tourette syndrome affects so many children. Why do you think it does not get more attention?I don’t have the answer, but it affects a lot more people than we’re all aware of. It’s something that is not as openly discussed and talked about among educators, doctors and health professionals as it should be. Creating awareness is the mountain we are trying to climb.What was it like growing up with this condition?I had a great childhood. From the age of 6 I was playing soccer and baseball. I had great friends. I used to run around the neighborhood and cause havoc on my bicycle. I had a normal childhood. But at some point in there, when I was around 10 or 11 years old, Tourette syndrome crept up on me with the O.C.D. and the tics. Obviously I knew something was different. But none of the other stuff wavered. I still had good friends. I still enjoyed and excelled at sports. But there was this point in time where this strange thing was going on with me. As a kid I recognized it, but on my list of priorities it was very low. On my mom’s list of priorities, however, it was very high. She saw me, her youngest child, with these tics that didn’t seem normal, and she was very concerned.What did your mother do?It was very frustrating. She did a lot of reading up on it and then took me to see a doctor. The doctor wanted to prescribe a drug. But my mother was against it. So we tried other things. I had a lot of trouble just sitting still most of the time, and my mother would often send me outdoors to play.Did sports help you manage some of your symptoms?Sports certainly gave me relief. They gave me another focus. I didn’t just go to school and then come home and sit in my room and ponder life. Sports gave me this outlet that I needed because I had all this pent up energy from trying to suppress my tics. I was trying to get through an entire school day without looking different from all the other kids and I was unsuccessful at that.So it was great for me to be able to participate in sports every day — to be a kid who was active. In all this chaos that was going on inside my body and inside my brain, trying to figure it all out as a young teenager, I always had soccer or baseball or basketball. That was what I looked forward to. It gave me something that I could focus on and enjoy.What are some of the misconceptions you are trying to dispel?Hollywood has so much power, and any time they portray someone with Tourette syndrome in a movie or on a television show it’s always some kid or some person cursing. That may be laughable to some people, but it’s a misconception. That kind of behavior affects only a low percentage of the Tourette community – only about 10 percent. For the most part, we in the Tourette community are as normal as anyone else.Many people with Tourette syndrome today look up to you. Who did you look up to as a child?Way back when I was a child, the only person I knew of that had Tourette syndrome was Chris Jackson, who played basketball for the Denver Nuggets and later changed his name to Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf. At the time there was absolutely zero literature on Tourette syndrome that I could find because the Internet was still in its infancy. Then I saw a program with Chris Jackson on television one night documenting his journey. And so here I was this young kid, wide eyed and thinking, “Holy cow, not only is he like me, but TS doesn’t matter! This guy made it to the NBA, the pinnacle of basketball.”It sounds like seeing him had a lasting impact on you.It changed my life. And that’s how I see it today: I want to be him to all the other kids with Tourette syndrome. I want them to see me and think: “Yeah, he has TS. But he wanted to play in the Premier League and he did it. He wanted to play in the World Cup and he did it – because of, or in spite of, having TS.’Has your success in soccer made it easier to bring attention to your cause?I’m a walking billboard. I’ve always said I have such an easy job creating awareness because I have no choice. Saturday morning comes and there are a billion sets of eyeballs watching the world’s beautiful game and I’m at the forefront of it. So I feel like I’ve got an easy job raising awareness.What is one message you would like to convey to the public about Tourette syndrome?There are so many messages. But I think it’s time for everyone to understand that research needs to increase. It’s not O.K. for doctors to slap a blanket medication over this condition and tell people to come back in a couple months. It really needs to be looked at and studied in much finer detail than it is today.Your performance in the World Cup last year was widely celebrated and turned you into an Internet sensation. Can we expect to see you in goal again at the 2018 World Cup?If my body holds up and the manager selects me, then I would most certainly want to be there. That would be awesome. That’s my goal, and that’s certainly the carrot that I have in front of me and that’s something I would love to do. I would love to be part of a team that goes to Russia because the U.S. team is young, it’s exciting, and it has a lot to prove.
For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.