Birdlike and in his 80s, the patient had come to the hospital complaining of a new cough. But it was not he whom my colleagues and I found most disquieting.It was his middle-aged daughter. With a practiced dexterity, she had managed to wheel her father in the clinic, hoist him on to the examining table, smooth his hair, wipe his brow and tuck blankets around his legs to keep him warm without pause as she simultaneously fielded nearly a dozen calls and texts on her cellphone. Dr. Pauline Chen on medical care.Still, every time her cellphone rang, buzzed, gurgled or popped, she jumped and sometimes even clutched her chest. After examining her father, I asked if she was O.K.The woman’s eyes widened; she looked as if she was going to cry. Her father, she began to recount, had moved in with her and her husband a few years earlier to help with their young children. But over the last few months, his health had begun to fail, and she found herself spending more and more time taking care of him. An occasional doctor’s appointment escalated into frequent emergency room visits and missed workdays so she could watch over him at home. Now, with her own sick days used up, her vacation day stockpile dwindling and the goodwill of her colleagues and boss dissipating, she tried to do as much work as she could by phone. “I’m trying to do my best to take care of my father, but I can’t afford not to get paid,” she said, pushing away the strands of grey and brown hair that had fallen loose from her ponytail.  “But thanks, anyway,” she added, “for asking.” I remember smiling in response. Asking, and listening, I thought, was the best I could do for someone who was a family caregiver and not my patient. But over the last few months, I have begun to think differently, thanks to a New England Journal of Medicine editorial by two pediatricians who argue that doctors and other health care providers can do more, by acting as patient advocates and supporting broader family leave policies.More than 30 million families are shouldering the significant health care demands of an ill loved one. Some families are fortunate enough to live in one of the handful of states like California or cities like East Orange, N.J., that have paid family leave or earned sick time laws that allow workers to earn a portion of their pay while taking time off to address the health needs of a family member. Most families, however, must rely on the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act, a law that guarantees 12 weeks of parental or sick leave but covers little more than half of all workers and does not include pay. As a result, a significant number of working adults end up, like my patient’s daughter, in an exhausting juggling act, running between the critical daily care for an ill family member and the iron-clad demands of a job they cannot afford to give up, even temporarily.Nonetheless, the debate over expanding such laws has been fierce. And up until recently its most vocal proponents and opponents have been labor experts, economists, politicians and women and family rights advocates. Their arguments have been focused on productivity, costs, administrative burdens, fairness and global competitiveness while ignoring, strangely enough, the very reason for any debate at all.The patient.The oversight was made patently clear in the eloquent New England Journal of Medicine piece. Dr. Mark A. Schuster and Dr. Paul J. Chung, pediatricians who have conducted extensive research on the effects of paid family leave on patients and family caregivers, argue that physicians and other clinicians should engage in the debate. As patient and public health advocates, they contend, health care providers understand the repercussions of care cobbled together by family caregivers who cannot afford to stop working. “As patient advocates, we have a stake in this issue,” said Dr. Schuster, head of general pediatrics at Boston Children’s Hospital and a professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. Physicians, for example, have watched cost-cutting reforms decrease the length of inpatient hospital stays, so patients are now being sent home requiring more care. Some leave the hospital with medication schedules that include pills, injections and intravenous pumps. Others are discharged with a dizzying array of postsurgical tubes and drains. Still others go home with wounds that require round-the-clock care.As a result, family caregivers must provide the kind of care once reserved for health care professionals. While most can manage the tasks, they “need time at the hospital to learn and then at home to perform these tasks, so they aren’t asking the neighbor or the 15-year-old babysitter to do them because they have to go back to work,” Dr. Schuster said. If family members don’t have time to learn or perform these new skills, patient care suffers significantly. A growing body of research on “transitions of care” has revealed that inadequate follow-up care at home can result in higher complication, re-hospitalization and mortality rates, as well as increased costs. Health care providers also have unique insight into the public health implications of stressed family caregivers. Doctors and other clinicians routinely recommend that individuals who are ill stay at home to rest and recuperate and, in the case of infectious diseases like the flu, to limit spread. But without paid family leave legislation in place, a significant number of working parents, for example, cannot afford to take time off of work to stay with their child at home.“How many times have we seen parents give their child Tylenol right before going to school so the child can get through the day without a fever?” Dr. Schuster said. “But then the child comes to the school nurse’s office in even worse shape, and the teacher and the rest of the class are exposed, as well.” Despite the persuasive arguments of the New England Journal piece, it is unclear how doctors across the country will respond to President Obama’s recent call for congress to pass a paid sick leave bill. But Dr. Schuster and Dr. Chung’s pleas do appear to have had an effect in at least one of the author’s home states. A few months after the editorial was published, Massachusetts voters endorsed an initiative that would guarantee paid sick days for workers who are sick or who need to care for an ill family member. The initiative received unprecedented support from physicians and hospitals statewide. “This issue is important for the health care community,” Dr. Schuster said. “As patient advocates, we need to work toward policies that allow family members to be with their loved ones when they need to be.” 