Jamila Garza, 24, from Everett, Wash., has made no less than nine YouTube videos enthusiastically describing how she closed a gap between front teeth with $5 elastic bands. Ms. Garza is not a dental professional. Until recently, she was a fashion design student. That hasn’t stopped tens of thousands of strangers from watching her do-it-yourself videos. “Definitely, guys, this is a great opportunity to close your gap!” she tells them. Orthodontists beg to differ. They warn that D.I.Y. teeth straightening or gap closing is not only foolish, it can lead to permanent loss of teeth. Because teeth are not exactly square, rubber bands can work their way under gum tissue and loosen a tooth at the root. “If it sounds too good to be true, it is too good to be true,” said Dr. DeWayne McCamish, an orthodontist in Chattanooga Tenn. “There are unintended consequences that could possibly occur.”Last month, a consumer alert posted on the website of the American Association of Orthodontists cautioned consumers to “please be wary of any suggestions to move teeth with rubber bands, dental floss or other objects ordered on the Internet.” The Web site teethgap.com suggests a gap can be closed in three easy steps with their elastics in less than 30 days “without the need for braces.” Ms. Garza is just one of dozens of laypeople advocating gap-closing. One video shows a young woman teaching how to make “homemade braces” out of elastic bands. It has more than 198,000 views. Alarmed by the videos he saw online about “gap bands,” Dr. Rolf Behrents, the editor in chief of American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, wrote an editorial cautioning consumers to not try this at home. As a elementary school student, David Campbell, a 47-year-old who works for a nonprofit that sends missionaries abroad, had a gap between his front teeth. A dentist advised him to use rubber bands nightly to close it. After elastics got stuck under his gums, the two front teeth started protruding; by age 13, he had lost both teeth at the root. “It was pretty traumatic,” he said. Ms. Garza first closed her gap two years ago, but she says she still wears elastics nightly to keep it closed. She hasn’t seen a dentist since 2011 but says she plans to see one soon to ask about more permanent solutions. After being told Mr. Campbell’s tooth loss using elastic gaps, she still said she would “probably” wear her bands nightly, until she visits a dentist. Related: “A Trip to the Mailbox, Not the Orthodontist.”