
Global Health By                     
 DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.
 
FEB. 2, 2015
A leading British medical journal has harshly attacked corruption in India’s medical schools.Many doctors trained in India emigrate to the United States and excel in their fields. Others fail American licensing exams but still see patients by working through licensed doctors — a situation described in Dr. Sandeep Jauhar’s recent book, “Doctored,” which offers a grim depiction of corrupt practices in American medicine.The BMJ published two articles describing how private Indian medical schools secretly charged admission fees of as much as $150,000 in addition to tuition, even though India’s Supreme Court banned such fees in 1992.One article — by a surgeon who, as a medical student, led a 1983 strike against admission fees — described how that ban was subverted over the years by medical-school owners with political connections.Private schools, which graduate even more doctors than the 25,000 produced each year by the government schools, may be exempt from restrictions on extra fees. They also use different entrance exams.Parents are pressured to pay, in part, because children with medical degrees are more marriageable and command higher dowries.There are nearly 250 applicants for every spot in the government schools, which vary in quality. When the Medical Council of India closed 10 inferior schools last year, admissions payments to others shot up, The BMJ said in a second article. Its author, Jeetha D’Silva, said in a telephone interview that inferior students who bought admission to private medical schools often had to seek jobs in wealthier countries in order to pay back loans used for the under-the-table payments.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page D5 of the New York edition with the headline: Journal Eyes Corruption in India’s Medical Schools.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »