Several people have recently asked me if they should get their DNA sequenced. “Have you had yours tested?” they ask.As a doctor who studies how patients make decisions about genetic testing, the question is not surprising. I have wondered about it myself.Twelve years ago, for the first time, scientists sequenced a person’s genome. The cost was about $1 billion. Since then, the price has plummeted, and is now around $5,000. Soon, it will be less than $1,000, making this question ever more common. Whole genome sequencing is giving us millions of times more genetic information about ourselves than did prior tests; and many patients are getting sequencedThe personalized or precision medicine initiative that President Obama announced in his recent State of the Union address will doubtlessly aid millions of Americans, and will involve whole genome sequencing, raising these issues further.As the cost has fallen, more people are getting their genes sequenced. Countless patients with cancer are now having their whole genomes mapped, since genes often predict how well these individuals respond to various chemotherapies – which drugs will work best for you versus me, and which will give each of us the worst side effects. Parents who have children born with medical problems frequently seek whether a mutation is the culprit – so that they can screen for it, and prevent a subsequent child from having it. For patients confronting a particular disorder, the price of sequencing the entire genome is now getting close to that of testing for only a single gene – say, for breast cancer.Doctors now test infants, too, for numerous diseases to aid treatment. In the future, more – perhaps most of us – will have such sequencing done, and your doctor may one day have your complete DNA on a computer in front of you.Scientists have found scores of mutations that predict screened disease fairly well – from breast cancer to Huntington’s disease to rare kinds of sudden death. Many of these mutations are “actionable,” leading to treatments and prevention.Many people are also seeking genetic testing on their own – or are considering it – through direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies. For several years, many people got tested through companies like 23andme, which only examined a tiny fraction of a person’s whole genome – at first, one one-millionth of your DNA – examining only tiny fragments called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs (pronounced “snips”). Over time, such companies began looking at more SNPs, but still only around one out of every 100,000 points of information. Nonetheless, such companies claimed to offer medically useful information in addition to information about one’s ancestry. Recently, the Food and Drug Administration banned 23andme from making claims about medical benefits since the company couldn’t show that these claims were true. Yet while information obtained with SNPs was relatively limited, whole gene sequencing provides hundreds of thousands of times more information.The four molecules that comprise our DNA – adenine, cystosine, thymine and guanine, abbreviated by the letters A, C, T, G — form individual combinations of 3 billion of these “letters” that are the utterly unique blueprint for making each of us. Still, we are 99.9 percent the same (as well as 98 percent similar to chimpanzees, 80 percent similar to cows and 60 percent similar to chickens).To get a sense of these proportions, a wall of books would contain about 1,000 volumes, totaling around 3 billion letters. If these letters were DNA, we share the information in 999 of those books. One of those books out of the 1,000 contains approximately the number of letters by which we all differ, giving us our individual eye color, hair color, nose-shape and propensity to develop certain diseases.A test that samples only one million SNPs looks at about one out of every 3,000 letters, or approximately one letter per page. Yet reading only one letter per page of a book – or a genome — gives very limited information.Now, however, with whole genome sequencing, numerous patients are having their entire genomes – all 1,000 volumes read. Companies are now starting to sell these tests directly to consumers. This vast amount of information contains great promise, as well as needs for care.Most predictive, actionable mutations are rare – only a small proportion of people have them. In part, evolution acts against lethal mutations – individuals who have them would survive less well than those people who lacked them. Hence, for most people with common diseases, genetic testing doesn’t yet help much. Nonetheless, even if actionable mutations affect only 2 percent to 3 percent of people, that number includes more than 10 million people in the United States.You may find genetic markers associated with various diseases that you are not looking for or anticipating. Some of these genes will be very predictive of a disease that is treatable such as breast cancer. But while scientists used to think they would find one gene that gives us a disease — a cancer gene, for example, or a “fat” gene — we are discovering that most common illnesses result from complex mixes of multiple genes and various environmental factors. So, you may learn that you have a gene that triples your risk of developing a particular disease – from 10 percent to 30 percent, for example — yet the odds are thus still 70 percent that you won’t get it. And the disease may not be treatable – as with Alzheimer’s. Education of patients is critical to help them grasp these complexities.Many patients are also concerned about discrimination. The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, or GINA, covers most health insurance. But it does not currently address life, disability or long-term care insurance, and for these three kinds of coverage, companies can reject customers with mutations or charge them much more. I suspect that laws will be developed to offer more protection to consumers.Of course, the decisions may not be entirely up to you. Doctors are beginning to offer these tests to patients – whether as strong recommendations or merely as possibilities to consider. Numerous research studies of a particular disease are performing whole genome sequencing, seeking causes and treatments. Many of us will undoubtedly be included, or helped.When people ask me if they should test, I answer, “Why are you thinking of having it done?” Some people, particularly those interested in science, think it would be “cool” to know. Others think, “Knowledge is power,” or they are the worried well. If you are seriously considering it, talk to your doctor about it. Clinical geneticists and genetic counselors can address more detailed issues that your physician may be unfamiliar with, or not know as much about.I am curious about what lies buried in my DNA – how the blueprint that made me contains the imprints of all my ancestors. Luckily, however, I am healthy and have no major medical problems. So I see no medical reason for me to test. Of course, that may change.Nonetheless, as doctors and patients, we have all entered a brave new world – and should proceed with prudence.So I haven’t tested…at least not yet.Robert Klitzman is a professor and director of the Bioethics Masters Program at Columbia and author of “Am I My Genes?: Confronting Fate & Family Secrets in the Age of Genetic Testing” and “The Ethics Police?:  The Struggle to Make Human Research Safe