Welcome to the Well Book Club, a place where readers can explore new or overlooked books about family, food, fitness and personal health. Every month, we will meet the author of the selected title, who will join us for weekly discussions online as we all read the book together.For our first Well Book Club, we decided to feature “The Opposite of Spoiled: Raising Kids Who Are Grounded, Generous and Smart About Money,” by Ron Lieber. Mr. Lieber is The New York Times’s personal finance columnist. Readers can join us Feb. 12 for an online discussion with Mr. Lieber about giving children an allowance. To kick off our book club, I spoke to Mr. Lieber about children, money and what it takes to spoil a child. Here’s our conversation.Q: How did you come up with the idea for this book? It was around the time of “Occupy Wall Street.” I heard from some parents who were feeling demonized. They were being told not to take taxis to school or have such extravagant birthday parties. They felt like they were having to apologize for how much they earned and who they were. At the same time, people with less were feeling like their noses were being rubbed in the affluence. A couple of the parents had seen some things I had been writing on the Bucks blog about the questions kids ask about money. Some of the parents invited me to come speak. They thought I could help sort everything out.Q: How did that lead to your book?It was in the course of putting these talks together that I realized that nobody wants their kid to be spoiled. What is the opposite of spoiled? I came up with a list of values and character traits — curiosity, patience, thrift, modesty, generosity, perseverance, perspective.  You can use money to teach every single one of those things. Rather than thinking that money subverts these values, what if we embraced conversations about money to teach our kids?Q: What was your experience with money as a kid?
In middle school my parents split up, and my dad lost his job. I went from being one of the haves more to one of the haves less. I learned a lot from that process. I remember in college going to the financial aid office with my mom to essentially beg for more money. It’s not surprising I found my way to writing about personal finance. I knew what both sides felt like.Q: You advocate talking to your kids openly about what you earn. Why do you think parents are uncomfortable talking to their kids about the family income?I think there are a number of reasons. There is a fear that kids will repeat the information. Sometimes parents want to protect them from this money stuff a little longer. They want to keep them innocent, and don’t want them learning to size people up based on what they do and how much money they have.But I think it’s a little naïve. Kids get it. Their job is to be curious. They are already making these judgments and sizing people up. Given that there is such a deep connection between money and values, don’t we want that information coming from us?Q: What kind of money judgments do kids make?Studies have shown that kids as young as three or four can look at pictures of kids who appear wealthy and kids with less nice clothes and less nice toys. Inevitably, when the researchers ask the kids who they want to play with, it’s the richer kids. This stuff is already out there. Q: How do you talk to kids about wealth and income disparity?There are a couple of ways to go with this when you’re talking about it to kids. You can point out that some families have more and can spend more because of the work they have chosen to do or because of an inheritance. You can also say there are families that make different choices about what to spend their money on. At that point you can explain what kind of family your family is. ‘We’re a family that values education’ or ‘we’re a family that values experiences over stuff.’ ‘We believe in doing things, not having things.’ Your kids don’t have to like it, but they are entitled to an explanation of what you have and what you stand for.Q: I’ve always felt like kids have their whole lives to work and earn a living. Why make them work when they are kids?

I’m not saying a kid should work 20 hours a week after school or every single summer. But at least one summer during high school they should have a job where they can work for someone else, learn to show up on time and how good it feels to get a paycheck. In the college admissions process, I think college admissions officers see athletes and theater people as a dime a dozen. What about working? Here’s the business I started; Here are the things I learned. Those kids are rare now. I think it might actually give you a leg up.Q: How do you feel about giving a child an allowance?I think it’s a great idea but my feeling about allowance is that it’s a teaching tool. We do not tie it to doing chores. Parents don’t get paid for chores so kids shouldn’t get paid. So we don’t make it a reward for work, but it’s there because you need to learn how to use money the same way you need to learn how to be a good reader or how to swim. Q: Now that you have written the book, do you feel like you have found the common ground among the wealthy, the middle class and the poor that those New York City parents were looking for?I think it’s the fact that nobody wants their kids to be spoiled. Rich people don’t have a lock on spoiling their kids. I’ve met all sorts of fantastic kids from wealthy families. And I’ve heard about kids living in housing projects who are spoiled. Money and buying stuff is just one way to spoil kids. The bigger way it happens is if there are too many privileges and not enough responsibilities. No rules and no consequences. That is the quickest way to a spoil child. Money can be a really effective teaching tool to imprint all these values and virtues that to me add up to being the opposite of spoiled, that lead to generosity, modesty, patience and all those good things that add up to the kind of grounded kid we want to send into the world.Join Mr Lieber, Tara Parker-Pope and other Well readers for the first discussion of the Well book club. Post your comments, and Ron will answer questions and share his views on how not to raise a spoiled child.JOIN THE CONVERSATION.A version of this article appears in print on 02/10/2015, on page D6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Raising an Unspoiled Child.