Solve a medical mystery with Dr. Lisa Sanders.On Wednesday, we challenged Well readers to take on the case of a 21-year-old college student with chronic headaches who suddenly became too dizzy to walk. She had a medical history that was complicated by back surgery and a subsequent infection, and chronic headaches after a car accident. More than 300 of you wrote in with suggested diagnoses, but only a handful of you noticed the clue that led the medical student who saw the patient to the right answer.The cause of the young woman’s dizziness was… Postural tachycardia syndrome, or POTS.The first reader to make this diagnosis was Theresa Baker, a retired bookkeeper and mother from Philomath, Ore. She said she immediately recognized the disorder because her young niece has suffered from it for over a decade. Her episodes of dizziness and fainting had started when she was just 13. Well done, Ms. Baker!The Diagnosis
Postural tachycardia syndrome — also called postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome — is an unusual condition in which simply being upright causes symptoms of lightheadedness, sometimes to the point of fainting, along with an increase in heart rate faster than 130 beats per minute, all of which improves when the patient lies down. These basic symptoms are often accompanied by fatigue, which is often worst after any type of exertion, along with a loss of concentration, blurred or tunnel vision, difficulty sleeping or nausea.POTS is considered a syndrome rather than a disease because it has many possible causes. It can be transient — a side effect of certain medications or a result of loss of conditioning, acute blood loss or dehydration — and in these cases it resolves when the trigger is removed. Other types of POTS are more persistent — which turned out to be the case for this patient — lasting months or years. A common pathological feature of POTS is difficulty getting blood to the brain when going from lying down to standing up. Normally when you stand up, the nervous system immediately implements a series of changes to get blood from the lower body, where it is pulled by gravity, up to the head where it is needed. To do this, nerves tell blood vessels in the legs to squeeze, sending blood upward. At the same time, other nerves tell the heart to beat a little faster to distribute the arriving blood more quickly. These changes are immediate and usually resolve so quickly that they are not even noticed.There are many different causes of this so-called orthostatic intolerance – the more general term for the symptoms that come on with standing and resolve with recumbency. For example, astronauts typically cannot stand up when they first return to earth because of orthostatic intolerance. Because they have been in an environment without gravity, the muscles around their blood vessels, which normally help the vessels constrict and move the blood upward, get out of shape. It takes a few days, but the vessels soon recover.In this patient’s case, the nerves telling her blood vessels to contract and send the blood up to her brain were not working properly. Why this happens is not well understood. Current thinking is that the nerves can be injured by an immune system that has been revved up by infection. The immune system then mistakenly attacks some of the delicate fibers that control the blood vessels. The viral infection this patient had a couple of weeks before her symptoms started may have been the trigger.How the Diagnosis Was MadeChristine Ament, the fourth-year medical student on the neurology service who saw this patient, reviewed the notes from the emergency room before going to see the young woman. She noted that the patient was on an antidepressant and an anxiety medicine for sleep. Plus, she was seen at a pain clinic. Ms. Ament had noticed that these factors sometimes led doctors to look for a psychiatric cause of her symptoms first, rather than last. Reviewing the patient’s physical signs and symptoms might give her the chance of figuring out the case. If there was anything to figure out.Something else stood out as well. When the patient first arrived in the E.R., her heart rate and blood pressure were measured when she was lying down and then again when she was standing up. When measured lying down, both her heart rate and blood pressure were normal. But when she stood up, her blood pressure didn’t drop, as Ms. Ament had expected, as this woman was supposedly dehydrated, and her heart rate skyrocketed. Normally when someone is dehydrated enough to feel dizzy, standing may make the heart rate go up, but the blood pressure should go down. Moreover, giving the patient fluids didn’t change this. When checked a few hours later, she had the same reaction. Her heart rate and blood pressure were normal when she was lying down, but when she stood up, her heart sped up, and her blood pressure didn’t change.Was that a clue? It didn’t match any medical problem Ms. Ament could think of, but she was certain it was abnormal.
Problems When StandingThe patient looked cheerful and pleasant and not very sick when Ms. Ament went in to see her. She was just a few years younger than the med student. The young woman patiently repeated the story she had already told so many times. She felt fine as long as she was lying down. The dizziness kicked in only when she stood up.Ms. Ament examined the patient carefully. Things looked normal — at least until she asked the patient to stand. The young woman looked anxious, but slowly made her way to the edge of the bed and stood up. She was on her feet for less than a minute when she said that she felt dizzy. Ms. Ament took her pulse. It had been normal while she was in bed – around 60 beats per minute. When Ms. Ament checked again, her heart rate had more than doubled, to 140. Ms. Ament wanted to get her blood pressure as well, but the young woman said she had to get back in bed or she would faint again.An Unusual ResponseDehydration can make your heart race and your head spin, but usually, even with severe dehydration, these symptoms disappear after a few minutes. So Ms. Ament was surprised when this patient — who wasn’t even dehydrated — continued to feel bad and have a rapid heart rate, even after a couple of minutes.Certain drugs can cause this kind of dizziness, but nothing this patient was taking. Could there be some problems with the blood vessels that usually constrict to push the blood back toward the head? Or the nerves that drove them? Ms. Ament knew that the hospital had a lab that specialized in testing for these types of diseases, so she suggested that the patient be seen there.Onto the Tilt TableThe patient went to the lab the following day, and Ms. Ament went as well. The patient was scheduled to have a tilt table test to investigate what was happening when she stood up. To Ms. Ament’s eye it was a strangely primitive test: The young woman was strapped onto a table, which then was tilted so that she was almost upright. Her heart rate and blood pressure were monitored. This patient’s heart began to race almost immediately — 100, 140, 190. The test — normally 30 to 45 minutes long — had to be stopped after just a few minutes when the young woman began to feel faint.Based on these results, the diagnosis was a condition Ms. Ament wasn’t familiar with: postural tachycardia syndrome, or POTS. The disorder was first named in 1993 by two neurologists who were evaluating a series of patients — mostly women — who described feeling lightheaded after standing for a while. These patients, like this young woman, had persistently rapid heart rates and lightheadedness when tested on the tilt table.The patient was started on two medications to help maintain blood flow to the brain when she was standing. One increases the amount of fluid in her body. The other helps blood vessels constrict. After a couple of days on the medications, she started to feel a little better.Before sending her home, though, the senior neurologist involved in the case wanted to make sure they were not missing anything linked to the abnormal finding in the patient’s retina. He called the patient’s ophthalmologist, whom she had seen a few weeks earlier. It was an old finding, he was told; probably something she was born with. With that out of the way, the patient was ready to go home.An Invisible DisabilityBack at home, the patient spent the next couple of weeks in bed. She still felt awful whenever she stood up — lightheaded and dizzy. Only when lying down did she feel even close to normal. Her new doctor, Dr. Roy Freeman, who was an expert in this type of disease, told her that while many people recovered from POTS, it often took months, even years. Hearing that, the patient realized that she would have to figure out how to live with it, until it went away, or not.Learning to Cope
Over the years since this patient’s diagnosis was made, she has learned a few tricks to accommodate her invisible disability. She eats a lot of salt, which keeps her blood vessels as full as possible. She wears compression stockings, which facilitate blood flow. And she always makes sure she knows where the nearest chair is. When she had to tell people that she had to sit down, she soon found that it was too hard to explain why. So she learned to tell people she had a heart problem and that was usually all they needed to hear.At first it was hard for her to get her mind around the fact that a simple virus could do so much to her. She has accepted that, in her case, the problem is not going away. These days, she has figured out how to get the most out of what she has in her life, which at this point includes a husband, two children and a successful nonprofit business — along with the will to get out of bed, dizzy or not, every day.
