The bad news from my mother arrived as a text: “In the emergency room all day today. fluid in lung. doctor said it looks suspiciously like cancer.”I looked across the table at my dinner companions chatting softly over plates scattered with bits of Peruvian rotisserie chicken, frijoles and plantains as a wave of heat rose to my head. I excused myself and stood outside on 10th Avenue clutching my phone to my chest, working up the courage to call my mother back.My mom, age 63, had recently retired from a long career as an early-childhood educator. What she had thought was a pulled muscle causing pain in her chest two months earlier had escalated to the point where she had trouble walking from her bedroom to the kitchen without stopping to catch her breath, leading to the emergency room visit earlier that day.I offered to fly down from New York to where she lived in Florida that weekend.“I’m fine, why don’t you come down when I really need you,” she said. But I needed to see her. “I’m coming down this weekend,” I said.Once in Florida I spent a few days watching her breathing worsen as the fluid that was drained from her lung a few days before built back up. Her walking became slower and more arduous. By the third day, the slightest activity made her nauseous. My mother had always been active and physically fit, and I was used to seeing her wriggling playfully on the floor with her young students or swimming in the gulf. Now all she could do was sit very still. Two days later, the biopsy results confirmed the presence of cancer. She wanted to be treated at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York, a hospital she knew and trusted from her youth. A day later we packed up her car for the 20-hour drive to my home in Brooklyn, where we agreed she would stay during the initial phase of her treatment.At our first appointment we learned from her oncologist, a kind doctor with a cheerful bedside manner, that she had Stage 4 nonsmall cell lung cancer, and later that the cancer had spread from her lungs to her lymph nodes and spine. Her doctor and the attending nurse used terms like “palliative care” and “quality of life.”With lung cancer, 70 percent of cases are diagnosed at Stage 4, when symptoms typically first appear. The survival rate is slim — only 16 percent of patients live for five years after their diagnosis.But we left feeling optimistic. That night we toasted to her health. I never thought I would be a caregiver at my age: 28. But let’s face it, we usually don’t have a choice. I’ve had enough friends who ushered their parents through a terminal illness, and now it was my turn.And while some have envisioned that millennials would be caring for their ill and aging parents with the help of robots and wearable tech and apps, I took my cue from my mom, whose no questions asked, drop everything and go kind of hands-on care was modeled early for me, when I was a child and my grandfather suffered a debilitating series of strokes. In our family, being there is what we do.I finally had a proper sleeper couch and we all squeezed into my one-bedroom apartment: my mother, my boyfriend, our two dogs and myself. I folded her needs into mine, and we quickly settled into a daily routine. My mother has a catheter attached to the lining of her lung that requires draining, a task that I’ve taken on with a nurse’s precision. She has two dozen medications that I parse out in weekly doses every Saturday. She requires five meals a day, to keep up her weight, that I prepare using fresh and organic ingredients — luxuries on my limited budget. But I’m not perfect. Feelings like anger, sadness and resentment creep in, and when they do, I find myself lingering over ingredients in the aisles of my grocery store or taking my dogs for a long walk around the rim of the East River.Cards and care packages arrive steadily in the mail, but social media plays a bigger role in my mother’s daily life. She posted her diagnosis on Facebook as soon as she learned about it and relies on her newsfeed to keep her up-to-date with friends and family. She started a blog to broadcast her cancer journey.Me? I’ve only wanted to unplug from social media. Scrolling through my Facebook feed only reminds me of the life milestones — weddings, babies, vacations — I may never get to share with my mother. Instead, I lurk around online support groups and message boards for cancer patients and caregivers. I save inspirational entries into a Google Doc, reading through them when I need a boost.A close friend whose mother had died of lung cancer told me his biggest regret was that he never showed his mom how hard her illness was on him. He was always putting on a brave face. And thus my greatest struggle: showing vulnerability without abandoning hope. I had always expected I would have many good years with my mother before illness or old age would require me to take over. Now I find myself mourning over what might have been. Although there is no shame in letting go of the way I thought things would be, it will be a matter of time, I suspect, before I fully accept the way things really are. Marie Tae McDermott is a news assistant at The Times.