AdvertisementSupported byBy Donald G. McNeil Jr.People who die of Ebola probably remain infectious for at least a week after death, according to a new study.The findings underscore how important it is to safely handle and bury corpses in the epidemic.Funerals at which mourners washed or touched bodies are believed to have spread the disease to many new victims. In a safer practice, teams dressed in full protective gear spray the body with bleach, put it in a body bag and then either cremate it or bury it deeply. At the funeral, family members are allowed to view the body but not to touch it.Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the study offered “microbiological proof positive of what we’ve been observing in a field setting — that kissing or washing or caressing bodies is almost certainly the way a lot gets transmitted.”For the study, scientists at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, which are run by the infections diseases institute, studied five macaque monkeys that had been infected with Ebola in other experiments. The researchers waited until the monkeys had the symptoms of humans on the verge of death from Ebola, and euthanized them.The monkeys then went into plastic tubs in a chamber that Vincent J. Munster, one of the lead authors of the study, described as “like a big deli fridge where you can manipulate the temperature and humidity.”Under conditions set to mimic a hot August in Liberia, the animals decomposed for 10 weeks.“We don't smell anything,” Dr. Munster said. “We're wearing positive pressure suits. We're not breathing the air from the same room. If we could smell the corpses, there's a chance we could be infected, and that's a no-no.” The odor itself is not infectious, he explained, but smelling it would indicate that the hood or suit had been breached.The monkeys’ mouths, noses, eyes, skin and other surfaces were swabbed daily and samples were taken from their livers, spleens, lungs and muscles.Infectious virus was found in the surface swabs for seven days after death and in internal organs for three days.RNA from decayed virus was detectable for up to 10 weeks. The RNA itself was not infectious, but it showed that diagnostic tests could work for that long.The study was done to see how long human bodies remained dangerous and how long it was possible to tell if an ape found decaying in a forest had died of Ebola rather than of something else. Ape die-offs often presage human Ebola epidemics.Advertisement