AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy Benedict CareyFor the first of two articles about mental health care in West Africa, The New York Times published several intimate photographs of people with mental illnesses in chains. Each one required multiple negotiations: one with the pastor running the camp where the person was being held; another with the person being photographed; still another with family members, if any were present. We worked through an interpreter, Samuel Kpavouvou, a pastor in Lomé, Togo, who directs the Graceland Christian Network.In several cases, the photographer, Joao Silva, and I decided that, despite getting consent, a photo was not appropriate. People were vulnerable; sometimes it was not clear whether they understood who we were; their body language told us to back off. And we did. Still, the images we did bring back carry enough cultural baggage — of exploitation, of loss of privacy, of slavery — that they prompted a series of meetings to decide what was appropriate to the article. The meetings included reporters, photographers and editors at all levels, to decide which images were most powerful without violating ethical standards.Mr. Silva is a Times staff photographer who has worked extensively in war zones and has also photographed many people with mental illnesses over a long career. Here, he explains the thinking about one particular image, of a man named Kodjo Didier Akarabi.Q. What sort of consent issues did you think about before taking this shot?A. The bottom line was that he had to understand what we were doing there. When we first got there, the pastor said, “Yes, go ahead, take his picture.” I said: “No, no — I need to hear it from him. It’s not up to you; it’s up to him.”Samuel asked him directly for permission. And he, Didier, looked directly at me and gave consent. He had already given his name, his age; he had answered some questions. And then he said yes. I got the strong sense that he understood.At some point, he got disinterested and turned away, and that was when he assumed that pose. I had to get myself down to his level quickly. It was one of those things — as I was photographing him, my mind was racing. I was thinking, “My God, what are we witnessing?”Within minutes of taking the picture, we discussed it, how he would be represented. There is a human being in there. That is the most important thing, that there is a human being there.Q. What special considerations are there in photographing people who are mentally ill?A. I grew up, from as far back as I can remember, with psychiatric problems in the family: My grandmother had schizophrenia; she spent time in institutions; she was medicated most of her life. Now, late in life, my dad is having some problems. So for me, this is real. It’s all too real.But that should in no way affect how I do my job, whether I have some personal connection. No, that’s too easy. We all should be sensitive, regardless of whether we have something like this in our family.These are humans, not just props for pictures. We have to be acutely aware of that, and it’s precisely because they are human that makes it particularly important to show the situations they are in. If not the camera, who then?Q. Did you think this was an essential image to tell the story? Why?A. Yes, because of its violent, stark reality. Because it brings up all those emotions no one wants to talk about — that beyond racism, beyond slavery, beyond abuse, this kind of thing is still present today. It awakens all of that in people. Sometimes we need to shock people into caring, if not acting.Advertisement