Personal technology for health and fitness.In a time when technology gives us instant access to people all over the planet, a social network called Nextdoor is connecting us to the folks who live nearby.Nextdoor is a fast-growing social network based on geography. So far, over 77,000 communities have signed up. Here’s how it works: Download the app or log in via the website Nextdoor.com. The site verifies your address and directs you to the Nextdoor network in your neighborhood. If there isn’t one, Nextdoor gives you the option to start one and invite your neighbors. Now, instead of being linked to friends all around the country, you are connected only with the people in your geographic area. That means when you need help digging out of a snowbank or finding your wayward dog, the people who read about your problems on the Nextdoor social network can actually do something about it.What you will find on Nextdoor is as varied as the communities it represents from coast to coast. In the Nextdoor community for my neighborhood in Oakland, Calif., recent posts have been about the rash of stolen packages off porches. Neighbors are also posting to give away an abundance of ripening fruit from trees in their front yards. A Nextdoor neighborhood in Anchorage, Alaska, where some family friends live, has become a virtual bear siren. When people spot a giant grizzly ambling across their yards, they go on Nextdoor to alert the rest of the locals to keep children and pets inside. A colleague’s Nextdoor community in Yardley, Pa., is still in its early stages, but posts have helped neighbors find nearby home contractors and alerted them to yard sales in the area. There was even a lengthy discussion about the neighborhood cats.I’ve been on Nextdoor since it first started four years ago, and it’s helped me feel far more connected with my community. Whenever I need help with anything around my house, it’s a fast, convenient way to reach out to my neighbors. All 1,096 of them. It has helped me track down my missing cat, find a new home for my old couch and even connect with an oral surgeon for an emergency root canal on a Saturday. According to 2015 General Social Survey data, only about 20 percent of Americans say they spend time with their neighbors, and nearly a third of the population reports no interaction whatsoever with the people who live nearby. That’s a flip-flop of the way things were back in the 1970s, when nearly 30 percent of Americans reported hanging out with their neighbors at least twice a week. I typically check my Nextdoor feed once a day out of habit, and I’ve adjusted the settings so that it sends me alerts if there’s an emergency. I don’t get pinged when Bob down the street needs tips on lawn fertilizer, but if someone spots a crime in progress, needs to warn of an outbreak of potentially deadly meningitis or sees a giant boa constrictor in the backyard (all true stories), my smartphone lights up. In fact, on-demand help has become such a common request on Nextdoor that the company is adding a feature allowing local services such as babysitters, pet sitters, tutors and the neighborhood handyman to register with the app and respond to requests. A pilot program for the on-demand service feature is being tested in the San Francisco Bay Area, and it is expected to roll out to other cities soon. At its heart, Nextdoor is about people helping people, and that can take many different forms, whether it’s to borrow a garden tool or to function as a digital “Neighborhood Watch” program.  Data from the app also is being used to track diseases including meningitis, the flu and even West Nile virus. What Nextdoor does better than other social networks like Facebook or Yahoo Groups is fill a void that technology has left in the communities where we live. With so many of us depending on email, cellphones and social networks for interaction, we often neglect to get to know our neighbors. Rather than become a place to share vacation photos or cat videos, Nextdoor is more about utility. When I was growing up, I knew all of our neighbors for miles around. My grandparents lived across the street, my aunt and uncle lived next door, and even if I wasn’t actually related to the rest of our neighbors, many of them felt like family. Nextdoor brings back some of those feelings. While it won’t force you to meet your neighbors, it does get you started. Think Facebook meets Mayberry, with new tech resurrecting good old fashioned neighborliness.Related: For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.