



The Well Guide: How to Start Running
Want to start a new running habit? We make it easy to get started, get inspired and stay on track. Are you ready? Let’s go!

Sign up for our running email.



Want to start a new running habit? We make it easy to get started, get inspired and stay on track. Are you ready? Let’s go!Most people think of Thanksgiving as a day for food and family time. But for hundreds of thousands of people across the country, it’s also a day of running.Thanksgiving has become the biggest running day of the year. More than 786,000 runners crossed the finish line at Turkey Trot or other Thanksgiving Day race events in 2014. While the number was down slightly from the previous year, Thanksgiving race participation overall has increased 16 percent since 2011. A Turkey Trot is typically a festive race on the shorter side — 3 to 6 miles — held on Thanksgiving morning. The races are often tied to fundraisers or food drives, may include costumes and almost always include a T-shirt with a trotting turkey.“We’re seeing a trend in running that has become much more social and much less solitary,” said Rich Harshbarger, chief executive of Running USA, which collects data on race participation and running trends. “Thanksgiving is a big family holiday. People say, ‘Hey, before we go to the parade or have dinner, why don’t a bunch of us enter?’ ”And of course, many people who run Turkey Trots are motivated by the meal they know is waiting for them at home.“After a workout or event of any kind people feel a sense of accomplishment,’’ said Mr. Harshbarger. “It gives them the ability to say, ‘I can have that extra piece of pie. I’ve earned this meal.’”With about seven weeks left before Thanksgiving, today is the right day to start planning for your Turkey Trot. Start by signing up for our Running email and we’ll supply you with running tips and inspiration over the next seven weeks to keep you on track for your Thanksgiving Day race.Next, find a Thanksgiving Day race by searching online or using the Runner’s World “Race Finder.” If you’re new to running, we recommend a 5K race, which is 3.1 miles. To train for it, try the free Mayo Clinic’s 7-week 5K training plan for beginners. It starts with just 15 seconds of running and 45 seconds of walking at a time — so almost anybody can do it. If you’ve been running a little, you could also try the free Hal Higdon’s 5K training plan.