By DENISE GRADYFEB. 16, 2015
Henning Jacobson just said no. Even though Massachusetts required it, he did not want to be vaccinated. He had had a bad reaction to a vaccine, and he opposed vaccination in general.Refusing to back down, he fought the state law all the way to the Supreme Court. And Mr. Jacobson, a minister in Cambridge, lost.He was not forcibly immunized, but he did have to pay a $5 fine for turning down the vaccine against smallpox.The year was 1905. There had recently been a major outbreak of the disease in Boston, and the court said, essentially, that the state’s obligation to protect public health trumped Mr. Jacobson’s wish to avoid the needle.AdvertisementSimilar fights, pitting personal freedom against the common good, “have gone on since the founding of the Republic,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, an expert in public health law and the faculty director of the O’Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University.AdvertisementThe battles continue. Now, with a measles outbreak that has affected 121 people in 17 states and Washington, D.C. — and an unusually high number of cases last year, 644 — people who refuse to vaccinate their children have become a focus of resentment and concern. Laws that allow parents to opt out of immunization are also coming under scrutiny.Can the government go further? Can officials require that citizens receive vaccines? The answer, legal experts say, is yes. The authority to require vaccination belongs to the states. “Each individual state really has complete power,” Mr. Gostin said.There is a common misconception that the federal government controls vaccination, he added. But federal authority applies only with matters of national concern, such as border crossings or immigration.States generally follow recommendations made by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.All 50 states require that children receive a certain schedule of vaccinations before they start preschool or school unless the child has a medical condition — like an immune disorder or cancer — that would make vaccination risky.This type of legal requirement is indirect: It does not compel vaccination but makes it condition for entering school. In theory, Mr. Gostin said, states could require vaccination itself.“But there would be something that would be very distasteful about holding somebody down and injecting them,” he said.More likely more feasible, he said, is “what the law normally requires: a civil or criminal penalty, a modest fine.”AdvertisementAlthough every state requires vaccination for admission to school, 48 states allow parents to opt out for religious reasons, and 20 allow them to decline for personal or philosophical reasons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“States have the power to vaccinate, and they don’t have to grant an exemption on religious grounds,” Mr. Gostin said. “The Constitution doesn’t require it. Mississippi and West Virginia don’t allow it.” In some states, he said, the rules for religious exemptions are hard to qualify for, requiring that parents demonstrate that opposition to vaccines is part of their religion and that a public-health officer sign off on the application.“In other states, you just sign a form,” Mr. Gostin said.Some parents use the religious and personal exemptions as a tool or loophole to avoid immunizations because they fear that vaccines are harmful, a belief for which there is no evidence.“They’re using an anti-science bias as a subterfuge for religion,” Mr. Gostin said.Marci A. Hamilton, a professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University, said the religious and personal exemptions from vaccination were a dangerous consequence of what she called “extreme religious liberty.”“The United States has a long history of providing exemptions to religious believers from laws that apply to everybody,” Ms. Hamilton said. “Early in the Republic, we exempted Quakers from military service. We exempted communion wine during prohibition.”She said some of the vaccine exemptions had their origins during the Nixon administration, when Christian Scientists asked for exemptions for people who believed in faith healing. Many states, she said, went along with such requests out of respect for freedom of religion — without anticipating that the exemptions could eventually lead to the return of childhood diseases that had been largely eliminated.Granting exemptions does increase the risk of disease. A 2006 study in The Journal of American Medical Association showed that states with easy procedures for granting nonmedical exemptions had approximately 50 percent higher rates of whooping cough.Some legal and public health experts say that one solution would be to get rid of personal and philosophical exemptions, and to retain the religious ones but enforce them strictly. State legislatures would have to vote to eliminate the exemptions; as long as they remain on the books, it will be difficult or impossible to stop granting them.“I think if you did that, you would see a significant long-term reduction in outbreaks of childhood infectious diseases,” Mr. Gostin said. “If you don’t do that, you virtually guarantee that in the future, we will have as many outbreaks if not more of measles, pertussis and a whole range of serious childhood diseases.”Sabrina Tavernise contributed reporting.A version of this news analysis appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page D2 of the New York edition with the headline: Vaccinations Are States’ Call.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.