By SABRINA TAVERNISEFEB. 19, 2015
WASHINGTON — Federal officials warned health care providers across the country on Thursday that difficult-to-clean medical scopes inserted down the throat might be infecting patients with deadly drug-resistant bacteria.The alert from the Food and Drug Administration came a day after California hospital officials reported that five patients had fallen ill and two had died from what they said were improperly sterilized scopes at Ronald Reagan U.C.L.A. Medical Center.The likely cause was a superbug that may have been transmitted during procedures using the devices, the hospital said. The family of germs, known as CRE, which stands for carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, are deadly because they are resistant even to last-resort antibiotics.The CRE germs usually strike people receiving medical care in hospitals or nursing homes, including patients on breathing machines or dependent on catheters. Healthy people are rarely, if ever, affected. But the bugs attack broadly, and the infections they cause are not limited to people with severely compromised immune systems, said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Advertisement“This is exactly what we are worried about,” Dr. Frieden said of the California infections in an interview. “CRE is becoming increasingly common in hospitals around the U.S. If we aren’t careful, it may well get out into the community and make common infections, like urinary infections, and cuts potentially deadly.”AdvertisementThe devices implicated in the California cases are inserted down the throat and through the stomach to the top of the small intestine, an area called the duodenum. Called duodenoscopes, they were used to diagnose and treat diseases of the liver, bile ducts and pancreas.About 500,000 such procedures are performed annually in the United States, according to the F.D.A. The devices themselves pose little risk to patients, but their design, which includes microscopic crevices nearly impossible to reach with a brush, makes them difficult to disinfect.“Residual body fluids and organic debris may remain in these crevices after cleaning and disinfection,” the agency warned. “If these fluids contain microbial contamination, subsequent patients may be exposed to serious infections.”The U.C.L.A. Health System, of which the Ronald Reagan hospital is a part, has identified and notified at least 179 patients who may have been exposed during procedures performed from October to January, it said in a statement. Patients are being offered free home testing kits that can be analyzed at U.C.L.A.Of the seven scopes in use in the hospital system during the time in question, two were suspected of transmitting the germs. The hospital informed all 179 patients who were examined with any of the seven instruments “out of an abundance of caution.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The scopes had been sterilized to the manufacturer’s standards, according to the statement. Two were immediately removed from use after health workers discovered the contamination in an internal hospital investigation in late January, and the health system is now decontaminating the devices in a way “that goes above and beyond the manufacturer and national standards,” the statement said.The U.C.L.A. hospital system said the Olympus Medical Systems Group manufactured the scopes.CRE germs often begin as a normal part of the human gut bacteria, but they can develop a certain enzyme and become resistant. The C.D.C. has estimated that they account for about 9,300 infections and 610 deaths a year.Aggressive methods to contain the bugs include isolating patients who have the infection; dedicating specific rooms, equipment and staff to patients with highly drug-resistant infections; and requiring more aggressive, systematic hand-washing by hospital staff, Dr. Frieden said. He said that Israel and the state of Florida had succeeded in bringing down CRE infection rates.The F.D.A. said it was closely monitoring the connection between sterilized scopes and the transmission of dangerous antibiotic-resistant bacteria. It received 75 reports from January 2013 to December 2014 of bacterial infections across the country believed to be linked to the scopes. A majority of the 135 patients who were affected in those reports had infections that were resistant to antibiotics, including CRE, the agency said.AdvertisementThe F.D.A. can order manufacturers to stop distributing and even recall devices they make. It did not comment on the California case, but said through a spokeswoman that it was “concerned by the risk to public health that could be created by removing the devices from the market, as there are no alternative devices.”An article on Feb. 20 about an alert from the Food and Drug Administration that a superbug might be spreading because of diagnostic scopes that are difficult to sterilize misstated the number of patients at the Ronald Reagan U.C.L.A. Medical Center who hospital officials said had been sickened by bacteria on scopes. There were seven patients, not nine.A version of this article appears in print on February 20, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Deadly Bacteria Linked to Hard-to-Clean Device.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.