Weight-loss surgery may help obese women have safer pregnancies and deliver healthier babies, compared with women who do not undergo surgery, according to a major new study.While the study found some risks for women who had surgery, including more babies born too small and a greater likelihood of stillbirths, experts said that overall the results were better.The findings have implications for an increasing number of women and children, especially in the United States, where nearly a third of women who become pregnant are obese. Obese women have more problems in pregnancy, including gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, and stillbirth. Their babies are more likely to be premature, overweight or underweight at birth, have certain birth defects, and develop childhood obesity.The study, published Wednesday in The New England Journal of Medicine, sought to find out if surgery could safely mitigate some of those effects. Swedish researchers, led by Kari Johansson, a nutritionist at the Karolinska Institute, evaluated records of 2,832 obese women who gave birth between 2006 and 2011, comparing women who had bariatric surgery before becoming pregnant with women who did not.They found that women who had had surgery were about 30 percent as likely to develop gestational diabetes, which can lead to pre-eclampsia, low blood sugar, birth defects and miscarriage. They were about 40 percent as likely to have overly large babies, whose challenges can include lung and blood problems.The outcomes were worse in some categories. Women who had surgery were twice as likely to have babies who were small for their gestational age, suggesting the need for better nutrition for pregnant women with surgically-reduced stomachs. And more of their babies were stillborn or died within a month after birth, although the number of such deaths in each group was very small and might have been due to chance, experts and the authors said. There was no significant difference in rates of premature births or babies with birth defects.“On balance the numbers of improvements outweigh the number of harms,” said Dr. Aaron B. Caughey, chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Oregon Health and Science University, who was not involved in the study. “If someone came to me and said ‘I want to get pregnant,’ I wouldn’t say, ‘The first thing you should do is have bariatric surgery.’ But I’d say it’s a bigger plus in the plus column than a negative in the negative column.”About 72,000 American women of child bearing age have bariatric surgery annually, said Dr. John Morton, a Stanford University surgeon and president of the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. Most weight-loss surgical procedures are covered by most major insurers, he said.The new study has limitations. The Swedish participants were not ethnically and racially diverse, and almost all the procedures involved gastric bypass surgery, not the less-invasive lap band procedure that is growing in popularity.The new study was not a randomized clinical trial, the highest standard of research, which is difficult to do when pregnancy and surgery are involved. Experts said there could be unaccounted-for differences in health or nutrition for women who chose to have surgery.The researchers “did about as good a job as I think they could,” said Dr. Melinda Maggard-Gibbons, a general surgeon at University of California Los Angeles Medical Center, who does not perform bariatric surgery but has studied its effect on pregnancy. “It’s encouraging that some of the benefits seem to be there, but there may be some risks.”Dr. Laura E. Riley, medical director of labor and delivery at Massachusetts General Hospital and president of the Society for Maternal Fetal Medicine, said she welcomed the results and increasingly recommends surgery for women who cannot otherwise lose weight.“It’s nice to see that those women do do better than their counterparts that didn’t have bariatric surgery,” she said.One of her patients, Melissa Shea, had gastric sleeve surgery, a less-invasive form, about a year ago. “I’ve struggled with weight my whole life,” said Ms. Shea, 37, a bank supervisor from Winthrop, Mass., who said she gained a lot when pregnant with her first child, who is 7. Ms. Shea is not yet pregnant, but is undergoing fertility treatments; research shows bariatric surgery also helps with fertility problems caused by obesity.In Kailua, Hawaii, Ristina Davis, 34, delivered her first child, Rezen, in January, about five years after having gastric bypass surgery that addressed her high blood pressure and prediabetic symptoms. She said her weight fell to 147 pounds from 301 pounds.Her pregnancy was normal and Rezen was born at a healthy weight “exactly on her due date,” said Ms. Davis, who works with children with autism. “All that fat is not in the way of things,” she said. “The pipes flow very well.”The Swedish researchers compared each of 554 women who became pregnant after bariatric surgery with up to five obese women who did not have surgery but were otherwise closely matched for body mass index, age, smoking status, education level and whether they had children already.The vast majority had pre-surgical or early pregnancy B.M.I.’s between 35 and 50, considered either severely or morbidly obese. The women with surgery had lost an average of 82 pounds before becoming pregnant. On average, they became pregnant about 15 months after surgery; doctors recommend women wait a year or more.It was unclear why women with surgery were twice as likely to have babies who were small for gestational age. “It could be due to non-absorption” of certain nutrients that can occur after gastric bypass surgery, Dr. Johansson said.Dr. Jennifer Lesko, an obstetrician at George Washington University Hospital who has studied post-bariatric surgery pregnancies, noted the study did not say how the smaller babies fared. “Are we talking about a 6-pound baby that ends up being fine or are we talking about a baby that is going to have problems down the road?” she asked.Overall, though, she said the results were reassuring: “It allows us to feel more comfortable recommending bariatric surgery to patients.”A version of this article appears in print on 02/26/2015, on page A20 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Surgery for Obesity May Aid Pregnancies.