A workout designed to help firefighters stay heart-healthy focuses on functional fitness exercises like stair climbing. Here’s how members of the New Brunswick, N.J. fire department stay fit.Four out of five firefighters nationwide are overweight or obese, and roughly half of all firefighters who die in the line of duty each year are killed by heart attacks.But now a group of health-conscious firefighters is trying to change that with a charity they founded called 555 Fitness, which provides daily workout plans – and even free exercise equipment – to thousands of firefighters across the country.The workouts are designed to not only burn fat and build cardiovascular endurance, but also to prepare firefighters for the challenge of wearing 65 pounds of gear as they climb staircases, break through walls, and crawl through smoke and fire to carry out rescues.Recently, we caught up with Lieutenant Robert Piparo — the vice president of 555 Fitness and a certified CrossFit coach — at the New Brunswick Fire Department in New Jersey. After a grueling workout at the station, we sat down with Lieutenant Piparo to learn more about functional-fitness-style workouts, how they are helping firefighters save lives and why just about anyone can do them, including you. Here are edited excerpts from our conversation.Why are so many firefighters out of shape?People have this image of the firefighter running out of a burning building holding a baby in this super athletic state. But we’re just your everyday Americans who have chosen to do a very dangerous job. And we fall into the same pitfalls as everyone else. We work crazy schedules and our sleep cycles are very interrupted.I’m a father of two. My wife works full time. I could be up all night at a fire and my wife has to work the next day. So when I go home I’m Daddy Day Care, and I may not be going to the gym that day or having a good nutrition day. It’s really hard for us to get into a routine of diet and exercise.Has exercise traditionally been encouraged by fire departments?It has not. In general it’s been one of those things where if guys worked out, they worked out. If they didn’t, they didn’t.Why is functional fitness so important for firefighters?We work 24-hour shifts. You could be here at the station and go from a dead sleep state to running into a burning building. The National Fire Protection Association says that we have to be at a fire within five minutes of the alarm. So you go from a resting heart rate to about 150 beats per minute in five minutes.When you go to a regular gym and do 20 minutes of walking on the treadmill and then do a back and biceps routine, your heart rate is never really climbing. But functional fitness training involves full body movements and it involves an up-tempo. About halfway through our workouts, your heart rate is at max effort level. But you still have to dig deep to finish. It’s just like in a fire. We max our heart rates when we’re fighting a fire, and even when your body is telling you to stop, you have to keep going if the fire’s not out.So this style of working out translates directly to fighting fires?Yes. When we go to a fire scene, everything is a full body motion. There are no bicep curls or triceps kickbacks at a fire ground. But there’s a lot of squatting. There’s a lot of farmer’s carries with ladders and different tools. There’s a lot of bear crawling when the heat drops us to the ground. So all these functional-fitness-style full body exercises mimic what we’re doing in fires.Can you walk us through the workout?In the fire service, everything is teamwork. Everyone on a fire ground has a job to do and you’re all working together for a common goal. So we work out as a team. Today we did a four-man style workout. We took a hose that weighs 15 pounds, and one man would put that on his shoulders and run up and down our staircase. He was essentially our timekeeper: After he was done with four rounds of running up and down the stairs, we would all switch stations.From the steps you move over to the battling ropes – except we don’t use ropes, we use a fire hose. Then you go over and do box jumps. But instead of using a box, we use the back bumper of our fire engine, which is about 26 inches off the ground. If you’re not very good at jumping, you can just do step-ups.Finally, we did a farmer’s carry with five-gallon foam pails. In our job, we use foam to put out alcohol based fires and gasoline fires. The foam sloshes around inside them, so when you’re doing this exercise it’s building your grip strength, which is really important for us.Why is building grip strength so important?On TV, you always see firefighters carrying someone over their shoulders. But when you have 65 pounds of gear on, carrying another person isn’t easy. We’re generally dragging them, which is what we’re taught to do in firefighter safety and survival school. So having grip strength is key.Can anyone do these workouts?Definitely. A lot of people who go on vacation follow the workouts because they can easily do them in their hotel room or gym. We post different workouts geared toward different activity levels, from beginner to the elite athlete level. And every day we also post what we call an Honor W.O.D. – or workout of the day — that honors one of the 343 firefighters killed on 9/11.How often would you recommend someone do these workouts?I would love to see firefighters working out anywhere from three to five times a week.Where can people find the workouts?You can go to our Instagram page, @555fitness.com, where we provide strictly body weight workouts every day that get your heart rate going in 15 to 20 minutes and give you a good full workout. You can also go to our website or our Twitter page.For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page. A version of this article appears in print on 03/10/2015, on page D6 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Saving Lives at the Firehouse.