Nutritionists will tell you that “butter is back” is not quite the right message to be sending to the public about the significance of fat in a healthy diet. We can, however, let go of our fear of frying, especially if we use monounsaturated fats like olive oil and polyunsaturated fats like grapeseed oil. Study after study has indicated that refined carbohydrates play a much more insidious role in our national health problems than fats do, and that a moderate-fat (but low-saturated fat) diet like the Mediterranean diet (about 40 percent calories from fat) is a healthy way to eat, and even more important, an enjoyable, very easy way of eating to adhere to. When it comes to frying and deep-frying food it’s not so much the frying that is the consideration, but what you are frying. If coating vegetables in a batter that crisps up when you fry them in hot oil makes you and your kids want to eat lots of vegetables, then why not do it from time to time? Try crispy kale coated with a crunchy spiced chickpea flour batter and you will find yourself eating kale like popcorn.I delved into different tempura-type batters this week and used a number of different vegetables. A buttermilk batter with cornmeal and cornstarch yielded a fluffy coating, whereas batters made with sparkling water yielded thinner, crispier coatings. I added dukkah to some batters for spice and texture, and fresh herbs for flavor.No matter what food you deep-fry, the most important thing to watch is the oil temperature. It should hover between 360 and 375 degrees at all times so that the food will cook quickly and crisp up without absorbing too much oil. You will be amazed to find a cauliflower floret tender inside its crispy coating in 2 minutes or less. So let the oil come back up to temperature between batches and use a thermometer. Also, once cooked be sure to drain the vegetables on a rack lined with paper towels; that helps remove any lingering excess oil. 
Crispy Spiced Kale
	:
		Irresistible, crispy kale that is a delicious alternative to kale chips.	
Fried Green Beans, Scallions and Brussels Sprouts With Buttermilk-Cornmeal Coating
	:
		A fluffy and crispy coating can give tired vegetables new life.	
Spiced Green Beans and Baby Broccoli Tempura

Deep-Fried Cauliflower With Crispy Dukkah Coating
	:
		A Middle Eastern specialty with a little extra kick.	
Herb Fritters
	:
		Light and delicate fritters that can be made with a variety of greens and herbs.	
For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page. 