Asked by Julia • 2141 votesThe most popular acid reflux medications — proton pump inhibitors like Nexium, Prilosec and Prevacid, which are taken daily — can have serious side effects and “are not the benign drugs the public thinks they are,” said Dr. Shoshana J. Herzig of Harvard Medical School.Over the past five years, the federal Food and Drug Administration has issued numerous warnings about proton pump inhibitors, saying that long-term use, defined as a year or more, increases the risk of hip, wrist and spine fractures (though studies have found an increase in bone fractures with use over shorter periods). Long-term use can also lead to low levels of magnesium in the blood, which can precipitate seizures, arrhythmias and muscle spasms, according to the F.D.A. The deficiency cannot always be corrected with supplements, and patients who take other drugs like digoxin or diuretics, which can also cause low magnesium levels, should avoid proton pump inhibitors.The use of these inhibitors for any period of time is also associated with an increase of intestinal infections and a higher risk of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea, a potentially life-threatening disease. An F.D.A. advisory warns patients who use these drugs to contact their health care providers immediately if they develop persistent diarrhea that does not improve.Several studies have also reported that proton pump inhibitors increase the risk for pneumonia in hospital patients; a similar increase was not seen among patients taking a different type of acid-reflux drug called a histamine-2 receptor blocker (a drug like Pepcid or Zantac), Dr. Herzig said.Long-term P.P.I. use may reduce the absorption of other important nutrients, vitamins and minerals besides magnesium, such as calcium, iron and vitamin B12, and has been linked with anemia. P.P.I.s can also interact with other medications, and the F.D.A. has warned heart attack and stroke patients that the P.P.I. omeprazole (Prilosec) weakens the effectiveness of the anticlotting agent clopidogrel (Plavix).Stomach acid plays an important role in breaking down food and absorbing nutrients, and also kills bacteria and microbes. Long-term maintenance use of acid-suppressing drugs like proton pump inhibitors may disrupt these processes and make people more susceptible to both infections and nutritional deficits, experts say.Taking antacids like Tums, Rolaids, Pepto-Bismol or Milk of Magnesia episodically to relieve heartburn is unlikely to have these effects, and while H2 blockers are known to have side effects like headaches, constipation and nausea, their long-term use has not been studied as extensively as that of proton pump inhibitors.“Certain people with conditions like Barrett’s esophagus should be on long-term acid suppression,” Dr. Herzig said, referring primarily to P.P.I.s, “but the majority of people with heartburn and reflux should not be on these drugs long-term.”Do you have a health question?
		 Submit your question to Ask Well.
Related:For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.