By SAEED AL-BATATI and KAREEM FAHIMMARCH 21, 2015
AL MUKALLA, Yemen —  From sparring seats of power across an increasingly divided country, Yemen’s president and the Houthi rebels who forced his government into exile traded ultimatums and threats on Saturday, escalating tensions after days of unrelenting violence.The war of words came a day after suicide bombers attacked Zaydi Shiite worshipers in two mosques in the capital, Sana, killing 130 people. A claim of responsibility by a group that said it was affiliated with the Sunni extremists of the Islamic State group raised fears of a descent into sectarian bloodletting.The attacks were the deadliest on civilians in recent memory in Yemen. But rather than trying to de-escalate tensions on Saturday, the Houthis, a rebel movement led by Zaydi Shiites from northern Yemen, and the president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, appeared to grow even more belligerent.Their public threats, coupled with reports of new violence in southern and western Yemen, deepened a sense that the country’s seven-month political crisis was entering a dangerous new phase.AdvertisementThe past four grim days have brought reports of bloodshed from around the country. On Wednesday, gunmen in Sana assassinated one of Yemen’s most prominent dissident journalists. In Aden on Thursday, military units and militias armed with heavy weapons fought for control of the international airport.AdvertisementAfter the suicide bombings on Friday, militants from Al Qaeda stormed security buildings in Huta, in the southern province of Lahj, killing more than two dozen soldiers before they withdrew.And the Obama administration, reacting to the failing security situation, withdrew more than 100 American Special Operations advisers stationed at a military base near Huta on Friday.
            In early 2014, Shiite insurgents known as Houthis consolidated control over Yemen’s Saada Province. In recent months, they have expanded their influence.        Controlled by HouthisHouthis have influence or are able to operateAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operateSparSely populatedSAADA PROVINCEYEMENSana100 milesTaizSHABWA PROVINCEQaeda strongholdAden200 milesSparSelypopulatedYEMENSanaTaizAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.Detail belowControlled by HouthisHouthis have influence or are able to operateAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operateSAADA PROVINCEYEMENSanaTaizSHABWAPROVINCEQaedastrongholdAdenMARCH 20, 2015
In his first public comments since fleeing the capital for Aden in February, Mr. Hadi called on Saturday on Yemen’s warring parties, including the Houthis, to pursue negotiations, using combative language that made that prospect seem remote. “My goal is to reunite, and to invite all political forces, including those who executed the coup against constitutional legitimacy,” he said, referring to the Houthis.He criticized the close alliance between the Houthis and Iran, accusing the Houthis of flying Iran’s flag in their northern stronghold and threatening to replace it with the Yemeni colors. Reading from sheets of paper, Mr. Hadi delivered ultimatums that the Houthis, who control the capital and large parts of northern Yemen, seemed unlikely to agree to, including orders to withdraw their loyalists from government ministries and their gunmen from Sana and cities across the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Soon after Mr. Hadi’s speech, the Houthis issued what seemed like a call for war. A statement from the group’s Supreme Revolutionary Committee that condemned the recent violence — including what it referred to as “terrorist” attacks by fighters loyal to Mr. Hadi in Aden — declared a “general mobilization” of soldiers, security officers and civilian volunteers to confront “terrorist forces all across the country.”The tensions overshadowed a day of mourning in the capital for the victims, at least 13 of whom were children, according to public health officials.On Saturday, Maj. Gen. Mohamed al-Moayad, who had been in the Badr mosque when it was attacked, said he could not shake the image of parents searching for their children in the aftermath, a memory more painful even than the blast.General Moayad was among those searching on Friday. His eldest son, Ibrahim, 25, was killed in the attack, and another son, 12-year-old Majduddin, was wounded, he said.Advertisement“I lost one,” the general said. “So did many fathers who were there.”Saeed Al-Batati reported from Al Mukalla, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo. Mohammed Ali Kalfood contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Threats by Yemen’s Warring Parties Escalate Crisis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.