AdvertisementSupported byBy Ceylan YeginsuISTANBUL — The jailed Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan on Saturday renewed a call for his fighters to disarm and end a long conflict with Turkey, hailing a “new era” in relations between Turks and Kurds.Mr. Ocalan, who continues to exercise influence over Turkey’s Kurdish population from a prison on an island in the Sea of Marmara where he has been serving a life sentence since 1999, urged the separatist Kurdistan Workers’ Party, known here as the P.K.K., to hold a congress in the spring to end a Kurdish insurgency that has fractured society and claimed nearly 40,000 lives since the 1980s.“I call on the P.K.K. to convene a congress to end the 40-year-long armed struggle against the Republic of Turkey and to determine political and social strategies and tactics in accordance with the spirit of the new era,” Mr. Ocalan wrote in a letter that was read to a crowd of hundreds of thousands celebrating the traditional spring festival of Nowruz in Diyarbakir, southeastern Turkey. Television images showed women in bright dresses and men in uniforms dancing and cheering jubilantly, waving scarves and flags of the militant group as the letter was read in both Kurdish and Turkish.Kurds, who account for roughly 20 percent of Turkey’s population of about 80 million, have been demanding greater rights and more autonomy after decades of being ostracized by the Turkish state. While Mr. Ocalan’s call for disarmament is likely to add momentum to a fragile peace process, which is now in its third year, Kurdish rebels are waiting to see whether the Turkish government can deliver on the democratic reforms outlined in a 10-point framework for peace that is to be safeguarded by a new constitution.In 2013, Mr. Ocalan called for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of Kurdish rebels from Turkish territory.  But the Kurds said that the government failed to keep its promises and instead focused on consolidating its power and winning elections.Thousands of Kurds took to the streets across Turkey in October to protest the government’s inaction and lack of military support against the Islamic State, whose fighters had besieged the Kurdish border town of Kobani in Syria. Turkey’s reluctance to intervene in the conflict stemmed, in part, from its opposition to an autonomous Kurdish region on its borders.  At least 40 people died in demonstrations in 30 Turkish cities, and P.K.K. commanders threatened to break the two-year cease-fire if Turkey failed to help Kurdish forces in Kobani.Mr. Ocalan urged both sides to reopen negotiations, and talks resumed late last year after Turkey allowed Iraqi Kurdish pesh merga fighters to cross into Kobani through Turkish territory. Last month, Kurdish lawmakers and the governing Justice and Development Party delivered a joint statement reaffirming the 10-point peace framework. But tensions grew again last week when President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said that there had never been a “Kurdish problem” in Turkey.“Now, when you take a look at them, they keep talking about a Kurdish problem,” Mr. Erdogan said during a ceremony in the province of Balikesir. “What are you talking about, brother? What Kurdish problem?”Analysts said that Mr. Erdogan’s comments were mainly intended as a tactical maneuver to secure the nationalist vote ahead of parliamentary elections in June. Mr. Erdogan is working to help his party secure an absolute majority so that he can push through a new constitution that would allow him to consolidate his presidential powers.“It is likely that Erdogan made that statement because of concerns that the Kurdish vote would shift to the main Kurdish party, while the nationalist votes would shift to the Nationalist Movement Party following the government’s joint declaration about the framework of the process,” said Verda Ozer, a scholar at the Istanbul Policy Center. “Ultimately if Erdogan were against the peace process, it would not be taking place.”Much is at stake for Turkey ahead of the elections as it grapples with the threat posed by the Islamic State at its borders. The Kurdish peace process has taken on a new sense of urgency as Kurdish fighters have become the most effective ground force, coordinating with the American-led coalition, in the fight against the Islamic militants.On Saturday, following Mr. Ocalan’s statement, Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc reiterated the government’s commitment to the peace process and dismissed Mr. Erdogan’s remarks as “emotional.”The responsibility for running the country and guiding the peace process “belongs to the government,” Mr. Arinc said, “and we can regard his statements as his personal views.” Advertisement