Demonstrators gathered in Taiwan’s capital, Taipei, on Monday as part of events marking the first anniversary of student-led protests that became known as the Sunflower Movement.Last year, a group of protesters broke into Taiwan’s legislature and occupied it for 23 days to block efforts by the governing party, the Kuomintang, to approve a pact on service trades with China. The hundreds inside the building were joined by thousands more in the streets, who said they were concerned that the trade pact could harm local businesses and leave Taiwan increasingly vulnerable to economic influence from China, which considers the self-ruled island part of its territory.The trade pact has been delayed pending a bill to set up a mechanism to allow closer monitoring of cross-strait agreements. But further progress is seen as unlikely until Taiwan holds presidential and legislative elections in January 2016. The Kuomintang suffered a sharp defeat during local elections in November, and analysts say that the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, which is pro-independence and cautious about ties with China, is likely to do well at the polls next year. Activists have spent recent days posting photographs, drawings and articles recalling the protests on razor-wire barriers in central Taipei. Protest organizers on Monday criticized the heavy police presence.“It feels just like the situation during the occupation,” Lai Yu-fen, a spokeswoman for the Black Island Nation Youth Front, a student activist group, told reporters. “There are lots and lots of barriers, as if they are afraid the students will break in again. From our point of view, that’s not necessary.”The gathering on Monday was to recall the bloodiest stage of last year’s protest, when a group temporarily occupied Taiwan’s main government offices. The police used wooden batons and water cannons to dislodge the protesters, leaving nearly 200 hurt. Last month prosecutors charged 118 people in connection with last year’s protests, including 93 for the March 23 occupation of the Executive Yuan, the government’s main administrative compound.