With the death of Singapore’s founding leader, Lee Kuan Yew, on Monday, China lost a figure who, in the eyes of Communist Party leaders, showed that economic prosperity could be achieved under crisply efficient one-party rule, immunized from the temptations of liberal democracy.Singapore won an outsize influence as an inspiration for Chinese policy makers from the 1980s, after they embarked on an experiment with controlled capitalism that turned China into the world’s second-biggest economy. Mr. Lee’s tiny tropical city-state, with a population a quarter the size of Beijing, offered Chinese leaders a model of how to navigate economic and social transformations without losing political control.“Singapore has a special position in the Chinese leadership’s mind,” Huang Jing, a professor at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy of the National University of Singapore, said in a telephone interview. “It is symbolic, showing that Chinese can be successful, both in terms of economic modernization and political modernization,” he added. “It shows that a non-Western political system can also succeed.”Mr. Lee has been extravagantly mourned by China’s news media, almost as if he were one of the country’s own leaders, and the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs hinted at the status that Mr. Lee held in Beijing, as a sympathetic interlocutor with Western countries and Southeast Asia, and as a flinty critic of liberal values.“Mr. Lee Kuan Yew was a uniquely influential Asian statesman and a strategist boasting both Eastern values and an international vision,” a ministry spokesman, Hong Lei, said in a message on Mr. Lee’s death. (The English version called them “oriental values.”) In a separate statement of condolence, President Xi Jinping praised Mr. Lee as “an old friend of the Chinese people and a founder, pioneer and promoter of Chinese-Singaporean relations.”In November 1978, on the cusp of inaugurating far-reaching economic changes, Deng Xiaoping visited Singapore. And in 1992, when Deng urged China into a frenzied burst of market liberalization, he offered Singapore as a reassuring example that the Communist Party could still maintain firm control.“The social order in Singapore is quite good,” Deng said while visiting southern China to promote faster economic change, according to an official transcript. “They run things strictly, and we should borrow from their experiences, and run things even better than they do.”Since the 1980s, and especially the 1990s, Chinese officials have visited Singapore, seeking to absorb its experiences, or burnish their credentials with a tour. In a recent paper about China’s fascination with Singapore, Mark R. Thompson and Stephan Ortmann, both from the City University of Hong Kong, cited one estimate that 22,000 Chinese officials made study visits to Singapore between 1990 and 2011. Singaporean universities offer public administration programs and courses tailored for Chinese administrators.“They want to learn how Singapore is run and why it has been so successful,” Professor Huang, from the National University of Singapore, said of the Chinese officials who take his classes. “And, second, they want to learn in Singapore how to deal with the outside world, because one major problem with Chinese officials is they don’t know how to tell their story.”Mr. Lee built the People’s Action Party and Singapore into Cold War fortifications against Communist revolution, and established full diplomatic ties with China only in 1990. Paradoxically, though, Mr. Lee and his government came to offer successive Chinese leaders an idealized example, much visited and studied, of how the Communist Party could absorb market changes and exposure to the outside world without succumbing to public discontent and rampant corruption.“What they’re looking for is ideological reassurance that they’re not falling into what we call the ‘modernization trap,’ that by advancing economically they’re not necessarily creating the basis of their own collapse,” Professor Thompson, who is the director of the Southeast Asia Research Center at the City University of Hong Kong, said in a telephone interview. The Singapore experience came to mean even more to Chinese admirers as other authoritarian Asian governments gave way to electoral democracy and fractious party competition.“As political change occurred in South Korea and Taiwan,” Professor Thompson said, “increasingly it became only Singapore that combined for the Chinese leadership a very interesting model of effective economic governance, rapid growth, of state involvement with meritocratic rule, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, strict limits on political participation and democracy.”Starting in 1976, Mr. Lee visited China 33 times, met all of China’s party leaders from Mao Zedong onward, and found something to praise in each. In a book published in 2013, Mr. Lee also held heady hopes for Mr. Xi.“He has iron in his soul,” Mr. Lee said of Mr. Xi. “I would put him in Nelson Mandela’s class of persons. A person with enormous emotional stability who does not allow his personal misfortunes or sufferings to affect his judgment. In other words, he is impressive.”In the last decade of his life, Mr. Lee gave advice to the Bush and Obama administrations on how to handle a rising China, and frequently they did not like his blunt assessments. When Graham T. Allison and Robert D. Blackwill, both at Harvard University, asked Mr. Lee whether China’s goal was to become the predominant power in Asia and then the world, he responded: “Of course. Why not? They have transformed a poor society by an economic miracle to become now the second-largest economy in the world,” he said. “Unlike other emergent countries, China wants to be China and accepted as such, not as an honorary member of the West. The Chinese will want to share this century as coequals with the United States.”Chinese leaders reciprocated the praise. For Chinese officials, Singapore has offered a particularly attractive role model because most of its people have Chinese heritage, and Mr. Lee promoted a mélange of Confucian precepts and other traditions as a uniquely Asian set of values, resistant to the decadence and disorder that Mr. Lee denounced in advanced Western societies.“Singapore created a miracle of development that has astounded the world,” said a commentary issued on Monday by Xinhua, China’s state news agency. “The impact and significance of this miracle lies in how Singapore forged a path that did not lead to Westernization, and instead took a path of Singaporean modernization through self-reliance drawing from the strengths of West and East.”But Cherian George, a Singaporean journalist teaching in Hong Kong, said Mr. Lee’s more authoritarian admirers abroad failed to note that he allowed a degree of regular electoral accountability that, while circumscribed, was unavailable in purely one-party states.“From the very start, he insisted on an incorruptible system,” Mr. George said. “There’s no shortage of strong leaders around the world and their fans who say they look up to Lee Kuan Yew, but ignore this very inconvenient aspect of his governance.”What practical lessons Chinese officials might learn from Singapore is less clear. Running a city-state of 5.4 million people is, after all, enormously different from running a country of 1.3 billion.For all the echoes that people seek in the People’s Action Party, Mr. Xi has so far not lived up to hopes voiced in 2012 that he might draw on Singapore’s experience to carry out a measure of political relaxation. Many of Singapore’s policies for fighting corruption, such as salaries for officials so high that the commercial sector and graft have less allure, could not be replicated in China, Professor Huang said.“As soon as those Chinese officials arrive in Singapore, after a few weeks of learning, they really learn they cannot copy the Singapore experience,” he said. “But still they go back with the idea that, ‘If Singaporeans, and Lee Kuan Yew and his people, can do it, then we can.’ ”David E. Sanger contributed reporting from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on 03/24/2015, on page A4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: China Has Sought to Emulate a Singapore Leaderu2019s Modernized System, to a Point.