When history intersects with nationalism, there is often little patience or appetite for nuance. Instead, broad brushstrokes are preferred. Take, for example, the period from the end of the First Opium War in 1842 to the victory of the Chinese Communist Party in 1949. This period — a time of wars, invasions, occupations and revolutions in China — is often summed up by Chinese political leaders as their country’s “century of humiliation.” Although more than six decades have passed, this narrative of “humiliation” at the hands of foreign powers continues to set the tone for China’s interaction with much of the outside world.The current exhibition at the Hong Kong independent arts center Para Site, and the first for the center’s new home in Quarry Bay, seeks to break down what one of the show’s curators, Cosmin Costinas, calls this “monolithic vision” of the Chinese nation, while also suggesting strategies for creating alternative narratives. Mr. Costinas and Anthony Yung, the show’s co-curator, invited artists, mostly from mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, to engage with the speech and clichés often associated with nationalism in China. The result is a tongue-in-cheek exhibition titled “A Hundred Years of Shame — Songs of Resistance and Scenarios for Chinese Nations.” It features works by 18 artists, many of which were specially created for the show, which runs through May 10. “I really wanted to make an exhibition about the way in which this complex of ‘a hundred years of national humiliation’ has informed so much of the discussion surrounding Chinese nationalism,” said Mr. Costinas, who is also Para Site’s executive director. “In light of events in Hong Kong, it became clear that it was important to not only look at the official discourse, but to focus on ways of being in opposition to it,” he added, referring to the protests last year in which thousands of people in Hong Kong, a semi-autonomous Chinese territory that enjoys civil liberties unavailable on the Chinese mainland, took to the streets to press for democratic changes rejected by Beijing.One commissioned work is an installation titled “Live in Hong Kong, Born in Dongguan,” a mainland Chinese city just north of Hong Kong, by the young Hong Kong-based artist Trevor Yeung. Placed at the center of the exhibition space, the installation consists of a circle of tanks containing wild fish. It is unclear whether the fish are from Hong Kong, where these particular types of fish are under legal protection, or from the mainland, where they are not.The installation is intended as “a metaphor of my shameful relationship with my own background,” Mr. Yeung writes in the accompanying text. “Growing up in Hong Kong as a mainlander was the source of many insecurities.”The work raises questions about “Chineseness” and the complicated negotiation of national identity on a personal level.“When I look at the fish in these tanks” — abandoned, yet still maintaining their own individuality and not caring where they are from,  the artist writes — “they are in many ways similar to me.”The show also features a 2014 video work by Hu Xiangqian, in which the Beijing-based artist returns to his hometown of Leizhou. There, Mr. Hu delivers a 10-minute motivational speech on the importance of acquiring knowledge and achieving success in life to an audience of 2,000 listless middle- and high-school students at his former school. Ridden with motivational speech clichés, the speech is in part ironic, but also genuine.Leizhou, which is on the southern tip of the southern province of Guangdong, is rather proudly referred to by locals as tuwei shijie, or “the edge of the world” — hence the title of this work, “Speech at the Edge of the World,” and the overall exhibition’s Chinese name, “Tuwei Shijie.”“We referred to the video in our title because it captures that perspective that is interesting for us, the sense of both personal and national accomplishment,” Mr. Costinas said. “The title ‘Edge of the World’ also works for the exhibition, because it is a perfect antithesis of the Middle Kingdom,” the Chinese name for China.“So it presents itself as a contrasting worldview to China’s official view of its place in the world,” he said.The exhibition emphasizes that China and its neighbors have a long history of dissent. In a 2015 acrylic on cloth, the Changsha-based artist Liao Guohe draws a connection between two “disobedient spirits” who lived centuries apart: Xi Kang, a subversive scholar and musician from the Three Kingdoms period (220-280), and Nam June Paik, the Korean-American artist whose pants “accidentally” fell down while he was greeting President Clinton in 1998.Visitors to the show can also sit in a recording studio (presented under the fictional label “Xi Kang Records”) and browse through an archive of music of dissent in the wider Chinese-speaking world, whether pop, punk or rock ’n’ roll. Mr. Costinas said the archive will be maintained and expanded after the exhibit closes.A spirit of rebellion radiates as well from the painting “Human Chain,” completed by the Hong Kong-based artist Firenze Lai on Sept. 25, just days before the riot police in Hong Kong sought to break up the pro-democracy protests using tear gas. About one month later, Ms. Lai wrote on her Facebook page, “I could not imagine that since September 28, the scene suggested in the painting would appear over and over again in front of me.”In one adjoining room, the rather cheekily named “Academy of Shame,” the curators try to provide a more historical framework for the “century of humiliation.” Among the various documents, reference points, artworks and cultural objects on display, one work in particular is a reminder to visitors that China’s humiliation at the hands of foreign powers was not without basis: an official portrait of a small, flat-faced Pekinese dog found during the sacking of the Old Summer Palace in Beijing by British and French forces in 1860.The dog was later presented as a gift to Queen Victoria, who rechristened her new favorite pet “Looty.”“A Hundred Years of Shame – Songs of Resistance and Scenarios for Chinese Nations” runs through May 10 at Para Site, 22/F, Wing Wah Industrial Building, 677 King’s Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong.