Mr. Duan, a taxi driver with a criminal record, was low on funds two years ago when he received an attractive offer on QQ, a messaging platform: Send military information in exchange for cash.Mr. Duan, who is from Kaifeng, in the central Chinese province of Henan, accepted the online offer, the local news media reported, using only his surname. Television footage appears to show him on a bicycle and in his taxi taking notes on his cellphone near military compounds and encrypting messages on his laptop.He is accused of sending the information and hand-drawn maps to his online acquaintance, receiving payments of 3,000 renminbi, or $480, a month, more than doubling his wages as a taxi driver — until his arrest last year. At least, that is, according to news reports on Mr. Duan’s arrest on Tuesday, which called it the first publicly acknowledged case of espionage in Henan since the province’s State Security department was established 20 years ago. The unlikely story of Mr. Duan, now 37, is one of a series of reports in the Chinese news media over the last year about street-level agents recruited online by foreign countries or organizations, reflecting heightened concerns over espionage.This month, two men were reported to have been convicted in Dalian, in northeastern China, of selling photos of military sites overseas. Last year the state news media said that a group of at least 40 people had sold information including photos of military aircraft to a foreign intelligence agent.None of the reports indicated which country purchased the military information.On Tuesday, the State Security department offered a way out to any Chinese citizens who were enticed into spying for foreign forces. “Don’t be afraid if you receive threats by your counterparts,” an unidentified department official in Kaifeng said in a local television report on Mr. Duan’s arrest.“Don’t let them lead you by the nose,” he said. “Anyone who is tricked into activities that harm national security, but reports them promptly and expresses remorse, can be spared prosecution. Such important meritorious service even warrants rewards.”