By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSEMARCH 23, 2015
LIMA, Peru (AFP) — At least 37 people were killed when a bus swerved into oncoming traffic in Peru on Monday, leading to a multi-vehicle collision involving two other buses and a freezer truck, the authorities said.Peru’s health minister, Anibal Velasquez, who was on his way to the crash site near the northern city of Huarmey, told local radio the accident also left 70 people injured.Six people who were badly hurt were taken by helicopter to a hospital in Lima, the capital, about 185 miles south.The local hospital in Huarmey was overwhelmed by the number of injured, fire officials said in a statement, adding that other health centers were enlisted.AdvertisementThe head of the highway police, Orfiles Bravo, said a bus belonging to the Murga Serrano line had swerved into an oncoming lane on the Pan American Highway. It was then hit by the truck and two other buses, Mr. Bravo told RPP radio.AdvertisementThe Murga bus “was split in two,” he added. Television reports showed bodies sprawled on the pavement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The authorities initially gave a death toll of 22, but the Health Ministry said that number had increased sharply as rescue workers gained access to the wreckage.The government declared an emergency and ordered more ambulances to the crash site, the head of the council of ministers, Ana Jara, said on Twitter.Forty-two passengers on the Murga bus were members of a Christian evangelical church, the World Missionary Movement, who were returning from a convention in Lima. Peruvian news media reports said the injured and stranded passengers also included Haitian and Senegalese travelers.Peru’s roads are notoriously dangerous. In the first half of last year, 1,406 people were killed in accidents. The full-year death toll was 3,590 in 2013 and 4,138 in 2012.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Dozens Killed in Multi-Vehicle Crash in Peru.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.