AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew RosenbergCAMP DAVID, Md. — Ashraf Ghani, the new president of Afghanistan, opened his first official visit to the United States on Monday with a simple message: He is a man with whom the United States can work, and he is thankful for American support and sacrifices.The contrast with his predecessor, Hamid Karzai, could not have been starker. Where Mr. Karzai was given to sharply criticizing his American allies, at times comparing them to the Taliban, Mr. Ghani offered praise and declared a new phase in relations between Afghanistan and the United States.“It’s time for Afghanistan to reciprocate the gift that the United States has so generously provided over the years,” he told reporters. “Reciprocating the gift means owning our problems, solving them and asking of ourselves what we must do for ourselves and for the region.”Throughout the day — in a speech at the Pentagon, during meetings with American officials and at a news conference at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland — Mr. Ghani stressed his commitment to combating militancy and ensuring that Afghanistan could one day support itself as a stable and functional democracy.Mr. Ghani, who lived in the United States for more than 20 years, seemed to go out of his way to recognize the sacrifices made by Americans in Afghanistan, repeatedly citing the 2,215 Americans who have been killed and the 20,000 who have been wounded in his country.It was a message that American officials were happy to hear and eager to help Mr. Ghani deliver. The Obama administration is close to abandoning its plan to cut the American force in Afghanistan by half at the end of the year, and senior American officials have repeatedly cited the improved relationship under Mr. Ghani as a reason for slowing the withdrawal.Mr. Ghani began the day at the Pentagon, where he spoke to American troops and their families. The speech appeared to be carefully choreographed to convey Mr. Ghani’s appreciation of the United States.“Each one of you has left a legacy, but I also understand that Afghanistan has marked you,” he said, standing beside the new defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter.Mr. Ghani then personally thanked two people in the crowd: Col. Sue Myers, retired, the widow of Maj. Gen. Harold J. Greene of the Army, who was shot and killed by an Afghan soldier at Kabul’s military academy last year, and Capt. Jeremy Haynes of the Army, who was severely wounded in the same attack.General Greene was the highest-ranking American military officer to die in a war zone since the Vietnam War, and Captain Haynes’s wounds were nearly fatal. “We recognize that there are millions of stories like theirs,” Mr. Ghani said. “Stories of duty, honor, sacrifice and sometimes of grief and tragedy because over 850,000 American troops and civilians and thousands more contractors have served and sacrificed in Afghanistan since 2001. And so have their families alongside them.”Later, speaking to reporters at Camp David, Mr. Ghani again cited the number of Americans killed in Afghanistan. “They will be part of our enduring memories, and we pay tribute to them,” he said.If Mr. Ghani sounded more like an American politician than a foreign leader, it is probably because he knows the United States well. He earned a doctorate at Columbia University and went on to teach at American universities before spending 15 years as a senior official at the World Bank in Washington. He once owned a house in Bethesda, Md., about an hour south of Camp David. But for all Mr. Ghani’s pro-American credentials, he is also deeply nationalistic, according to people who know him.Both he and President Obama wanted to ensure that each side walked away from the visit with tangible achievements. A decision on troop numbers, which is to be the focus of discussion when Mr. Ghani and Mr. Obama meet at the White House on Tuesday, is the most likely outcome.Although troop numbers came up during meetings on Monday at Camp David, which Mr. Obama did not attend, the discussions were designed to produce other kinds of substantive agreements to back up all the talk about a new phase and a renewed partnership. Mr. Carter and Secretary of State John Kerry took part in the meetings, as did Abdullah Abdullah, the chief executive of Afghanistan, a role created as part of an American-brokered deal to end a political crisis set off by widespread fraud in Afghanistan’s election last year.The deal resulted in a unity government with executive power shared by Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, but the powers of the chief executive were never well defined. The government has been hampered by infighting, with Mr. Ghani seeking to solidify his power and sideline Mr. Abdullah.Still, the two have put on a brave face in public, and they appeared together with Mr. Kerry and Mr. Carter after the meetings at Camp David.Advertisement