By RICK GLADSTONEMARCH 23, 2015
Jason Rezaian, the reporter for The Washington Post incarcerated in Iran for eight months, has been denied permission for a five-day Iranian New Year furlough from prison, his brother, Ali Rezaian, said Monday.The petition for the furlough, presented a few weeks ago by the reporter’s lawyer in Iran to a Revolutionary Court judge in Tehran overseeing the case, was rejected last Friday, just as the holiday was about to begin, Mr. Rezaian’s brother said.Iranian judicial authorities sometimes grant such furloughs to nonviolent inmates for Iran’s New Year, a two-week-long holiday that coincides with the first day of spring.It was not clear why the judge, Abolghassem Salavati, refused the furlough to Mr. Rezaian, whose prosecution remains shrouded in mystery. The exact nature of the charges against him have not been made public, and he was not permitted access to a lawyer until about three weeks ago.AdvertisementA native Californian of Iranian descent, Mr. Rezaian was arrested on July 22 in his Tehran home, along with his Iranian wife, Yeganeh Salehi. She was released on bail after a few months but was warned not to talk about the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking by phone from California, Ali Rezaian also said there were new indications that his brother’s trial, which the family thought would begin once the New Year holiday was over at the beginning of April, would be further delayed.He said the judge had indicated to the defense lawyer that he would need more time to prepare for the case, suggesting that it might not start until the second half of the month.Advertisement“This was news to us,” Ali Rezaian said.The Rezaian family, The Washington Post and American officials have all called on the Iranian authorities to free Mr. Rezaian, one of three Americans of Iranian descent known to be imprisoned in Iran.A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Middle East; Iran: Judge Denies Jailed Post Reporter’s Request.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.