By JONATHAN SOBLEMARCH 23, 2015
TOKYO —  The governor of Okinawa ordered the suspension of work on a new American military airfield on Monday, escalating a confrontation with the central government. Officials in Tokyo said they would ignore his order and continue preparations for the project.Construction of the airfield at Camp Schwab, a Marine Corps base near the village of Henoko, has been delayed for years by local opposition. Among other issues, parts of the two planned runways would jut into the coral-filled waters of Oura Bay.Protesters outside the camp appeared in television news reports on Monday cheering the suspension order.The governor, Takeshi Onaga, gave those in charge of the project one week to halt a maritime geological survey for the base planned by the Japanese Defense Ministry. He threatened to revoke a marine drilling permit if the deadline is missed, and said it would be illegal to continue the survey work beyond that time period.Advertisement“I have made up my mind,” Mr. Onaga said in Naha, the capital of Okinawa. “If it comes to it, I will proceed earnestly.”AdvertisementThe United States has had an extensive military presence on the island since 1945, including an airfield at Futenma that has become surrounded by dense residential developments over the years. The United States and Japan agreed in 1996 to relocate the base, but to the frustration of officials in Washington, local frictions about environmental and other concerns have caused repeated delays and changes of plan.Mr. Onaga won a landslide election victory in November on a promise of blocking the expansion of Camp Schwab to accommodate the airfield. He and his supporters want the Marines moved off the island altogether. About half of the nearly 50,000 American military personnel stationed in Japan are on Okinawa, which Mr. Onaga and his supporters say imposes a burden on the island.On the other side of the debate is Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, a conservative who has sought to strengthen Japan’s security ties with the United States. Mr. Abe has shown more willingness to press ahead with the base relocation, despite Okinawan objections, than had his recent predecessors.Protests are held regularly outside the gates of Camp Schwab, and while they have remained peaceful, they have grown larger and more rowdy in recent months. One last month attracted at least 2,000 people, according to a count by the Okinawan newspaper Ryukyu Shimpo, and three protesters were detained.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officials in Tokyo disputed Mr. Onaga’s authority to revoke the drilling permit, which was issued by the previous governor.The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, called Mr. Onaga’s order “extremely regrettable” and said the survey work would go on.“There is absolutely no change to our plans to continue earnestly, in compliance with the law,” Mr. Suga said.Mr. Onaga said that he believed the Defense Ministry surveyors were drilling in areas of the seabed not covered by the permit, and that he would consider court action if the work continued after the permit was revoked.“The government keeps saying it is acting respectfully and seeking the understanding of Okinawans,” he said, “but this is far from sufficient.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Okinawa Governor Orders a Halt to Work on U.S. Military Airfield.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.