Like a modern-day Leviathan scenting  challenges to its rule, the Chinese state  appears to have a new target: young  women.On March 6 and 7, public security officials detained five women in three cities who planned to distribute stickers  and leaflets on March 8, International  Women’s Day, to highlight the problem  of sexual predators on public transport.Li Tingting (also known as Li Maizi),  Wang Man, Wei Tingting, Wu Rongrong  and Zheng Churan were the faces of a  new, young and fun feminism that was  drawing support in China, and their detentions provoked an outcry. Supporters of gender equality demonstrated in  New York, New Delhi and Hong Kong.  Thousands of rights advocates around  the world signed petitions demanding:  #FreeTheFive! Chinese students  signed a call: ‘‘Release the Feminists!’’Beneath the global noise, in China, a rich vein of intimidation has spread, affecting hundreds. A notice from the  Student Affairs Office of a university in  Guangzhou, posted  on social media,  read: ‘‘There are reports that students  at 10 universities  have signed a petition. Please ensure  all institutes quickly hold activities to  deeply penetrate student and  classroom circles, investigate, and do  educational and dissuasive work.’’ The pushback had the effect of publicizing the petition. ‘‘If they hadn’t issued the notice, not that many people  would have known about this,’’ wrote a  student who posted it, who other feminists said was at the South China University of Technology. ‘‘Now the whole  university knows.’’ Students were called in for ‘‘guidance’’ meetings with university officials  or teachers, a student at another university wrote in a social media message.‘‘Initially I didn’t think too much of  it,’’ she wrote. Her philosophy professor supported the feminists, so didn’t  go too hard on her.‘‘But others have had a different experience,’’ she wrote. ‘‘Students who  were out of town were called back. I  heard some were warned so severely  they were frightened and in tears.’’Administrators told signatories they  could receive a ‘‘bad mark’’ in their personal file, and prospects for further education and jobs would be affected. The students were ‘‘being used,’’  they said. The women were detained  because they planned ‘‘a collective  event that may have other motives.’’‘‘Ridiculous and frightening,’’ the  student fumed. ‘‘Where do these ‘guidance counselors’ get the power to decide students’ futures?’’‘‘We’re not idiots. We have our independent personalities and ideas. Please  respect us. Thank you.’’ And, ‘‘We demand that all collective  events be canceled, because they may  all have other motives!’’Lawyers for the detainees, who were  held on suspicion of ‘‘picking quarrels  and provoking trouble,’’ say their clients are being  maltreated in jail.The police took away the eyeglasses  of Ms. Wei and Ms. Zheng. Ms. Wang  was hospitalized with heart problems  after interrogations continuing far into  the night. Ms. Wu has been denied  medication for her hepatitis.The detentions surprised feminists in  China and abroad. Gender equality is a  founding principle of the Communist  state, which recently has pushed for a  law against domestic violence.‘‘The government scares me,’’ wrote  Ms. Zhu, an employee at a Beijing film  company who asked that her full name  not be used. ‘‘Yeah, really gone backwards,’’ she  wrote, adding that the government’s  true goal is ‘‘to restore Confucianism.’’Confucianism has traditionally emphasized women’s subservience to  male authority. In recent years, the  Communist Party has flirted with Confucian-style morality as its own ideology sputters. Some diplomats and academics in  China attribute the detentions to the  state’s fear of social activism rather  than opposition to feminism, noting that  they came during the National People’s  Congress session, when the state doubles down on ‘‘social stability.’’Either way, quite a few young women  in China are asking why distributing  stickers about gropers is a crime. Only  the Leviathan really knows. pagetwo@nytimes.com 