
MARCH 25, 2015

Passengers from at least 15 countries were aboard the flight from Barcelona, Spain, to Düsseldorf, Germany, including 72 Germans and 35 Spaniards. Here are profiles of some of the 123 victims whose families have been notified.
Passengers from at least 15 countries were aboard the flight from Barcelona, Spain, to Düsseldorf, Germany, including 72 Germans and 35 Spaniards. Here are profiles of some of the 123 victims whose families have been notified.Ms. Radner, 34, a rising star of Wagnerian opera, made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera in New York in “Götterdämmerung” in January 2012, and at La Scala in Milan in “Die Frau Ohne Schatten” in March 2012. She had been expected to perform at Bayreuth this summer in “Das Rheingold” and “Götterdämmerung,” according to a biography on her management company’s website.
Mexico’s Foreign Ministry confirmed on Thursday that two Mexicans were killed in the crash. Ms. Ayón, a yoga
and meditation teacher who lived in the Caribbean beach resort of Tulum, had
gone to Amsterdam to celebrate her 36th birthday and then traveled
to Barcelona to visit friends. She was on the first leg of her return trip to
Mexico. Her sister, Fernanda Rico, told a Mexican radio station that Ms. Ayón
would always say “that we’re just passing through” and “that you have to live
life to the fullest.”Ms. Salas, 45, was a
chemist who moved more than a decade ago to Barcelona, where she earned
master’s and doctoral degrees in food science. She was on her way to an
international food fair in Cologne for iTram Higiene, a food safety company
where she was in charge of research and development. “She was the one that
helped us with everything, advice, warnings,” her sister Maribel Salas said in
a radio interview. “She was always there to support us.”The two women were Spanish teachers at the Joseph-König high school in Haltern Am See, Germany. Ms. Cercek, 33, and Ms. Tegethoff, whose age could not be confirmed, were returning with 16 students from a Spanish-language exchange program. The 10th-grade students were identified by the school: Linda Bergjürgen, Elena Bless, Lea Drüppel, Selina Eils, Gina Michelle Gerdes, Ann-Christin Hahn, Julia Hermann, Marleen Koch, Paula Lütkenhaus, Fabio Rogge, Rabea Scheideler, Lea Schukart, Helena Siebe, Steffen Strang, Aline Venhoff, Caja Westermann.The wife of a Catalan politician, Ms. Falguera worked for a fashion company and was going to Germany for business. Her husband, Lluis Juncà, is a high-ranking member of Esquerra Republicana, or ERC, a party that has been leading the drive for Catalonia to secede from Spain.The couple, who were married on Saturday, were planning to settle in Düsseldorf, according to Juan José Maestre, a municipal official from La Llagosta, outside Barcelona. Mr. Maestre said that Ms. Allaoui, 23, held Spanish and Moroccan citizenship, but it was unclear whether her new husband, Mr. Tehrioui, 24, who was from Morocco, also had a Spanish passport. Another passenger aboard the flight, 42-year-old Francisco Javier Goñalons, was from La Llagosta, according to Mr. Maestre.Mr. Misanas, the general manager of Mimasa, which makes sanitation equipment, was among a group of Spanish executives believed to have been flying to Germany to attend Anuga FoodTec, a trade fair. On its website, Mimasa said that it was planning to present its products at the food and beverage industry event. The company was closed on Wednesday "for family reasons."The two men worked for Delphi, an auto parts manufacturer, in its diesel systems factory in Sant Cugat, near Barcelona. Mr. Oficialdegui, 62, was the human resources director in Spain and was set to retire soon, after more than three decades with the company. Mr. Rives, 51, a labor union representative, had worked for Delphi for 26 years. Both men were traveling to a meeting at Delphi’s German headquarters, according to Marie-Pierre Ygrié, a spokeswoman for the company.Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman, confirmed that three Americans had been killed and identified two of them as Yvonne Selke, 58, of Nokesville, Va., and her daughter, Emily Selke, 22.Yvonne Selke, who was taking a European vacation with her daughter, was an employee of Booz Allen Hamilton in Washington for nearly 23 years. “Yvonne was a wonderful co-worker and a dedicated employee who spent her career with the firm supporting the mission of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency,” which coordinates satellite-based mapping for the Pentagon, said a company statement released by Betty Thompson, an executive vice president.Gabriela Maumus and her boyfriend, Sebastian Grecco, both 28, were vacationing in Spain according to Argentine media reports. The Argentine embassy in France confirmed they were killed aboard the Germanwings plane. Ms. Maumus was the bass player in the popular Buenos Aires rock band Asalto al Parque Zoológico, according to a report in La Nacion.Two Australians were aboard the flight. They were identified on Wednesday by Foreign Minister Julie Bishop as Carol Friday, a 68-year-old registered nurse, and her son Greig Friday, 29, a mechanical engineer, both from the State of Victoria. Mr. Friday had hoped to start teaching English in France soon, and the two were spending a few weeks together in Europe beforehand, their family said in a statement. “They were both extraordinary and exceptional people,” the statement said.Ms. Bandrés, a 37-year old editor and colorist, was traveling with her seven-month old son, Julian Pracz-Bandres. Her husband, Pawel Pracz, said in a statement that his wife worked on video and film postproduction and had been living in Manchester, Britain, for seven years. Mr. Bramley, 28, of Hull, England, had just finished his first year at César Ritz College in Lucerne, Switzerland, studying hospitality and hotel management, his family said in a statement. He was spending time with friends in Barcelona before beginning an internship on April 1. His mother, Carol Bramley, said, "He was the best son, he was my world."Mr. Bryjak, 54, a native of Kazakhstan, had been a member of Deutsche Oper am Rhein, a German opera house, since the 1996-97 season. "We have lost Oleg Bryjak, a great artist and a great man," the opera house's general director, Christoph Meyer, said in a statement. "We are stunned."The baritone sang at the prestigious Bayreuth Festival last year and was expected to perform there again in August.In a 2014 interview with Deutsche Welle, Mr. Bryjak explained that he had grown up in Kazakhstan because his Ukrainian-born father had been sent into forced exile there by the Soviets, after having done forced labor in Germany as a teenager in World War II."The good part of the story is that I grew up with the children of other prisoners," Mr. Bryjak told Deutsche Welle. "Russians and Ukrainians, Latvians and Georgians, Lithuanians and Kazakhs. We were absolutely international. So it would be impossible for me to say that one nation is better than another."Three other passengers from Kazakhstan were on board, according to wire-service reports citing the Kazakh foreign ministry: Erbol and Adil Imankulov and Aizhan Isengaliyeva. Milad Hojjatoleslami, a journalist with the Tasnim News Agency, and Hossein Javadi, a reporter for Vatan-e Emruz, an Iranian daily, were in Barcelona to cover Sunday’s soccer game between Barcelona and Real Madrid. The two sports journalists were scheduled to cover Iran’s national soccer team, which was to play Chile in Austria on Thursday. Two Colombians were killed in the crash, that country’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said. María del Pilar Tejada, 33, was studying economics in Germany and was returning from a visit to see her husband in Barcelona, according to Colombian news reports. Luis Eduardo Medrano, 36, had worked in Equatorial Guinea as an architect since 2009, according to a statement from Fundación Universitaria de Popayán, the Colombian university he attended. Advertisement