By DAVID M. HERSZENHORNMARCH 24, 2015
MOSCOW — In the latest move in a dispute that has threatened to fracture Ukraine’s government, President Petro O. Poroshenko early Wednesday dismissed the billionaire governor of Dnipropetrovsk, an important industrial region that has been a bulwark against the advances of pro-Russian separatists.The ousted governor, Igor V. Kolomoisky, had been one of the government’s staunchest allies, and his privately financed militias had helped stop pro-Russian fighters from moving beyond the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, where they have been waging war for nearly a year.But recently, Mr. Kolomoisky had clashed with the government over the future of two state-owned energy companies in which Mr. Kolomoisky owned a minority stake.Masked, armed men, apparently loyal to Mr. Kolomoisky, occupied the offices of one company, Ukrnafta, in Kiev, the capital, late last week. The seizure of the building unsettled Kiev, which has remained peaceful since February 2014, when about 100 people were killed during mass protests that ultimately ousted the president, Viktor F. Yanukovych.AdvertisementCritics of Mr. Kolomoisky, including some prominent Ukrainian lawmakers, accused him of blocking reforms and had called for his dismissal.His removal was announced in a middle-of-the-night statement by Mr. Poroshenko’s office, apparently after a meeting between the men. The statement said that Mr. Poroshenko had received the governor’s resignation and had signed a decree removing him from the governor’s post.Advertisement“We have to ensure peace, stability and tranquillity,” Mr. Poroshenko said in the statement. “Dnipropetrovsk region should remain a bastion of Ukraine in the east, to protect peace.”The statement said that Valentyn Reznichenko, who last month was named governor of the neighboring region of Zaporizhia, would be the acting governor in Dnipropetrovsk. Mr. Reznichenko had ran a government agency overseeing Ukraine’s radio frequencies and has business ties to the president’s chief of staff.Dnipropetrovsk, which also borders Donetsk, is widely viewed as the country’s most important industrial region.Just days ago, in an interview on the 1+1 television channel, which he owns, Mr. Kolomoisky suggested that a compromise had been reached with Mr. Poroshenko. But on Monday, the director of the Ukrainian state security service said that Mr. Poroshenko had ordered the arrest of any armed men remaining in Ukrnafta’s offices.The breach between Mr. Poroshenko and Mr. Kolomoisky could have far-reaching ramifications. On Tuesday, there were reports that private militia forces had disappeared from the streets of Odessa, in southeastern Ukraine, where they had been helping to maintain order.Critics of the militias have long warned that they could easily turn against the government in Kiev. And Mr. Poroshenko had said that he would take steps to incorporate private militias like those controlled by Mr. Kolomoisky into Ukraine’s military.AdvertisementThe governor in Odessa is Ihor Palytsia, an ally of Mr. Kolomoisky, who had served as an executive of Ukrnafta.In a separate statement, the presidential administration announced that Mr. Poroshenko had signed into law a bill adopted last week by Parliament that set off the dispute with Mr. Kolomoisky.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The law effectively reduced the power of Mr. Kolomoisky’s minority stake in the state-controlled energy companies, depriving him of the ability to block management changes.Supporters of the law said that it was needed to prevent murky arrangements between the government and the country’s richest business leaders that have hobbled the country’s economy for years.In a statement, Mr. Poroshenko’s office said the bill signed by the president “brings the legislation of Ukraine to international standards.”A version of this article appears in print on March 25, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Ukraine President Dismisses Ally Who Helped Stop Rebels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.