

      By SHREEYA SINHA

MARCH 26, 2015

French officials said Thursday that the co-pilot of Germanwings Flight 9525 deliberately flew the plane into a mountain in the French Alps while the pilot banged on the locked cockpit door and passengers screamed. Crashes caused intentionally by pilots are very rare but not unheard of. Here are some examples:
Related Article
French officials said Thursday that the co-pilot of Germanwings Flight 9525 deliberately flew the plane into a mountain in the French Alps while the pilot banged on the locked cockpit door and passengers screamed. Crashes caused intentionally by pilots are very rare but not unheard of. Here are some examples: Herminio dos Santos Fernandes, the pilot of Mozambique Airlines Flight TM470 bound for Luanda, Angola, intentionally crashed the plane in a national park in Namibia on Nov. 29, 2013, according to investigators. All 33 people on board were killed. When the flight’s co-pilot left to use the lavatory, the captain locked him out of the cockpit and manually steered the plane downward. Listening to recovered flight recordings, investigators were able to hear alarms and banging on the cockpit door.A Boeing 737 belonging to the Singapore-based airline SilkAir was cruising at 35,000 feet in clear weather when it suddenly dove into a mangrove swamp near Palembang, Indonesia, on Dec. 19, 1997,  killing all 104 people on board. Indonesian investigators said, that in the last seconds of the flight, there were indications that the pilot, Tsu Way Ming, “was in the process of, or intending to, leave the cockpit.” He had recently been demoted and disciplined by the airline, and had large gambling debts. The government of Indonesia has yet to officially accept the findings. Moroccan authorities said that Younes Khayati, 32, the pilot of a Royal Air Maroc ATR-42 aircraft, intentionally disconnected the plane’s automatic navigation systems on Aug. 21, 1994, and crashed the plane into the Atlas Mountains shortly after takeoff, killing all 44 people aboard. He had passed a competency test and medical checkup on July 30. Seiji Katagiri, 35, the pilot of a Japan Air Lines DC-8 sent the plane into Tokyo Bay moments before it was to land on Feb. 9, 1982, killing 24 of the 166 passengers on board. Mr. Katagiri, who survived the crash, was prosecuted, but he was found not guilty by reason of insanity. He had a history of ''psychosomatic disorders'' in late 1980, but airline doctors said he was fit for duty. An earlier version of this article misstated the timing of Seiji Katagiri’s “psychosomatic disorders,” as a Japan Air Lines executive termed them. He had the disorders in late 1980, not in the late 1980s.If Andreas Lubitz, the flight’s 27-year-old co-pilot, was determined to kill himself, he would not be the first to use an airplane as a tool for self-destruction or to kill passengers and other crew members in the process.AdvertisementIf Andreas Lubitz, the flight’s 27-year-old co-pilot, was determined to kill himself, he would not be the first to use an airplane as a tool for self-destruction or to kill passengers and other crew members in the process.