

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

UPDATED April 21, 2015

After a nearly month-long bombing campaign in Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition of 10 Arab countries, the Saudi government announced Tuesday that it would halt its attacks. It is unclear if the decision will lead to peace talks between the antagonists in Yemen, the region’s poorest country, where the mounting crisis has drawn regional powers Egypt, Iran and Saudi Arabia deeper into a violent struggle for influence.

Here is a look at the crucial divisions and the parties to the conflict.
Related Article
After a nearly month-long bombing campaign in Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition of 10 Arab countries, the Saudi government announced Tuesday that it would halt its attacks. It is unclear if the decision will lead to peace talks between the antagonists in Yemen, the region’s poorest country, where the mounting crisis has drawn regional powers Egypt, Iran and Saudi Arabia deeper into a violent struggle for influence.Here is a look at the crucial divisions and the parties to the conflict.Yemen, historically divided between Shiites, who live mostly
in the northeast, and the majority Sunni population who live in the southeast, is  important to regional players and the United States.The Houthis are a Shiite insurgent group that fought the government of President Ali Abdullah Saleh intermittently from 2004 until he agreed to step down in 
2011, in the wake of protests inspired by the Arab Spring. Less than four years later, the Houthis are now collaborating with 
security forces still loyal to Mr. Saleh, a reflection of the shifting 
alliances at work in Yemen. Graphic: The Geography of Chaos in YemenThe Houthis are a Shiite sect from Saada Province. With support
from Iran, militants took control of the capital, Sana, and in January forced the resignation of
Mr. Saleh's successor, President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi.Who Are the Houthis?
Video: A Close-Up of Unfolding Unrest in YemenThe leaders of Saudi Arabia, which shares a border with Yemen, are especially worried about the Houthis because they are backed by Iran, a regional rival.The Saudis led a month-long military assault against the Houthis and in support of President Hadi. Mr. Hadi escaped to the port city of Aden, south of the
capital, where he and forces loyal to him took refuge, and is now in Saudi Arabia.  The Saudis have said military
action was necessary to restore Yemen’s government. But the Saudi intervention raises the possibility of a proxy war in Yemen and a wider regional conflict.Houthi Forces Move on Southern Yemen, Raising Specter of Regional Ground WarA day after the Saudi-led airstrikes began, another Arab ally came to the support of Mr. Hadi. President
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt said in a statement that the country’s navy and
air force would join the campaign. The Egyptian Army, the largest in the Arab
world, was ready
to send ground troops “if necessary,” Mr. Sisi said.Antagonists on either side of the
Yemeni conflict are braced for a prolonged battle as the country — like Iraq,
Libya and Syria — is consumed by a civil conflict, regional proxy war and the
expansion of extremist groups. Egypt Says It May Send Troops to Yemen 
Arab Nations to Form Military Force to Counter Iran and Islamist Extremists 
Obama Removes Weapons Freeze Against Egypt Militants of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula attacked government buildings in Aden on April 2, breaking out of prison a top Al Qaeda leader and hundreds of others. It was the latest example of how, as the situation in Yemen has degenerated, Al Qaeda's affiliate there has grown more assertive. After the Houthis began establishing their control of increasingly wider swaths of the country last year, and promised political change, their supporters were hopeful stability could be restored. Instead, the Sunni militants of Al Qaeda, who regard the Houthis as heretics because they 
are members of the minority Zaydi sect, an offshoot of Shiite Islam, have retaliated with growing ferocity. Violence Grows in Yemen as Al Qaeda Tries to Fight Its Way BackU.N. Warns That Yemen May Collapse as Qaeda Fighters Make Big GainsThe United States, which has backed Saudi Arabia in the Yemen conflict, moved to deploy a strengthened armada of warships off Yemen’s coast, in what was seen as a warning to the Iranians not to rearm the Houthis.Until the growing chaos forced the
evacuation of 125 United States Special Operations advisers last month,
Yemen served as a partner in American counterterrorism operations, mainly
against Al Qaeda’s affiliate in Yemen. Without American eyes and ears on the
ground, efforts to thwart Al Qaeda will be more difficult.American officials fear that the emerging security vacuum could attract even more jihadists to Yemen. On March 20, a group calling itself an affiliate of the Islamic State claimed responsibility for bombing Shiite mosques, increasing fears that it will try to ignite the sectarian tensions already roiling Yemen.At Risk of Fragmenting, Yemen Poses Dangers to U.S.U.S. Drone Kills 3 Qaeda Operatives in Yemen, Continuing Policy on StrikesDrone Strike in Yemen Said to Kill Senior Qaeda FigureAn earlier version of this article misstated the year that Ali Abdullah Saleh stepped down as president. It was 2012, not 2011; he agreed to step down in 2011.Advertisement