AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini SenguptaUNITED NATIONS — The war in Syria, now in its fifth year, has not only flooded countries in the region with millions of refugees. It has driven up the number of people seeking asylum across the world to a 20-year high, according to the United Nations.About 866,000 people sought asylum in the world’s industrialized countries in 2014, growing by 45 percent over 2013, according to numbers released Thursday by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. One in five asylum seekers were Syrians, with Iraqis and Afghans the next largest groups.Not since the peak of the war in the Balkans, in 1992, has the world witnessed such a surge of people arriving on foreign shores seeking protection. The United Nations refugee agency chief, António Guterres, nudged world leaders to be “just as generous” to Syrians now as they had been to the Balkans then.An asylum seeker is defined as someone who claims to be fleeing persecution at home.In 2014, the bulk of asylum seekers went to Europe, many of them paying smugglers to ferry them across the Mediterranean. They landed mainly in Greece and Italy and tried to make their way to more prosperous countries in northern Europe. Of every 20 who made it, one died at sea, according to the agency.A look at the conflict that has dismembered Syria and inflamed the region with one of the world’s worst religious and sectarian wars.Germany received the largest number of asylum applications: 173,000, with Syrians making up the largest group. Sweden and Italy were the other countries receiving large numbers of asylum seekers. Even Japan and South Korea saw a sharp increase, though their numbers were fairly small. Only Australia saw its asylum claims decline.Turkey, which is home to millions of Syrian refugees, took in nearly 88,000 asylum applications — the largest share from Iraqis, who in the past year have been fleeing the Islamic State.The United States recorded the second-highest number of asylum applications in the world. Syrians are still a small fraction of the total, though climbing fast. Last year nearly 1,600 Syrians filed for asylum in the United States, up from barely three dozen applications a decade ago, according to government figures.“It is no surprise that there has been a steep increase in asylum seekers from Syria, given the size and scope of this crisis — and the fact that some states in the region have begun closing escape routes and turning away refugees fleeing from Syria,” said Eleanor Acer, a director of Human Rights First, a New York-based legal advocacy group that has urged the United States to step up its refugee resettlement efforts. “Also, as the crisis has become prolonged, it has become tougher and tougher for refugees to survive in countries where they can’t work, unite their families and begin to rebuild their lives,” she said. Advertisement