By JAD MOUAWADMARCH 25, 2015
Among the unusual elements of Tuesday’s crash of a Germanwings Airbus A320 in the French Alps is that debris strewn across the site was in tiny pieces rather than large chunks, with one witness describing the plane as having been “pulverized.”Xavier Roy, the coordinator for emergency personnel at the scene, said he was surprised to see few big pieces of wreckage, like an engine or a large piece of the plane body.“The largest piece we have seen so far is the equivalent of a car door,” he said after flying in a helicopter over the site.Rémi Jouty, the director of the French Bureau of Investigations and Analysis, which is leading the investigation, said tiny debris was typical of high-velocity impacts. The French authorities said the plane probably disintegrated when it struck the mountain, and did not explode in the air.“This is what we see when we have an impact on a hard surface, with an open angle, and a high-impact speed,” Mr. Jouty said at a news conference on Wednesday in Le Bourget, near Paris.When a plane blows up in the air, he said, debris is typically scattered over a larger area and the debris is much bigger — perhaps several feet long.Small debris was found when an Air Algerie MD-83 aircraft crashed in Mali last year, he said.In this case, however, very few familiar airplane parts have been spotted. Rescuers said the only recognizable piece was a part of the landing gear. Given the state of the crash site, “the physical examination of the debris will probably be very limited,” Mr. Jouty said.There was nothing on the barren hillside to slow the plane or muffle the impact, which means the mountain bore the full force of the crash. In those circumstances, the plane was shredded by the mountain.“Everything is pulverized, nothing is discernible,” said Eric Sapet, a lieutenant in an alpine firefighting unit and one of the first witnesses on the scene, who was quoted in the French newspaper Le Monde. “We can’t see anything. We can’t even see an airplane.”Like most commercial jets, the skin of the Airbus A320 is made of aluminum panels held up together by stringers, strips of wood or metal; insulation foam; and plastic interior paneling. The entire structure is pressurized while in flight. The aluminum skin is extremely thin — less than a quarter of an inch.Investigators will not know at what speed the plane struck the mountainside unless they can find the memory card from the flight data recorder; the casing was found, but the memory card was not inside. (The Airbus A320’s maximum cruise speed at 37,000 feet is 560 miles per hour, and its landing speed is about 160.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »