AdvertisementSupported byOpen Source Robert MackeyA Jewish man who was mistaken for an Arab and stabbed by a fellow Israeli Jew bent on avenging recent knife attacks in Israel denounced ethnically motivated violence in interviews with the local news media.Uri Rezken, the victim of the botched revenge attack, was stabbed in the back on Tuesday as he worked at a market in the Haifa suburb of Kiryat Ata.“I’m working, and suddenly I feel four knife stabs in my back,” he told Israel’s Army Radio on Wednesday. “I heard a shout, ‘You deserve it, you deserve it, Arab bastards!’ When I turn around I see a Haredi man. I shouted to him, ‘I’m a Jew,’ but he tried to continue. I just ran away; otherwise I would have been killed.”As Jessica Montell, an Israeli rights activist, noted, the victim also rejected the premise that his attacker’s confusion mattered at all. “If I were Arab, it still wouldn’t have been O.K. You shouldn’t stab anybody,” Mr. Rezken said.Speaking from his hospital bed to a local news site, NewsHaifaKrayot.net, Mr. Rezken issued a plea for tolerance in comments posted Wednesday on YouTube. “We are all human beings, we are all equal,” he said.“The fact that he came to commit a hate crime,” Mr. Rezken added, “a crime of racism, on the basis of religious differences, I have no words to describe that, I don’t know what to say.”The suspect, who was arrested after a security guard shot at him, is a 36-year-old resident of Kiryat Ata known to the police “for suspected criminal activity,” Haaretz reported.The court withheld the suspect’s name at the request of his lawyer, who sought to prevent any vigilante attacks and also asked for a mental health evaluation, Haaretz said.After a Jewish teenager from the southern city of Dimona stabbed four Arabs there on Friday, his lawyer also said that the boy had psychological problems and was not competent to stand trial.Tuesday’s episode was not the only case of mistaken identity reported this week in connection with nationalist attacks. Elizabeth Tsurkov, a blogger and rights activist, wrote on Twitter on Wednesday that her partner had witnessed “a Jewish mob in south Tel Aviv” beating a Jewish man “they thought was a terrorist.”Last week, when another group of Israelis attacked an Arab man in the coastal city of Netanya, a man threw himself on the victim to protect him from the mob, The Guardian reported.Advertisement