By SOMINI SENGUPTAMARCH 27, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  France signaled on Friday that it would press the Security Council to adopt a resolution soon to spur talks between Israel and the Palestinians, a step that the United States resisted last year.“If we want to have a two-state solution, and if we want to avoid a complete crash, we must go in the same direction,” the French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, told reporters at the United Nations on Friday morning. “I hope the partners who were reluctant will not be reluctant.”Mr. Fabius declined to say how soon France would bring up a draft measure before the Council. But he said France would consult with other Council members “in the coming days” over a framework for negotiations. Doing so is likely to put pressure on the White House to act.An American official, who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the discussions, said by email on Friday: “We’re not going to get ahead of any decisions about what the United States would do with regard to potential action at the U.N. Security Council. We continue to engage with key stakeholders, including the French, to find a way forward that advances the interest we and others share in a two-state solution.”AdvertisementFrance circulated a draft late in 2014 that would have laid out what are known as parameters for talks between the two sides in the Middle East conflict, and would have set a deadline for completing the talks. The Obama administration was reluctant to support that draft, especially with a general election in Israel approaching.AdvertisementSince then, the White House has signaled publicly that it could re-evaluate its position, especially in light of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s election victory, won partly on the strength of hard-line rhetoric. Even so, the administration has said it will not make a decision until after Mr. Netanyahu forms his new coalition government, a stance that suggested that Washington was in no mood to rush into a Security Council measure that it could not control.Asked whether France would resume work on a resolution as soon as the Israeli government is formed, Mr. Fabius said, “We shall work in that direction, yes — our aim is to be efficient.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He noted that construction of Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territories had continued since France’s earlier effort at a resolution last fall, and said, “There has to be a discussion, negotiation — it has to be backed by an international effort.”Mr. Fabius is serving as president of a Security Council session on Friday concerning the protection of religious minorities in the Middle East. After that, he flies to Lausanne, Switzerland, for the resumption of nuclear talks with Iran, which have been newly complicated by the conflict in Yemen.Iran backs the Houthi fighters in Yemen who have driven President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi from the capital, while France and the United States support the Arab-led international coalition that began airstrikes against the Houthis this week.“We are looking at what is taking place,” he said. “In this region, which already is very eruptive, if you add nuclear weapons, what happens? That’s the issue.”Mr. Fabius played down the need to reach an agreement by the March 31 deadline. “The important thing is the content, not the deadline,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: France to Press U.N. on Talks Between Israel and Palestinians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.