
MARCH 29, 2015

On Sunday, Singapore laid to rest its founder and first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew. He died on March 23 at the age of 91. Mr. Lee was known for his blunt and pithy honesty. Below are some of his most memorable remarks.

“Repression, sir, is a habit that grows. I am told it is like making love — it is always easier the second time! The first time there may be pangs of conscience, a sense of guilt. But once embarked on this course, with constant repetition, you get more and more brazen in the attack and in the scope of the attack.”— Oct. 4, 1956, addressing David Marshall, a colonial-era chief minister, as an opposition member of Singapore's legislature. Read the Transcript »“For me it is a moment of anguish because all my life... you see, the
 whole of my adult life... I have believed in merger and the unity of 
these two territories. You know, it’s a people, connected by geography, 
economics, and ties of kinship.... Would you mind if we stop for a 
while?” — Aug. 9, 1965, before losing his composure during a news conference after Singapore gained independence from Malaysia. Read the Transcript »“If we don’t try, Singapore will become Communist. If we try and fail, 
it will become Communist. The important thing is for us to try.” — Aug. 10, 1965, quoted in the New York Times report on the aftermath of Singapore's separation from Malaysia. Read More From The Times »“I am nobody’s stooge. I am not here to play somebody else’s game. I have a few million people’s lives to account for. And Singapore will survive.”— Aug. 26, 1965, in one of his first press conferences after independence. Read The Transcript »“The Americans should know the character of the men they are dealing with in Singapore and not get themselves further dragged into calumny. They are not dealing with Ngo Dinh Diem or Syngman Rhee. You do not buy and sell this Government.” — Sept. 2, 1965, reacting to a $3.3 million bribe offered by the C.I.A. in exchange for the release of an agent. Read More From The Times »“And I say without the slightest remorse, that we wouldn't be here, we would not have made economic progress, if we had not intervened on very personal matters — who your neighbor is, how you live, the noise you make, how you spit ... or what language you use. We decide what is right. Never mind what the people think.” — April 20, 1987, quoted in the The Straits Times newspaper. Read More in The Straits Times's Archives »“Am I a dictator? Do I need to be a dictator when I can win, hands down?”— Feb. 22, 1999, in a heated conversation with the Times columnist William Safire at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Read the Transcript »“There are very few things that I do not know about Singapore politics, and there are very few things that you can tell me or any foreign correspondent can tell me about Singapore.” — in 2006, addressing foreign reporters. Read the Times Report From May 2006 on Discontent Among Young Singaporeans »“They must know that to dominate this region is not possible.” — Aug. 29, 2007, in an interview with The Times. Read the Transcript »“The system works regardless of your race, language or religion because otherwise we’d have divisions. We are pragmatists. We don’t stick to any ideology. Does it work? Let’s try it and if it does work, fine, let’s continue it. If it doesn’t work, toss it out, try another one. We are not enamored with any ideology.” — Aug. 29, 2007, in an interview with The New York Times. Read the Transcript »“I always thought that humanity was animal-like. The Confucian theory was that Man can be improved. I’m not sure he can be, but he can be trained, he can be disciplined.”— July 6, 2009, in an interview with National Geographic. Read the Interview »“I’m not saying that everything I did was right, but everything I did was for an honorable purpose. I had to do some nasty things, locking fellows up without trial.” — Sept. 1, 2010, in an interview with The Times. Read the Transcript »“Do not judge a man until you’ve closed his coffin. Do not judge a man. Close the coffin, then decide. Then you assess him. I may still do something foolish before the lid is closed on me.” — Sept. 1, 2010, in an interview with The Times. Read the Transcript »Advertisement