By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSMARCH 28, 2015
PRAGUE —  Two Czech tourists who were abducted by gunmen two years ago as they were traveling on a bus through southwestern Pakistan have been released, the Czech government said Saturday.Prime Minister Bohuslav Sobotka said in a statement that the two women, Hana Humpalova and Antonie Chrastecka, returned to the Czech Republic on Saturday.Mr. Sobotka said their release was negotiated by a Turkish nongovernmental organization, the IHH Humanitarian Relief Foundation, but offered no further details.“I am very tired but I don’t want to sleep,” Ms. Chrastecka told Turkey’s state-run Anadolu Agency before flying home. “I am afraid this may be a dream.” The women were on the road from Iran to Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan Province in southwestern Pakistan, when they were seized in March 2013.AdvertisementThey had been given a police guard in Pakistan to escort them on a passenger bus, but the police officer was no match for the eight to 10 gunmen who stopped them in the Chaghi district near the Iran and Afghanistan borders, officials said. The disarmed police officer was later released.AdvertisementSerkan Nergis, a spokesman for the IHH Humanitarian Relief Foundation, said the women’s families had contacted his group two months ago, seeking help after other efforts to secure the women’s release had failed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We used our sources in the region to find out where in Pakistan they were being held and then worked for their release,” Mr. Nergis said. “It was a long and detailed process.” He said the women were captured by a group linked to Al Qaeda.IHH staff members escorted them to the eastern Turkish city of Van by road, where they arrived Friday evening and were reunited with their families, Mr. Nergis said.“We didn’t know who was holding us, because they never told us or said why they were holding us,” Ms. Humpalova said.“When we came out, we were happy to see the sun after two years, to see happy, smiling people,” she said. “We were deprived of this.”A version of this article appears in print on March 29, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Tourists Abducted in 2013 Have Been Freed in Pakistan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.