In recent months, China’s Internet regulators have further restricted the already limited access that the nation’s 648 million Internet users have to the web. Several Google services, including Gmail and Gchat, have become inaccessible. Virtual private networks, or V.P.N.s, that once let users skirt online censorship have also been blocked.Tools such as GreatFire.org’s “mirrored” websites and the Internet bandwidth-sharing service Lantern have so far allowed users to access the open Internet. These services use the encrypted hosting of information by so-called cloud service providers around the globe, including in China. Chinese Internet regulators would have to shut down such services, including those run by Amazon and Microsoft, to stop these censorship-evading tools. Some analysts have argued that the economic cost of blocking these services is too high and that the number of users of censorship-evading tools is too low to prompt such intervention by censors. This month, however, unidentified hackers targeted GreatFire.org’s service in an unprecedented distributed denial of service, or DDoS, attack, flooding the service with billions of requests an hour and setting off concerns that the patience of China’s Internet censors had run out. Adam Fisk is the lead developer of Lantern, a censorship-evading tool that became available in 2013 and is largely financed by the United States State Department. The software allows users in countries where the web is not censored to share part of their Internet traffic with users in countries with censorship, such as Iran and China. The software has been installed 135,000 times so far, Mr. Fisk said, allowing unrestricted transfers of 150 terabytes of data every month.Mr. Fisk, 39, was also a developer of LimeWire, a once-popular network that relied on peer-to-peer technology for file sharing. It was shut down in 2011 after a judge ordered most of its services disabled amid accusations of facilitating music piracy. In an interview, he discussed how Lantern works and how it has reacted to the new measures by Chinese Internet regulators.How many people use Lantern in China and the rest of the world?Over all, Lantern use is still relatively low. It’s about 10,000 weekly active users in the world. In China, it’s about 6,000 or 7,000 weekly active [users]. Who would use Lantern in China?We intentionally know very little about our users, but we know that people like [the Chinese artist] Ai Weiwei have used it, tweeted about it. The goal behind Lantern is to be free and easy to use, a service that works really well, so that anyone can use it. In terms of where we’re at now, it’s still the intellectual elite that tends to be more active on the Internet and tends to be more informed about the tools that are out there. What measures have Chinese Internet regulators taken to strengthen the Great Firewall since you started Lantern?The biggest change has been the most recent V.P.N. blocking. To me, that blocking is fascinating in the sense that the ways V.P.N.s are blockable are obvious and trivial. So I think the reason they hadn’t been blocked earlier was that the only people who can access V.P.N.s are people who have foreign credit cards. Technically, that block was really fairly obvious. One of the reasons that Lantern exists is that things like V.P.N.s are easy to block. The V.P.N. blocking didn’t affect Lantern. But you used Gmail and Gchat before they were blocked, right?
We didn’t use Gchat to tunnel traffic. It was really more to kickstart the network. If you have a friend who lives in an uncensored region, you can access the Internet through that friend, or a friend of that friend. That’s really the reason we used Gchat. We tunnel to it, because it’s blocked. When you tunnel traffic, you operate through cloud services or peers. Do you expect that the rise of services like Lantern and GreatFire will result in more attempts to block cloud services?
This might be one I can’t answer.Let me rephrase the question. Collateral freedom tools such as Lantern operate on cloud services. These cloud services are extremely important for Chinese businesses and shutting them down would cause economic damage. Do you think those who are regulating the Great Firewall are aware of this?I definitely think they are aware of it, and it really reflects the interconnectedness of the global economy. And for me, the big danger — both for China and the Internet as a whole — is the Balkanization that we are starting to see. The question in my mind is the degree to which the Balkanization is damaging to the Chinese economy. I don’t know if anyone has looked at that. But, if so, many services not being available or in danger of not being available would have a significant impact for innovation. Some of the best technology companies in the world have been affected.Where do you see that Balkanization of the Internet heading? Do you think concerns over the economic damage will prevail and keep the Internet free?There is an overlap in interest between [Chinese] government officials and people in the industry. Hopefully, the interconnectedness of the global economy is strong enough and vital enough that we see a move away from Balkanization. What are you currently working on?We are working on fleshing out the peer-to-peer approach. It relies on global interconnectedness, not of businesses but of people. It’s using real-life social networks to build this backbone of information exchange about ways to access the open Internet. One other big focus is speed. Also we are looking at mobile. We are releasing this Twitter app called Firetweet, which is basically a Twitter client in censored regions. So you don’t really know it’s Lantern running in the back end, but it just works in censored regions. Is there a chance that censors can infiltrate your networks? We really assume that censors are going to penetrate the peer-to-peer network and are going to run as peers. So we just focus on providing access. We don’t do much to prevent monitoring. Censors can actually see which websites you are accessing, but — because traffic is encrypted — they cannot see what you are doing on these websites.What we are more concerned about is censors actually blocking Lantern through infiltration. The way our algorithms work makes it very difficult to do that. They would need to penetrate the Lantern social network on a massive scale.Do you see the collateral freedom community moving away from cloud services to peer-to-peer? I don’t see that happening. We are the only ones working on that that I know of. The peer-to-peer network can perform really well, but making it perform consistently is a challenge. It comes down to the location of peers. If we have people accessing in China, we have to make sure they have access through peers in Tokyo and not in Iceland.  And in the wider community?That’s a big open question. If cloud-based centralized services start getting blocked more and more, it’s unclear what the next step is.