By ALISSA J. RUBINMARCH 29, 2015
PARIS —  The clear winner in the second round of France’s local elections on Sunday was an alliance of conservative parties that took control of at least two-thirds of the country’s departments, trouncing the Socialists.Voters were selecting 4,108 local council members who will run 98 of France’s departments, local units of government that have limited powers over schools, roads and some social services. But the elections were seen as having national significance since the results are likely to influence the climate ahead of the 2017 presidential election.The outcome was a comeback for former President Nicolas Sarkozy and a clear defeat for the governing Socialists, who lost control of about half of the departments they had led, including Corrèze, the base of President François Hollande.While the far-right National Front party, led by Marine Le Pen, had been predicted to make large strides and did win a number of seats in some areas, it did not win enough to take control of even one department, according to National Front leaders.AdvertisementIn acknowledging defeat, Prime Minister Manuel Valls, a Socialist who had campaigned hard to rally left-leaning voters, said his party had heard voters’ anger and frustration and would respond with a focus on “jobs, jobs, jobs.”AdvertisementHe lamented that the left had been divided rather than combining into a coalition as several conservative parties did.Mr. Valls also warned that the number of votes garnered by the National Front, which has embraced a strongly anti-immigrant and anti-European Union position, “indicates a lasting change in our political landscape from which we will each have to draw our own conclusions.”For Mr. Sarkozy, who lost the presidency to Mr. Hollande in 2012, Sunday’s vote was a victorious one that seemed to bring him one step closer to making another run. Last year he became the leader of a conservative party, the Union for a Popular Movement, but even before that he was weighing a return to politics.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Sarkozy, looking determined and focused as the results came in, emphasized the voters’ apparent rejection of Mr. Hollande’s government, saying that there had never been such a complete disavowal at the polls of a sitting government.France’s turn to the right was presaged by the first round of local elections on March 22, in which a mainstream right-leaning coalition led by Mr. Sarkozy garnered 29 percent of the popular vote while the Socialist Party won barely 22 percent. In both rounds only about half of eligible voters cast a ballot.The moribund French economy casts a long shadow over the electorate here, and the extended period of high unemployment hits especially hard on young people. Despite some small economic improvements — most recently a slight drop in the deficit — unemployment remains around 10 percent, according to Eurostat, the European Union’s data arm.Much of the political discussion at the national level occurs with an eye to the next presidential elections, and both Mr. Sarkozy and Ms. Le Pen of the National Front as well as Mr. Hollande are positioning themselves to run. They will have another chance to gauge their popularity and that of their parties in December when there will be regional elections.Though her party did not win control of any department in the elections, Ms. Le Pen tried to take the long view, based on the assumption that her party would at least capture more council seats than in past ballots.“This is the base for the great victories of tomorrow,” she said.The vote Sunday was, to some extent, a test of the popularity of the National Front, which was in a strong position in this second round in hundreds of districts. However, both Mr. Valls on behalf of the Socialists and the conservative coalition led by Mr. Sarkozy urged people not to vote for the extreme right.Laure Fourquet contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Conservative Alliance Gains in French Voting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.