AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben HubbardBEIRUT, Lebanon — Syrian forces backed by Russian airstrikes began a new offensive on Thursday aimed at breaking rebel control of a crucial highway between two major cities, according to Syrian state media and antigovernment activists.Many of the 33 airstrikes Russia said it had carried out in Syria in the last 24 hours hit rebel-controlled towns between Homs and Hama. Residents of the area reported heavy bombardment, and mosques broadcast warnings to civilians to take cover. Antigovernment activists said dozens of people were killed.Russia’s Defense Ministry announced on Thursday that it had established a hotline with the Israeli military to avoid clashes in the sky during these operations. On Wednesday, representatives of both sides used the hotline to inform each other about their plans, the ministry said in a statement.A similar attempt to coordinate with the United States Air Force has yet to be concluded. Russia angered Turkey, a NATO member, in early October after its fighter jets violated Turkey’s airspace.Thursday’s strikes were the latest attempt by the Syrian government and its allies to turn the tide on rebels who have seized parts of the country’s northwest and are now within striking distance of communities that remain loyal to President Bashar al-Assad. Russia said its strikes hit a mobile surface-to-air system that rebels had captured, a mine factory and an artillery battery, among other targets.Mr. Assad’s forces, which have lost control of more than two-thirds of Syria’s territory and suffer from grave manpower shortages, have received a boost since Russian jets began bombing rebel positions on Sept. 30, adding a new, complicating factor to the civil war, now in its fifth year.Syria’s other major foreign backer, Iran, has also stepped up its aid to Mr. Assad. An official from the alliance backing Mr. Assad, which includes Russia, Iran and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, said Thursday that hundreds of Iranian operatives were on the ground in central Syria assisting his forces.Underlining Syria’s close ties with Iran, Alaeddin Boroujerdi, the head of a national security and foreign policy committee in the Iranian Parliament, told reporters in Damascus, the Syrian capital, on Thursday that his country fully supported the Syrian government, according to the Syrian state news agency, SANA.He did not mention the presence of Iranian troops, saying they would be sent only in response to a Syrian government request.The 33 sorties Russia conducted in Syria in the last 24 hours were down from 88 two days ago, the Russian Defense Ministry statement said. Russia is decreasing the number of airstrikes because battle lines are shifting in the wake of ground operations by the Syrian Army, the ministry said.Rebels are retreating, trying to regroup in new areas and adjust their ammunition supply chains, the statement said. Russian forces bolstered their reconnaissance missions, sending drones to ascertain the changes.Over four years of war has forced more than four million to flee the country, fueling a migrant crisis in the Middle East and Europe.Mr. Assad has long counted on Russia and Iran for military, political and financial support, and Hezbollah has sent well-trained fighters to help his forces on crucial fronts. The alliance says it is fighting “terrorists,” a name it uses for all of Mr. Assad’s foes, from the extremists of the Islamic State to more moderate rebels who came out of the Arab Spring protest movement against his rule.Although Russia said it was intervening in Syria against the Islamic State, most of its airstrikes have focused on the country’s northwest, where the Islamic State has little presence, but where armed rebels hold territory and often clash with government forces. Those rebels include members of the Nusra Front, Al Qaeda’s Syrian affiliate.American officials have said Russia is more interested in propping up Mr. Assad than in routing the Islamic State.Thursday’s strikes appeared to be part of a Russian campaign to loosen rebel control in the northwest, and focused on rebel-held towns along the highway between Homs and Hama, two major cities still controlled by the government.Residents of the area posted online videos of  vast clouds of smoke rising from residential areas after bombs fell. They said the bombardment was the heaviest in months.Firas al-Saidi, an antigovernment activist reached though WhatsApp, said the attacks came from many sides.“We are talking here about serious attempts for the first time in months,” he said.But it remained unclear whether the increased strikes would lead to a ground incursion and whether Mr. Assad and his allies had the forces to mount one, since they are already locked in fierce battles with rebels elsewhere in the northwest.Hwaida Saad and Maher Samaan contributed reporting from Beirut, and Ivan Nechepurenko from Moscow.Advertisement