By MANSUR MIROVALEV and NEIL MacFARQUHARMARCH 29, 2015
TASHKENT, Uzbekistan —  Uzbeks went to the polls in droves on Sunday for an election in which the result was a foregone conclusion: maintaining President Islam Karimov in power in the authoritarian Central Asian state, which he has led since 1989.The main significance of the event seemed to be signaling that Mr. Karimov, 77, harbored no plans to step down any time soon, especially since a rift within his immediate family has taken on the overtones of a Shakespearean drama involving corruption and betrayal.Mr. Karimov has led impoverished, landlocked Uzbekistan since it was still part of the Soviet Union and has used his 26 years in power to eliminate all opposition and even criticism.“These elections mean nothing except that despite all the speculation about a possible transition in power in Uzbekistan, Karimov is staying,” said Alexey Malashenko, an expert on Central Asia at the Carnegie Moscow Center.AdvertisementAlthough there were ostensibly three opposition candidates, they were obscure functionaries from pro-government parties who used their low-key campaigns to praise the incumbent, who habitually garners about 90 percent of the vote.AdvertisementStill, polling places were crowded, with about 91 percent of the nearly 21 million eligible voters participating, Mirzo-Ulugbek Abdusalomov, the country’s top election official, told the Uzbek news media.“My son, his wife, my entire family is voting for Karimov,” said Shukurullo Abdusamatov, 52, a mechanic with a wrinkled, tanned face. “He’s not thinking about himself, he’s only thinking about his people.”Not everyone waxed as enthusiastic. “This election is a sad circus where we are the clowns,” said Abdulatif, 42, a lanky, stooped former teacher who did not want to give his full name because of possible repercussions. He had recently returned from Russia, where he had worked as a night watchman.“Nothing depends on us,” he said. “Schoolteachers and government employees are treated like dirt, corruption is everywhere and people die because their doctors bought their degrees.”After a brief flirtation with open politics right after Uzbekistan gained its independence in 1991, Mr. Karimov has jailed or driven into exile his opponents and shut down all independent news media. Independent online publications are routinely blocked, and special police teams at airports comb through laptops and smartphones, sometimes for hours.Muhammad Solih, a poet who ran against the president in 1991 and now lives in exile in Turkey, said in an interview that Mr. Karimov was “a classic dictator who sits on the throne thanks to the giant machine of state terror against any dissent.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although for a time it seemed that Mr. Karimov’s daughter Gulnara Karimova  might succeed him, she has disappeared from public view. Based on a brief Twitter outburst, among other sources, she has apparently lived under house arrest for about a year.Ms. Karimova, who worked variously as a businesswoman, diplomat, pop singer and fashion designer, was once described as a “robber baron” in a leaked American diplomatic cable. Various former employees of hers have been arrested, and some sentenced to lengthy prison sentences for membership in an “organized criminal group” involving extortion and forgery.AdvertisementMs. Karimova has been investigated in Switzerland and Sweden, among other European states, on suspicion of bribery and money laundering related to telecom licenses in Uzbekistan.“The succession question looms large for Uzbekistan because Karimov has so thoroughly eliminated any political competition and any political process, that many fear there could be a violent struggle for power when he does exit the scene,” said Steve Swerdlow, the director of Central Asia research at Human Rights Watch.Human rights advocates say Uzbekistan has one of the worst records in the world, with thousands of political prisoners, widespread torture and forced labor. About one million people in Uzbekistan are forced to leave their regular jobs for a month each year to harvest the critical cotton crop.Mr. Karimov is vying for a fourth term, having been elected three times, with several of those terms extended by referendums. Human rights organizations pointed out that Sunday’s election technically violated the Constitution, which limits any president to two consecutive terms. But the government maintains that the Constitution was amended to reduce the term to five years from seven, and that therefore Mr. Karimov is starting with a clean slate.“His yet another nomination and imminent victory are obviously illegitimate,” said Daniil Kislov, a Moscow-based political analyst whose ferghananews.com website is banned in Uzbekistan.The president habitually brushes aside any suggestion that he has remained in power too long. “They criticize me, and I want to keep on working,” he said last year at a news conference. “What’s bad in it?”The United States has muted its disapproval of Uzbekistan. The Americans established a base here to support operations in Afghanistan, but were evicted in 2005 after Washington and the European Union criticized the massacre of hundreds of protesters in the eastern city of Andijon.Mansur Mirovalev reported from Tashkent, and Neil MacFarquhar from Moscow.A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Uzbeks Vote on Expected 4th Term for Authoritarian.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.