AdvertisementSupported byBy Aurelien BreedenPARIS — The Vatican took exceptional steps to clarify Pope Francis’ message on homosexuality after it became known recently that he had  met with Kim Davis, the Kentucky county clerk who opposes same-sex marriage. It issued a statement making clear that the meeting was not an endorsement of her views.Now, the Vatican’s stance on homosexuality has moved to the center of a long-building diplomatic standoff with France, though this time, it seems, clarity is not of the order.The dispute between Paris and the Vatican has simmered quietly since January, when France put forward its nominee for ambassador to the Holy See, Laurent Stefanini, the chief of protocol for President François Hollande.Nine months later, the Vatican still has not said whether it would accept Mr. Stefanini’s credentials. Nor has it provided a public explanation for the delay.The French and Italian news media have reported that he is gay and speculated that the nomination has been given what is widely being interpreted as a pocket veto, though neither Mr. Stefanini nor the French government have confirmed his sexual orientation. The French government has not denied it either, citing respect for his privacy.Other factors, analysts say, may be the Vatican’s displeasure with France’s legalization of same-sex marriage, or the fact that news of Mr. Stefanini’s nomination had leaked before it was announced.In any case, French news reports now suggest that the French government has lost hope that Mr. Stefanini will be accredited, even as French officials insist that the process is continuing.The daily newspaper Libération, quoting anonymous government officials, reported last week that the French government had taken note of the Vatican’s silence and had interpreted it, as many analysts have, as a refusal.Mr. Hollande will not nominate someone else for the Holy See post until 2017, when France holds its next presidential election, the newspaper said.Mr. Stefanini, a Roman Catholic who was second in command at the French Embassy to the Vatican from 2001 to 2005, is widely recognized as an expert on religious issues.Neither the Élysée Palace nor the Rev. Federico Lombardi, a Vatican spokesman, would comment on reports in the news media. A senior French diplomatic official who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter said only that there were “no new elements” on the issue.At a news briefing on Tuesday, a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry declined to answer questions about whether France planned to nominate someone else for the post, indicating that Mr. Stefanini was still France’s nominee.“Mr. Laurent Stefanini, who has major diplomatic experience and in-depth knowledge of international religious issues, has been proposed to the Holy See to succeed Ambassador Bruno Joubert,” the spokesman said. “The procedure is continuing.”Mr. Joubert became ambassador in 2012 and left the Vatican in February. The position has been vacant since.The French government said in April that Francis had met privately with Mr. Stefanini at the Vatican, but the meeting did not end the standoff.The weekly newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné, which mixes news and satire, reported on Wednesday that the French government had given up on the idea of sending Mr. Stefanini to the Vatican, promising him a post in London instead.“Because he refused to hide his homosexuality, the diplomat was blacklisted” at the Vatican, the newspaper reported.A similar situation arose in 2008, when the president at the time, Nicolas Sarkozy, nominated Jean-Loup Kuhn-Delforge, an openly gay diplomat, as ambassador to the Holy See. Mr. Sarkozy withdrew the nomination after a 10-month deadlock.François Mabille, a political-science professor at the Université Catholique de Lille who specializes in religious issues and international relations, said that there might be several explanations for the Vatican’s inaction, including internal political maneuvering and discontent with France’s legalization of same-sex marriage.But “there comes a moment when symbols take over political realities,” Mr. Mabille said, noting that as soon as news of Mr. Stefanini’s nomination and presumed sexual orientation were made public, that factor seemed to trump all others.For France, changing nominees now would have the appearance of caving in to pressure from religious conservatives; for the Vatican, accepting the nomination might, even unwittingly, extend a message of openness toward homosexuality that some in the Vatican are reluctant to send.In any case, the delay in accepting Mr. Stefanini’s credentials has put a dent in the pope’s sympathetic stance toward gay people. “If someone is gay and he searches for the Lord and has good will, who I am to judge?” Francis told reporters aboard the papal airplane in 2013.But Mr. Mabille said that such internationally acclaimed statements do little to change the balance of power in the Vatican hierarchy, where many bishops and cardinals, nominated by the pope’s more conservative predecessors, oppose his liberal views.“There is a huge contrast between the reaction to the pope’s speeches and trips abroad, and the weight that he really has within the Catholic Church,” Mr. Mabille said. “Within the church, he is a more weakened pope who on many issues does not have the backing of a majority.”Gaia Pianigiani contributed reporting from Rome.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.videoAdvertisement