Supporters of a Chinese anticorruption campaigner who was detained last week on charges of soliciting a prostitute are questioning whether the move represents retaliation by officials angered by his investigations.On March 26, Ou Shaokun, commonly known as Uncle Ou, was detained along with another man and two women in a hotel in Changsha, Hunan Province, according to a Sina Weibo post published by the Changsha police. Legal experts said that, even if the charges were justified, the police had violated Mr. Ou’s privacy by confirming his identity to news outlets after his detention notice was leaked online.Mr. Ou, 61, gained prominence over the past decade by advising some people in his hometown, Guangzhou, in petitioning government offices over land seizures. More recently, he gathered a following online by taking photographs of officials using government cars for private purposes and posting them on his microblog. “This clearly is retribution for his longtime monitoring of corruption as a citizen,” said Wang Aizhong, a rights advocate in Guangzhou who has known Mr. Ou for several years. “He is very much respected and a popular figure among Guangzhou rights defenders.”The anticorruption campaign that has been underway since 2012 has included stringent guidelines for the use of government cars by officials. In February, for instance, the annual legislative sessions in Beijing strictly regulated the use of cars to transport delegates to the Great Hall of the People.Last Thursday, Mr. Ou posted photos of government vehicles in Shaoshan, the birthplace of Mao Zedong in Hunan Province, on his Sina Weibo microblog, with the message: “Uncle Ou has been in Hunan for two days, and has already seen two instances of official cars being used privately. Today (March 26), at 10:30 a.m., at the former residence of Mao Zedong, inside the Shaoshan Mao Zedong Memorial Garden, Uncle Ou saw Guangzhou Public Security 0A2041 official car being used privately.”He added that he had notified corruption investigators in Guangzhou, and that he was awaiting their reply.Mr. Ou was detained that night, along with Xian Yaojun, who was traveling with him, at their hotel in nearby Changsha. Mr. Xian has campaigned against land seizures in his home village of Xian, which is now part of Guangzhou’s central business district.The police in Changsha said in their microblog post that they had been alerted that day by an unidentified citizen to acts of prostitution. They took Mr. Ou, Mr. Xian and two women into custody around 11 p.m. Mr. Ou was then formally detained on prostitution charges for five days, they said.On Monday, Mr. Ou struggled to walk when he was allowed to talk to four visitors at the detention center through a video feed, according to one visitor, Zhou Wei. He said Mr. Ou told them that the police had pushed him to the ground on Sunday after he refused to give staged interviews with reporters, confessing his guilt. Mr. Ou denies the prostitution charges, Mr. Zhou said.A spokesman at the Public Security Bureau in Changsha declined to comment on Tuesday.Cai Ying, a lawyer for Mr. Ou, said that even if Mr. Ou had paid for sex, “there is no conflict with his right to supervise” public officials as a citizen, he wrote in a public statement Tuesday evening. “If the Changsha police really framed Uncle Ou, their actions violate the spirit of the central leadership’s anticorruption campaign,” he added.On Wednesday, Mr. Cai said he had not been allowed to meet with his client. It was unclear whether Mr. Xian had hired a lawyer.Mr. Ou, a former Guangzhou city employee managing farmers’ markets, began monitoring the use of government vehicles in 2005 in an effort to raise public awareness of the abuse of official privileges in Guangzhou.His campaigning even earned him praise by the state news media last year, when China News Service called Mr. Ou a model citizen. “We need more people like Uncle Ou,” it wrote in an editorial warning officials to steer away from corruption.“For many people in Guangzhou, particularly villagers grappling with local corruption, he is a modern-day folk hero,” said David Bandurski, a media researcher at the University of Hong Kong and author of a coming book on urban villages in Guangzhou. “But his push to make government leaders live up to their own laws has often gotten him in trouble.”Mr. Ou’s detention notice included his full name, age, personal identification number and home address. Police detention notices are usually delivered only to detainees, and are not normally released to the public. It was unclear who had leaked the notice online.In a blog post, Wang Cailiang, a lawyer who has represented Xian villagers in a land-rights case, accused the authorities in Changsha of violating Mr. Ou’s right to privacy by revealing his identity to news outlets.The actions by the local authorities lead one to “assume that this was an attempt by the authorities to smear the name of a rights defender, thereby further eroding the government’s credibility,” Mr. Wang wrote.A commentary on the case in Monday’s Beijing Times defended Mr. Ou. “Even if a person has lower moral standards, he should not be deprived of his legal status as citizen,” it said.Yu Jianrong, a sociologist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, commented in a blog post, “Regardless of whether Uncle Ou was involved in prostitution, his rights should be legally protected.”