Activist Ou Shaokun Denies… //t.co/JKwSbY8e1K #Level2Article #Level3Article #Level4Article #Beijing #News #Asia //t.co/QsvNTFhZei— BreakingBeijingNews (@iBeijingNews) 2 Apr 15An anti-graft campaigner who was detained for allegedly soliciting a prostitute said on Friday that he planned to take legal action against the authorities he said set him up and tried to publicly shame him in retaliation for his investigations into official corruption.“We will sue very soon,” the campaigner, Ou Shaokun, who was released on Thursday, said in a telephone interview.  “I wasn’t in detention for more than 30 minutes before they released my name. Is that not that a deliberate effort to blacken my name? I told the authorities that the definition of soliciting prostitutes involves a financial transaction and sexual activity, neither of which I did. So how can you use a prostitution charge to accuse me?” The detention in Changsha last week of Mr. Ou, 61, attracted national news media attention, with newspapers such as The Beijing News and The Beijing Times running commentaries questioning the police action. Mr. Ou, also widely known as Uncle Ou, is a former Guangzhou government employee who first gained prominence by helping local villagers organize and devise ways to fight land seizures. More recently, he has gathered a large following online by posting photos of officials improperly using government vehicles for private purposes. In the past, embarrassed officials have responded by beating Mr. Ou or offering him bribes to halt his activities. On March 26, hours after he posted photos of government vehicles he suspected were being used privately in Shaoshan, Mao Zedong’s hometown in Hunan Province, he was taken into custody in nearby Changsha, the provincial capital.  In an interview with Thepaper.cn, a state-financed media site, after his release, Mr. Ou said he had traveled to Hunan Province last week with Xian Yaojun, another campaigner for villagers’ rights in Guangzhou, at the invitation of a man who had approached Mr. Ou online expressing support for his anti-graft activities. The man, who used the online name of Chun Sang, met Mr. Ou and Mr. Xian when they arrived in Changsha and took them to meet a man he said was his boss, Chen Jialuo. Mr. Chen offered to cover all expenses for the trip, and Mr. Ou said he accepted. The report on the interview posted by Thepaper.cn has since been deleted. Mr. Chen hosted the men at dinner and then invited them to a karaoke bar, Mr. Ou said. After a few songs, Mr. Ou excused himself, saying he felt unwell, and he returned to his room at a four-star hotel, which Mr. Chen had paid for. A woman Mr. Ou said he had seen speaking with Mr. Chen earlier then knocked on his door, entered his room and undressed. Mr. Ou said they had just begun to kiss when the police burst into the room and took photographs. Mr. Xian was also taken into custody with a woman.Both men were given five days of administrative detention. Mr. Ou said he had been ordered by the police to give a taped interview in which he would confess to paying a prostitute. The interview that was later broadcast on local Changsha television showed him admitting to acting on his “male instincts,” but Mr. Ou said his protests that he had been wrongly detained were edited out. Mr. Ou and Mr. Xian were released Thursday morning at the end of their five-day administrative detention. The police then drove them back to Guangzhou, eight hours to the south. Mr. Ou, his lawyer and supporters say that the police acted improperly. Mr. Ou said he was not served a detention notice when he was taken into custody, or given any food or water, until his second day in detention. Normally, such a notice is delivered only to the person in detention, but somehow his identity and circumstances were leaked to the news media, which legal experts have said was a violation of his privacy.   In the meantime, dozens of supporters have been looking for evidence that Mr. Ou was framed by the authorities and have been trying to track down the man Mr. Ou says set him up.“Let’s find three generations of his ancestors,” one person commented in a WeChat group that supporters have been using to share their findings. On Thursday night, they shared Mr. Chen’s business card, his identity number, a photo and address. But they failed to find Mr. Chen. Instead, they said they found deserted company offices on the 15th floor of a commercial tower in Changsha. The website of Mr. Chen’s company, which was described as providing public relations services on social media, had been deactivated. Its microblog had not been updated since 2012.Calls to Mr. Chen’s office phone and cellphone numbers went unanswered on Friday. Mr. Ou also said he did not know what had become of the two women who were detained with him and Mr. Xian. Wu Kuiming, a civil rights lawyer based in Guangzhou, said Mr. Ou was not the first civil rights campaigner to be smeared with prostitution charges. But in Mr. Ou’s case, Mr. Wu added, the trap seems to have backfired. “It’s clear that somebody wants to damage his reputation,” Mr. Wu said in a telephone interview. “But the result they wanted wasn’t achieved. It only increased the public’s deep support for him. You can see it on Weibo, WeChat and QQ. So I don’t think it’s damaged Uncle Ou’s reputation at all.” 