Ha Jin‘s latest novel, “A Map of Betrayal,” tells the story of Shang Weimin, a Chinese mole within the C.I.A. He adopts the name Gary, becomes a United States citizen and, unable to return to his wife in China, starts a family with an American woman. When his identity is finally uncovered, China does nothing to save him. Gary takes his own life in his prison cell.Issues of exile and identity figure strongly in Ha Jin’s own experiences. After joining the army at the age of 14, he studied English at Heilongjiang University and then earned a master’s degree in Anglo-American literature from Shandong University. In 1985, he entered a Ph.D. program at Brandeis University and chose to remain in the United States after the military suppression of the Tiananmen protests on June 3-4, 1989. Ha Jin (the pen name of Jin Xuefei) has been unable to return to China to visit his family, and although he has published more than a dozen books, most have been banned there. Most of his early works are set during the Mao era in China’s northeast, where he grew up. These include his 1999 novel “Waiting,” which won the National Book Award and PEN/Faulkner Award, about an army doctor who must wait 18 years to end his loveless marriage. But since his 2007 novel “A Free Life,” much of his writing has focused on the lives of Chinese immigrants in the United States. Over the past two decades, he has published seven novels, including the Pulitzer Prize finalist “War Trash” (2004), six collections of short stories and several poetry collections, and he is currently a literature professor at Boston University. In an interview, he discussed his new novel, patriotism, exile and the challenges of writing in two languages: On one level, “A Map of Betrayal” is the story of a spy. But it’s also the story of an immigrant — a kind of involuntary immigrant. A theme in much of your writing is the divided identity felt by many immigrants. In Gary’s case, this division is extreme. He is intensely patriotic, but he can’t return to his home country, and he feels betrayed by his country. How does this resonate with your own experience?I am also an involuntary immigrant. That’s why I am sometimes identified as an exile. In fact, I am both an immigrant and an exile. But I very much cherish my immigrant experience, which has given me another start, a new life. To date, I haven’t been able to return to China, even for a visit. Two years ago, when my mother was hospitalized, I applied for a visa so I could go back to see her. My application was rejected by the Chinese Consulate in New York three times in a row. I didn’t see my mother when she passed away. So I could feel the longing and pain that Gary Shang, the protagonist of the novel, experienced. Your early novels were set in China, but more recently you have turned to exploring American experiences. How has this affected your writing?When a story is set in China, there is little room for the characters to speak English, which gives me more room to experiment with the language, which is in essence artificial. In other words, it gives me more linguistic freedom, though I’d have to try to make the language feel natural and must not abuse this freedom.When a story is set in the States, there’s an English environment, so I have take the actual idiom into account when I write.There is a great deal of suffering in your novels. One critic said that “Waiting” illustrates that Chinese are “excessively tolerant.” “A Map of Betrayal” seems to do the same. Gary’s life is one of suffering. Is this how you see the Chinese people?This tolerance also means allowing external forces to oppress oneself, allowing them to shape oneself. If the tolerance, or endurance, has some meaning in it, it can be a virtue. But most times it is based on deception and manipulation by the powers that be.Gary often seems naïve, a blind follower. He spends his life trying to rationalize his suffering. One line from his journal reads: “For me, self-sacrifice is sweet.”
That quote itself is not naïve. Tolstoy said something similar. What’s wrong is that Gary uses it as an excuse to console himself.Most of my male characters are intelligent, well-educated men, but they are not mature emotionally. Many of them are possessed by some anachronistic emotion and unable to disentangle themselves.What do you mean by anachronistic emotion?Essentially, a blind patriotism, which confuses one’s country and religion.After Gary dies, the daughter he had with his American wife goes to China to look for her relatives there. Unlike Gary, she places her family above her country. Are you drawing a contrast in values, American versus Chinese?Not at all. In ancient Western classics, the word “country” refers to one’s homestead and one’s village. In Chinese, the word “country” has the word “home” within it. So it’s pathological to only love one’s country without loving one’s home. Furthermore, if a country cannot protect your home, that country does not deserve your love.You have written more than 10 books in English. Do you consider yourself now to be primarily a Chinese writer or an American writer?I long to become both, just as Conrad and Nabokov are embraced by both English and their native languages. One’s loyalty to art must not be divided by languages and nations. Conrad never wrote in Polish, but the Poles regard him as a Polish writer as well.Do you follow contemporary Chinese writers closely?I am well informed. That is the advantage of the Internet.Have your novels written in English been translated into Chinese? How have they been received? All of them have been translated into complex Chinese, published in Taiwan. In the Chinese diaspora my books are well received. In mainland China, only two of my novels have been published. There are some pirated editions there. Even “A Map of Betrayal” has a pirated edition.Who is your ideal reader?That depends on the book I’m working on. Most of my ideal readers are dead authors: Chekhov, Gogol, Tolstoy, Hardy. I try to keep their works close to my book, as a kind of spiritual crutch.What are you working on now? I’ve just published a book of poems, “Another Space,” written directly in Chinese. Lately I have been writing a lot of poetry in Chinese. I will rewrite some of them in English. Since my wife has been ill, it’s hard for me to immerse myself in a novel-length project, so I have been writing poetry, which is my first love anyway. I want to be a fine poet in both languages.Your literary career began with poetry. What’s the difference between Ha Jin the novelist and Ha Jin the poet? Does poetry require different experiences and sensitivities?“In my beginning is my end” — I am quoting T.S. Eliot. That line sums up both life and art. It’s probably a fundamental principle of the universe. In fiction one has to create narratives, tell a story. But poetry needs lyrical intensity and must do something with the language. A poet’s worth is judged by what he can contribute to the language he uses.This article was adapted from an interview that first appeared on the Chinese-language site of The New York Times and was translated by Mia Li. Yongxi Wu is a freelance journalist and a fiction writer, and the translator into Chinese of “The Collected Stories of Lydia Davis.”  