By ANDREW ROTHAPRIL 2, 2015
MOSCOW — Russian emergency workers frantically plucked bodies from the freezing Sea of Okhotsk on Thursday after a refrigerated trawling ship sank in Russia’s Far East, killing at least 56 of a crew of 132.Helicopters and dozens of ships were mustered for a large-scale rescue operation that continued into Friday morning off the Kamchatka Peninsula, where 13 members of the crew were still missing. Sixty-three sailors were rescued from the icy waters, and the bodies of 56 crew members were recovered.A press officer for Russia’s Emergency Ministries said by telephone that survivors faced complications from hypothermia and were being evacuated to mainland Russia.The reason for the sinking of the trawler, the Dalny Vostok, was not immediately clear, and Vladimir A. Puchkov, the Russian emergencies minister, said that investigators were still considering theories. No public statements by any officials suggested an attack or an act of terrorism.AdvertisementSeveral officials quoted by Russian media said that the vessel might have been overloaded with cargo in a violation of maritime regulations. The acting governor of Sakhalin Island near where the boat sank, Oleg N. Kozhemyako, told a Russian television channel that the crew might have overloaded the vessel, and the deputy head of the Kamchatka region was quoted as saying that the ship was hauling a 100-ton fishing net at the time of the accident.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Vladimir V. Putin is receiving regular updates on the rescue mission, the Kremlin said in a statement, and has expressed “deep condolences to the families and those close to those killed.”The United States Embassy in Moscow said, “It is terrible to see how many human lives this tragedy has taken.”AdvertisementThe sinking is the deadliest Russian maritime disaster since 2011, when a tour boat sank on the Volga River in central Russia, killing 112 people. Early in Mr. Putin’s first term as president in 2000, the Kursk nuclear submarine sank during a training exercise in the Barents Sea, killing all 118 aboard.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.