By SOMINI SENGUPTAAPRIL 2, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  United Nations peacekeepers in Mali used “unauthorized and excessive force” when they fired at civilians protesting outside their base in January, killing three, an internal inquiry has found, resurrecting the question of how to hold United Nations personnel accountable when misconduct occurs.The police officers involved in the episode are due to be sent home, United Nations officials said Thursday. A spokesman for the organization, Farhan Haq, added that it would follow up to ensure that “justice is done.”That is easier said than done. United Nations personnel have diplomatic immunity, unless the organization opts to waive it. That means it is up to the peacekeepers’ home country — Rwanda in this case — to prosecute, if it so chooses.Rwanda is investigating the allegations, according to its mission to the United Nations.The United Nations has limited leverage to compel a country contributing troops to hold its soldiers or police officers accountable. That applies to relatively rare cases like this, just as it does to more common crimes like sexual abuse.AdvertisementWithout naming the country, the United Nations’ director of peacekeeping operations, Hervé Ladsous, told reporters Thursday afternoon that it was up to the peacekeepers’ home country to conduct a judicial inquiry into the four police officers involved in the gunfire, along with the commander of the unit. If they were to be found “directly responsible,” he said, they would be barred from joining a United Nations mission in the future.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.No report on the internal inquiry has been released. A statement summarizing its findings said that some of the protesters who gathered outside the United Nations base in Gao, in the north of Mali, on Jan. 27 threw stones and improvised explosive devices at the peacekeepers and tried to break into the compound.AdvertisementMalian troops left, though they were supposed to help guard the United Nations base, the inquiry found. The peacekeepers fired, and in the confusion, three civilians were killed and four wounded. The inquiry concluded that five United Nations peacekeepers were also hurt.The statement added that “some protesters and organizers of the demonstration bear responsibility for the violence of the protest.”Gao is the center of clashes between terrorists affiliated with Al Qaeda and peacekeepers trying to stabilize the region. It is part of the territory that fell to the extremists in 2012, before a French-led intervention evolved, eventually, into a United Nations force.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Inquiry Finds ‘Excessive Force’ by U.N. Peacekeepers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.