AdvertisementSupported byVillafranca De Los Barros JournalBy Suzanne DaleyVILLAFRANCA de los BARROS, Spain — Though the official harvest had ended weeks before, there were still olives under the trees outside this small town southwest of Madrid recently, and Luis Cardenas Travado, 52, was hard at work raking them up in the hope of making some extra money.Maybe just 20 or 30 euros. But with all four of his adult children unemployed and living at home, even that would help.“We can buy some fuel,” said Mr. Cardenas, who once worked in construction. “Not for heating. We can’t afford heating. But for cooking.”Picking up the leftovers after the harvests — whether grapes, olives or garlic — has been a way of making extra income in these parts for as long as anyone can remember. Mr. Cardenas said he did it with his grandfather when he was 9.But this century-old practice has come under fire recently from angry farmers who believe that hard times have led far too many pickers, and not just local villagers, to the fields.They say that swarms of out-of-towners, often Romanians, are at it, too, making a profession of gathering the leftovers. And as they work, they break branches, drive their trucks onto the fields and maybe even affect the quality and the price of regional goods, like wine and olive oil, because older and cheaper products make their way into the pipeline.The subject has caused tension in many of Spain’s villages, where hundreds of families depend on income from picking up leftovers. Last year, the regional government considered legislation to regulate the practice, raising fears among pickers that the secondary harvests would be so tightly restricted that they would no longer be profitable.In the end, regional government officials backed down, concluding that the issue was complex and that they lacked the authority to legislate. They said in response to written questions that they were still pursuing the creation of a board to regulate leftover sales.In the meantime, they sent health inspectors, backed by members of the national police, to block the sale of hundreds of pounds of grapes collected after the official harvests this fall, saying that because they were collected from various properties and combined, they would violate European Union rules on traceability.Officials said this was necessary, though some local officials believed it was simply meant to curtail the market for leftovers, which in 2013 accounted for 22 million pounds of grapes.Other regions in Spain have grappled with this issue. Around the southern city of Jaén, for instance, the government postponed the usual collection of leftovers until everyone in the region had finished their official harvest, a move intended to ensure that no one was collecting in fields before the farmers themselves had finished, another frequent complaint. Farmers sometimes give permission for leftover picking, but they are not always asked.Ventura Arroyo, the president of the agriculture collective in Villafranca de los Barros, said his group did not want the practice of picking leftovers to be forbidden. But he said his members did want more oversight.“Traditionally, those who did this were from the village, and they used good practices — they knew what they were doing,” he said. “But a lot of the people out there today are from different countries. It’s not the same.”Many here sell the leftovers they collect to Juan Luis Diaz, whose run-down warehouse is not far from the center of town. He opened it in 2012, believing leftover pickings could be a niche business. “Ten years ago, leftover pickers collected a third of what they collect today,” he said.As he waited for pickers to arrive recently, he said the pressure to curtail the secondary harvesting was wrongheaded. Official harvesting, he said, was a wasteful business, always leaving good fruit behind. And because fruit does not ripen evenly, there is always more to collect a few weeks after the harvest. While it may not make economic sense for a farmer to double back for the scraps, it could be profitable for pickers working alone.Though leftovers are often lower quality, he said, they are still good for something. For instance, he said, older grapes are good for making vinegar or cooking wine.Mr. Diaz said that in many cases, foreign pickers brought to Spain to work on the official harvests could not make ends meet without the leftovers. “It’s certainly better than having people go on welfare,” he said.Benito Durán, a member of the Villafranca de los Barros town council who is in charge of agricultural issues, said the regional government’s efforts to stop the picking of leftovers had created a lot of bad blood in this town, where the unemployment rate is 31 percent.“This is a village of 15,500,” he said. “We know each other.”“There would only be one reason to block people from doing this,” Mr. Durán added. “You are a bad-hearted person.”While some local newspapers have cited unnamed farmers claiming to have seen pickers using metal bars on the olive trees and driving heavy vans into the fields, Mr. Durán said that 95 percent of the people engaged in this work were careful and desperately in need of the money.One of the pickers selling leftovers to Mr. Diaz recently was Viorel Constantin, 52, who came from Romania nine years ago to work in the fields. He and his family move around following work, harvesting potatoes one month and grapes the next. When possible, they live in a small apartment in a neighboring village. But when the work is too far away and they cannot make it home for months at a time, the landlord lets them cut the rent by half, an accommodation, Mr. Constantin said, he was grateful for.But it would be difficult to pay even half the rent without the money from picking leftovers. “There are good farmers here and bad ones,” Mr. Constantin said, with a sigh. “Some of them say: ‘Leave it all on the ground. It is mine.’ ”Rachel Chaundler contributed reporting.Advertisement