AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — The Israeli military called off extensive searches in the Hebron area of the West Bank late Thursday night after initial reports that an Israeli man had been abducted by Palestinians proved to be a hoax.The Israeli police said that the man they had been searching for, Niv Asraf, 22, was found in a valley in the Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba, adjacent to Hebron, equipped with canned food and a sleeping bag.“The ‘missing’ man and his friends staged a kidnapping,” the police said in a statement, adding that the episode was being investigated and that those responsible would face the consequences, given the waste of resources and the delicate security situation in the West Bank.Earlier Thursday, the police said an Israeli man had called the emergency police number, 100, and said that he and Mr. Asraf had a flat tire and that Mr. Asraf had gone to find assistance and tools in the nearby Palestinian village of Beit Anoun, north of Hebron, but did not return.Yet questions were soon raised about the reliability of the information provided by the man who reported Mr. Asraf missing. The Israeli news media said Mr. Asraf, a resident of Beersheba, in southern Israel, had left his cellphone in the car. Israeli television also said that the car the men had been traveling in did not have a flat tire.Many Israelis still have fresh memories of the kidnapping and killing of three Israeli teenagers in the Hebron area last June. The event traumatized the country and set off a much broader Israeli-Palestinian confrontation involving an Israeli crackdown on Hamas, the Islamic militant group that dominates the Gaza Strip. Rocket fire from Gaza intensified, and that led to a 50-day war between Israel and the militant groups in Gaza.The three teenagers were lured into a car while hitchhiking and were fatally shot soon after. Their bodies were found in a shallow grave 18 days later. The Israeli security forces later arrested and charged members of a Hebron squad affiliated with Hamas.Diaa Hadid and Irit Pazner Garshowitz contributed reporting.Advertisement