AdvertisementSupported byBy Scott ShaneWASHINGTON — For Iran watchers, a possible deal to rein in the country’s nuclear program raises questions about its impact not only on arms control in the region but also on Tehran’s complex internal politics.Could a deal, and an easing of sanctions, empower reformers who would like to see an end to the 35-year cold war with America? Or might it set up for blame those who supported the talks, including President Hassan Rouhani, if an agreement produces less in the way of sanctions relief or economic progress than they have promised?Both situations are plausible, according to a range of experts who agree only on the pivotal nature of the talks.The deep divisions in American politics over the nuclear talks are precisely mirrored on the Iranian side, with hard-liners deeply skeptical about whether Iran is giving up too much. But Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has publicly expressed support for Iranian negotiators, quieting the skeptics and heartening Iranians who yearn for a breakthrough in their country’s relations with the world.“After three decades of propagating a culture of defiance against the U.S., it will be curious to see whether and how Khamenei spins a nuclear compromise as an act of resistance, not compromise,” said Karim Sadjadpour, who studies Iran at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.A guide to help you navigate the deal between global powers and Tehran.President Obama faces his own chorus of critics on the concessions necessary for a deal. But he is deeply invested in the talks and their potential to change relations with Iran beyond the goal of disrupting its progress toward a nuclear weapon.After the announcement of a framework for a deal on Thursday, a senior Obama administration official noted the volatility of Iranian debate around the nuclear issue. “We all tend to think of Iran as a sort of one-person country, that whatever the supreme leader says goes,” the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity to describe how the framework came about. “Actually, Iran has politics.”“There is no doubt that Javad Zarif will have to sell this deal, just like we will, and his task is not simple or a given,” the official said, referring to Iran’s foreign minister.Independent scholars say Iran and the United States have been at odds for so long that Tehran’s factions have never had to react to a serious reconciliation.“Iran’s civil society, in contrast to its hard-liners, overwhelmingly wants this deal to happen,” Mr. Sadjadpour said. “But there are no guarantees that a nuclear deal will bring about greater political openness within Iran.” He said an internal crackdown after a deal is reached was just as likely if hard-liners want “to signal to people that external flexibility doesn’t signal internal weakness.”As Iran and world powers including the United States try to reach a deal on nuclear controls in exchange for the lifting of sanctions, Iranians from all walks of life are watching and hoping for a new start.Mr. Sadjadpour said that Ayatollah Khamenei would be quick to blame Mr. Rouhani if a deal did not produce sufficient sanctions relief to be felt by most people. The supreme leader, he said, has “undermined and ultimately emasculated every president he’s worked with” to protect himself and the regime. “After 26 years in power, it’s doubtful that he will take a different approach toward Rouhani,” he said.Trita Parsi, president of the National Iranian American Council and an outspoken advocate for improved relations with Tehran, struck a more optimistic note, suggesting that an agreement could be a watershed in internal Iranian affairs.“I think in many ways this is going to be decisive as to who defines Iran for the coming decades,” he said after flying back to Washington on Wednesday from Lausanne, Switzerland, where he was monitoring the talks. “If there’s a good deal, and sanctions are lifted and it boosts the Iranian economy, it will show that the moderates can actually get something done.”Mr. Parsi said that Mr. Rouhani, who took office in August 2013, had been given an extended honeymoon by most Iranians, despite economic stress and other problems, because they prefer his style to that of his more bombastic and divisive predecessor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. “They lived through eight years of the alternative, and they know they don’t like that,” he said.Gary G. Sick, a former National Security Council official and now a Columbia University scholar who has studied Iran for more than four decades, said that Iran’s leaders would place great weight on presenting a deal as a victory, even if they made major concessions in the fine print.Whether Iran is racing toward nuclear weapon capabilities is one of the most contentious foreign-policy issues challenging the West.“They need something to hold up to the populace and say, ‘We’ve stood by our rights and our dignity,’ ” he said.That is in part because Iranian hard-liners, particularly the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, will be looking for ways to attack and undercut any deal, Mr. Sick said. The Revolutionary Guards “thrive on hostile relations with the U.S. and benefit hugely from sanctions, which allow them to control smuggling,” he said.Mr. Sick said he believed that a deal could begin a process of epochal change inside Iran.“If the sanctions are lifted, foreign companies come back in, the natural entrepreneurialism of Iranians is unleashed,” he said, then Iran’s political system will inevitably change, if slowly.“If you want regime change in Iran, meaning changing the way the regime operates, this kind of agreement is the best way to achieve that goal,” he said.Since the Islamic government took power, one side or the other has made a move to improve relations on at least seven occasions, said David B. Crist, a Defense Department historian and author of “The Twilight War,” a 2012 book on American-Iranian relations. Every attempt ended in failure, he said.Against that history, a nuclear deal would be “uncharted territory,” Mr. Crist said. At least initially, he said, a deal would enhance the power of Mr. Rouhani and the Iranian pragmatists, and it would probably lead to permanent diplomatic engagement with the United States.“The flip side of that is the danger of too much engagement, from an Iranian point of view,” he said, adding that the influence of the West could be seen as undermining Iranian youth. “And that could prompt a crackdown domestically.”Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reporting from Washington.Advertisement