By JOE COCHRANEAPRIL 2, 2015
JAKARTA, Indonesia — An Indonesian court on Thursday found a Canadian educator and an Indonesian teaching assistant at one of the country’s most prestigious international schools guilty of sexually assaulting three kindergarten students, after a high-profile trial in which defense lawyers and the school asserted that the entire case had been fabricated.Neil Bantleman, a guidance counselor at the Jakarta Intercultural School, and Ferdinand Tjiong, the teaching assistant, were sentenced to 10 years in prison by a three-judge panel at the South Jakarta District Court. The four-month trial was held behind closed doors, but the lengthy verdicts were read during public hearing that lasted for hours.The men’s legal team said they would appeal.The two men, who have been in custody since July after the parents of three boys filed police complaints against them and a third educator, have vehemently asserted their innocence and filed defamation complaints against the parents of one student.Dozens of parents and school employees rallied outside the courthouse on Thursday, as they have for weeks, in support of Mr. Bantleman and Mr. Tjiong.AdvertisementThe case erupted last April, when the Indonesian police arrested a janitor who worked for an outside cleaning company on charges of child sexual assault at the school’s main campus, which includes a high school, middle school and elementary school with about 2,200 students in all. Students from more than 60 countries, including the children of Western diplomats and wealthy Indonesians, attend the school, which is popularly known as J.I.S. and was previously named the Jakarta International School.AdvertisementThe janitor and five other cleaners who were arrested later were accused of having gang-raped a 6-year-old kindergarten student sometime in March 2014, in a student bathroom less than 30 feet from the boy’s classroom.Five janitors were found guilty of child sexual assault and were sentenced to prison terms ranging up to eight years; the sixth committed suicide shortly after his arrest, the police said. The five janitors maintain their innocence, saying that the police had tortured them until they confessed.Two months after the allegations against the janitors became public, the families of the first boy who came forward and two other boys in the kindergarten program filed complaints with the police claiming that members of the school’s teaching staff had sexually assaulted their children.They said that Mr. Bantleman and Mr. Tjiong, as well as the elementary school’s American principal, Elsa Donohue, had drugged and raped the children and other students in the school’s administrative offices, and that they had videotaped the assaults. Ms. Donohue has not been detained or charged with any offense, and no videotapes of the alleged assaults were ever found.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The mother of one of the two other boys claimed that Mr. Bantleman and Mr. Tjiong had also joined the school janitors, who had already been accused, in sexually assaulting her son in the same bathroom. On Thursday, she said in a phone interview, “On one part, there’s relief, but the other part, it’s not enough.” The woman, who has declined to be identified by name to try to protect her child, alleged that more children had been abused and that there were more abusers.But according to the defense, investigators failed to question any school employees posted near the bathrooms or in the administrative offices, which school officials contend are full of staff members and students throughout the day.One of the children who said he was assaulted told the police that Mr. Bantleman had conjured a “magic stone” out of thin air to anesthetize the boys and later heal them of their injuries, according to defense lawyers.On Thursday, Tracy Bantleman, the guidance counselor’s wife, who also works at the school, said of the men: “They absolutely did not get a fair trial. It is obvious from today that this panel of judges made up their minds the day the trial began, and that the last four months has been totally ignored.”Robert O. Blake, the United States ambassador to Indonesia, said in a statement Thursday that “serious questions have arisen in this case regarding the investigative process and lack of credible evidence against the teachers.” He expressed disappointment in the outcome and added, “We look forward to the next steps in the legal process in which we hope that all the available facts in the case will be considered.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Indonesia: Educators Are Found Guilty of Sexually Assaulting 3 Young Students.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.