By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEAPRIL 2, 2015
GENEVA — The United Nations human rights chief, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, criticized the “draconian” powers adopted by Thailand’s ruling generals this week, saying on Thursday that they opened the door to abuses and made the junta’s parallel move to lift martial law “meaningless.”Ten months after seizing power in a coup d’état, the coup’s leader, Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, on Tuesday said he was asking King Bhumibol Adulyadej to lift martial law partly in response to pressure from Thai businesses and those who work in tourism who complained it was damaging the economy. Martial law was lifted the next day.But the military said it was replacing martial law with a new article to Thailand’s interim constitution, Article 44, granting the military wide-ranging powers of search, arrest and detention, as well as the power “to issue orders prohibiting the reporting of news” deemed a threat to public order.“Normally I would warmly welcome the lifting of martial law,” Mr. al-Hussein said in a statement released by his office in Geneva, “but I am alarmed at the decision to replace martial law with something even more draconian, which bestows unlimited powers on the current prime minister without any judicial oversight at all.Advertisement“This clearly leaves the door wide open to serious violations of fundamental human rights,” he said.AdvertisementCurbs on the news media and on unauthorized gatherings of more than five people “annihilate freedom of expression,” Mr. al-Hussein added. “In effect, this means the sweeping away of all checks and balances on the power of the government, rendering the lifting of martial law meaningless.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many middle-class Thais welcomed the coup as a step to restoring public order after years of political polarization and violence, but the ensuing crackdown on dissent and the junta’s failure to lay out a timetable for surrendering power has drawn growing criticism from human rights organizations.The junta’s decision to adopt Article 44 signaled Thailand’s “deepening descent into dictatorship,” the director of Human Rights Watch Asia, Brad Adams, said this week.General Prayuth, a gruff career soldier, brushed off criticism, telling reporters he was “not a ruthless person.”But Mr. al-Hussein’s statement was the second time in as many days that the general has drawn criticism from United Nations human rights officials.The United Nations expert who works on issues of freedom of expression, David Kaye, railed against remarks by General Prayuth that he would “probably just execute” journalists who did not report the truth as officials saw it. Mr. Kaye called the comments “simply outrageous.”A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | United Nations; Human Rights Chief Faults Thai Junta.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.