By EDWARD WONGAPRIL 3, 2015
BEIJING — An American geologist who was imprisoned for more than seven years on a vague charge of “illegally procuring state secrets” has been deported by China and arrived home in Houston on Friday, according to a human rights organization in the United States.Senior American officials, including President Obama and three American ambassadors to China, had for years urged  top Chinese Communist Party and government officials to release the American, Xue Feng. But China showed little leniency, and Mr. Xue served all but 10 months of his eight-year prison sentence.Through most of the past decade, Mr. Xue’s case has been a frustrating one for the American government and has been cited by human rights groups as an example of the vagaries of the Chinese legal system.The fact that the Chinese government refused to release Mr. Xue ahead of or during Mr. Obama’s visit to Beijing in November 2009 despite intense behind-the-scenes diplomatic talks revealed at the time how little leverage the United States has had in recent years in human rights advocacy in China. Mr. Obama personally lobbied for Mr. Xue’s release during the visit, to no avail.AdvertisementThe case also underscored China’s unwillingness, in legal proceedings, to recognize the status of Chinese who have given up their Chinese citizenship and become citizens elsewhere. Mr. Xue was born in China but was a naturalized American citizen and had lived in the United States since earning a Ph.D. at the University of Chicago. Other Chinese-born Americans, including Hu Zhicheng, an automotive engineer, have suffered similar fates as Mr. Xue.AdvertisementAt the time of Mr. Xue’s release, no other American was serving a prison sentence for endangering state security, according to the human rights organization, the Dui Hua Foundation, which is based in San Francisco and often works for the release of political prisoners.In November 2012, Chinese officials granted Mr. Xue a 10-month reduction in his sentence for good behavior. He was first detained in Beijing on Nov. 20, 2007, and placed in a detention center under the watch of the Ministry of State Security, which oversees espionage and counterespionage matters. This status, “residential surveillance,” lasted for more than one year and was not counted in the eight-year sentence, Dui Hua said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Xue was formally detained in February 2008, tried in July 2009 and then sentenced on July 7, 2010. His years in formal detention before the sentencing were counted in the time served, as is normally the case in China.Mr. Xue was working for IHS, an American energy and engineering consulting company, until he resigned in July 2007, several months before he was detained. While in the employ of IHS, he had introduced the company to an oil industry database that he believed was commercially available. After IHS bought the database, Mr. Xue was detained.American Embassy officials were not allowed to see him for weeks. When he finally did meet with embassy officials, Mr. Xue told them of how he had been mistreated and tortured, and he showed them cigarette burns from interrogators on his arms.Chinese officials have wide powers in categorizing items as state secrets, and they often do so retroactively, after a person has already been detained. Many foreign officials and scholars say China’s state secrets charges are often used for political purposes.On Friday, Chinese prosecutors announced they were charging Zhou Yongkang, a former head of the domestic security apparatus and a political enemy of Xi Jinping, the Chinese president and party chief, with leaking state secrets, bribery and abuse of power.A report in the World Briefing column on April 4 about China’s deportation of Xue Feng, an American geologist who had been imprisoned for more than seven years on a vague charge of “illegally procuring state secrets,” referred incorrectly to his employment status at the time of his detention in 2007. Mr. Xue had resigned from IHS, an American consulting company, several months before he was detained; he was not working for IHS at the time.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; China: Detained for Years on Spy Charges, an American Is Released and Deported.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.