By ELISABETH MALKINAPRIL 3, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  Rival drug gangs battle over territory. The murder rate rises and helpless residents implore the government to restore order. The government sends soldiers to keep the peace.But instead, the violence gets worse.The story was repeated many times during the six-year term of President Felipe Calderón, who began his presidency at the end of 2006 by sending troops into his home state, Michoacán. Now a statistical analysis of homicide rates in 18 regions of Mexico during that time confirms that the arrival of soldiers failed to reduce the number of murders in 16 of those areas. In some of the most notable cases, including the border cities of Ciudad Juárez and Tijuana and the Pacific resort city of Acapulco, the murder rate soared in the year after soldiers were put on the streets, according to a new study published on the website of The American Statistician.The study, “Did the Military Interventions in the Mexican Drug War Increase Violence?” strongly suggests that the arrival of troops leads to an increase in homicide rates in the short term, or at best, no improvement, said Valeria Espinosa, one of the study’s authors, a quantitative analyst at Google who completed a Ph.D. in statistics at Harvard in 2014.To estimate the effect of the military intervention, the study compared the regions where there were interventions with similar regions where no troops were sent. Ms. Espinosa and her co-author, Donald B. Rubin, a Harvard professor of statistics, also defined the regions they studied as the central city and surrounding municipalities because drug violence often migrates to neighboring areas when soldiers begin patrolling cities.AdvertisementIn an interview, Ms. Espinosa said that additional variables that she did not have — such as government intelligence on drug gangs, smuggling routes and drug crops — would contribute to a fuller understanding about whether military intervention actually causes increased violence.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s a methodology that policy makers could use along with inside information” to determine the effects of military intervention, Ms. Espinosa said.The study is limited to short-term results. In the most notorious case, Ciudad Juárez, the murder rate rose to more than 200 people per 100,000 in 2010 after a military intervention in 2008, the highest in the world. But since then, it has fallen significantly.AdvertisementA recent study by the International Crisis Group attributes the relative return to normality to citizen engagement that demands accountability from the local authorities, public investment in social programs and local police and judicial reforms.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Study Finds Mexican Troops Did Not Stem Drug-War Killings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.