AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — It took President Obama two days to call Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel after his March 17 electoral victory, and any congratulations were couched in an excoriation of Mr. Netanyahu’s hawkish and divisive campaign rhetoric.It took Mr. Obama about two hours to call Mr. Netanyahu after Thursday’s announcement of a framework agreement to curb Iran’s nuclear program, and this time it was the Israeli leader who lectured the American that the emerging deal “would threaten the survival” of his state. The White House account of the call was conciliatory: The president promised to increase security consultations and cooperation with Israel to “remain vigilant in countering Iran’s threats.”The relationship between the two leaders, and their nations, has always been asymmetrical: The United States is the world’s sole superpower, Israel a small country in a volatile neighborhood. But while Mr. Obama’s promised reassessment of Washington’s longstanding protection of Israel in the United Nations flexes that larger muscle, Mr. Netanyahu is now in a powerful position to undermine the Iran nuclear deal, his counterpart’s signature foreign policy initiative.How fiercely Israel fights the deal, particularly in Congress, could have broad implications for the strained alliance and the Middle East peace process.“Ironically, just because of this deal, there is a chance that the Americans will try to compensate Israel somehow if we stop fighting against this deal, and we should exploit it in a smart way,” Giora Eiland, a former Israeli national security adviser, said in an interview Friday, noting that Mr. Obama “rushed to call” Mr. Netanyahu and “tried to be as nice as he could.”A guide to help you navigate the deal between global powers and Tehran.Mr. Eiland was one of several Israeli analysts who said the emphasis should turn to strengthening the verification procedures in the deal and clarifying the consequences if Iran violates it. “If Netanyahu chooses this option, at least we can gain some other benefits from the situation rather than to continue to blame and to undermine,” he said. “The time has come to make a real reassessment in regard to the Israel-American relationship.”Though Israeli and American officials have long denied any link between the Iranian and Palestinian issues, the two are playing out simultaneously. In the coming weeks, as Congress reviews the deal and considers further sanctions, France plans to introduce a United Nations Security Council resolution regarding Palestinian statehood. It is not hard to imagine Mr. Obama vowing to block it if Mr. Netanyahu lowers the volume on Capitol Hill.At the same time, Mr. Netanyahu must assemble a new governing coalition, and the Iran deal could put new momentum behind the idea of a unity government with his center-left rival, something Washington might favor.Mr. Netanyahu on Friday introduced a new demand for the nuclear negotiations, saying the final agreement must “include a clear and unambiguous Iranian recognition of Israel’s right to exist.” As he has several times this week, he noted an Iranian general’s recent declaration that “the destruction of Israel is nonnegotiable,” and said, “I want to make clear to all: The survival of Israel is nonnegotiable.”“Israel will not accept an agreement which allows a country that vows to annihilate us to develop nuclear weapons, period,” he said. “Some say the only alternative to this bad deal is war. That’s not true. There is a third alternative — standing firm, increasing the pressure on Iran until a good deal is achieved.”The statement, issued in English and Hebrew shortly before the beginning of the Passover holiday, followed a special three-hour session of Israel’s security cabinet, which Mr. Netanyahu said was “united in strongly opposing the proposed deal.” It did not mention Congress or hint at the prime minister’s strategy.Whether Iran is racing toward nuclear weapon capabilities is one of the most contentious foreign-policy issues challenging the West.Dore Gold, a former foreign policy adviser to Mr. Netanyahu who remains in his inner circle, said Friday that “it’s not for Israel to get into legislation” in Congress, but that the world powers negotiating a final deal by June 30 “include parliamentary democracies” and “an active press corps in all countries.”Opponents of the deal in Israel and the United States have been emphasizing what they view as Iran’s expansionary meddling in Iraq, Syria and Yemen as another reason not to trust it. The Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a Washington-based policy institute that has been critical of the emerging nuclear deal, said Friday that it could “further supercharge Iranian aggression in the region” and encourage Iran’s Sunni Arab adversaries to develop nuclear capabilities.“This is a battle for ideas, and Israel will have to put forth its arguments,” said Mr. Gold, a former Israeli ambassador to the United Nations and president of the Jerusalem Council on Public Affairs. “We’re past the elections now in both countries. Everybody is making their case, their point. If the final agreement reflects what’s in this framework, we’re talking about something that is nothing less than a historical error.”Mr. Gold said the framework’s provisions allowing Iran to keep much of its nuclear infrastructure intact, in light of what he called Iran’s history of violating international agreements, was a primary concern.But several Israeli commentators said Friday that the deal looked better than expected, noting that even if it only delays Iran from producing a nuclear weapon by its decade-long duration, that is far longer than what an Israeli or American military strike could achieve.“Even Israel could learn to live with it,” wrote Ron Ben-Yishai, a security analyst for the news site Ynet. “Put simply, Obama is offering an olive branch to Netanyahu in an attempt to cooperate on the design of the final agreement over the next three months. The Israeli government should warmly embrace the offer without batting an eye.”Nahum Barnea, a columnist for the Israeli daily Yediot Aharonot, described Israel’s crusade against the deal as “a resounding failure,” writing, “As the clash between Netanyahu and Obama on the Iranian issue heightened, Israel’s influence on the course of the negotiations and its outcome lessened.”“The dilemma that Netanyahu faces today is not an easy one. He can push the leaders of the Republican majority in the two houses of Congress to try to torpedo the agreement,” Mr. Barnea said. “It is doubtful whether doing this would achieve its purpose.”But Emily Landau, an Iran expert at Israel’s Institute for National Security Studies, said Israel’s campaign in recent months had succeeded, at least, in preventing critics of the deal from being marginalized as “warmongers or idiots.” Ms. Landau was one of many in Israel who opposed Mr. Netanyahu’s speech in Congress last month against White House wishes, but she said that it helped reframe the debate in newspaper editorials and foreign policy institutes.“If you look at very serious analysts at the unofficial levels, you see them coming together with the same interpretations, whether they sit in America or France,” she said Friday. “It’s not just Israel is out of step with the international community — we’re past that. If the Obama administration tries to continue with that line, it’s getting old and stale. There’s a need to confront the serious and important criticism that a lot of knowledgeable people have.”For Ms. Landau, that criticism starts with how Iranian violations of the agreement would be detected, who would determine if such violations warranted confrontation and who would “take action if it’s deemed necessary to take action that goes beyond the sanctions.”The situation reminded Mr. Eiland, the former Israeli national security adviser, of an Old Testament tale in which King David fasts for seven days after Batsheva bears him a very sick son. Once the baby dies, the king asks for something to eat, explaining, in the book of Samuel: “Why should I fast? I can’t bring him back to life.”Israel should say to the Americans, “We understand this is a fait accompli, it is something that cannot be reversed,” Mr. Eiland said. “Let’s try to solve other problems we have. Don’t push us to the corner in the Palestinian arena, make sure you’re not going to be against us in the U.N. Let’s try to improve what can be improved, let’s stop fighting because this specific game is over.”Advertisement