

      By KAREN YOURISH, 
    
SERGIO PEÇANHA and 
    
K.K. REBECCA LAI

UPDATED APR. 9, 2015

Since it was announced April 2, American and Iranian officials have used different words to describe the preliminary agreement to limit Iran’s nuclear program. Meanwhile, Israeli leaders and members of Congress continue to express skepticism over the framework. Negotiators have until June 30 to come up with a final deal.

Iran’s official explanation of the framework says sanctions that have punished Iran’s economy will be “immediately” lifted once the agreement is implemented. On April 9, Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in his first comments about the deal, stressed that sanctions “should be lifted all together on the same day of the agreement, not six months or one year later.”
              
              
            
President Obama’s ViewSanctions will be lifted in a phased approach, only after Iran lives up to its commitments under the agreement.Israel’s ImpressionThe deal removes sanctions “almost immediately” and makes Iranian compliance “unlikely.”
President Obama has said inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency who will be charged with verifying that Iran is complying with the agreement “can go anyplace” in Iran.
              
              
            
Iran’s ViewIran has maintained that the deal will not require inspections of military bases. Mr. Khamenei, above, reiterated that inspections of military facilities would not be permitted.Critics SayCritics of the deal, like Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and Senator John McCain, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, insist that inspectors be allowed to go “anywhere” in Iran, at “anytime.”
In a statement following the announced framework, Mr. Obama said Iran would “no longer” enrich uranium at its Fordo facility. But the American statement also says Iran has agreed not to enrich uranium at Fordo for “at least 15 years.”
              
              
            
Iran’s EmphasisMore than 1,000 of the centrifuges will be kept at Fordo, and modifications could be reversed if the United States does not hold up its end of the deal. Above, President Hassah Rouhani.Israel and McCainWant the facility to be closed completely.
The United States will “preserve the ability to snap back” sanctions if Iran violates the agreement.
              
              
            
Israeli SkepticismIsrael questions the effectiveness of this mechanism.
The American statement says Iran will be prohibited from using its advanced centrifuges to produce uranium for at least 10 years. Before those 10 years are up, Iran will be able to conduct some “limited” research on the centrifuges.
              
              
            
Iran’s StatementThe Iranian statement omits the word “limited.”Change SoughtIsrael and Mr. McCain want the final agreement to prohibit all research on centrifuges.Advertisement