By IAN AUSTENOCT. 16, 2015
Kenneth D. Taylor, the Canadian ambassador who helped shelter six Americans after militants overran the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and who then helped spirit them out of Iran, died on Thursday in Manhattan. He was 81.His wife, Pat Taylor, who helped Mr. Taylor shelter the Americans in their home in Tehran, said the cause was colon cancer. He lived in Manhattan.Mr. Taylor always insisted that he had done nothing extraordinary, preferring to characterize the episode as simply a triumph of Canadian diplomacy. He was nonetheless hailed as a hero in both Canada and the United States, where he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1981.When Islamic militants stormed the embassy on Nov. 4, 1979, taking more than 60 Americans hostage, nothing in Mr. Taylor’s background suggested that he was prepared for the potentially dangerous international intrigue that would follow. For much of his career he had acted as a trade commissioner, spending time at the Canadian consulate in Detroit.AdvertisementBut he was thrust into the thick of the crisis when a group of Americans managed to flee the embassy’s 27-acre compound and desperately sought refuge. Five were allowed into Britain’s diplomatic compound before being asked to leave, apparently because of security concerns.AdvertisementBut one American, Bob Anders, was able to reach, by telephone, John Sheardown, the head of Canada’s immigration section in Tehran. Without consulting officials in Ottawa, Mr. Sheardown and Mr. Taylor began working out a plan to shelter Mr. Anders and four other Americans in their official residences.“He took a great risk,” said Malcolm McKechnie, a retired Canadian diplomat and friend of Mr. Taylor’s. “But he made the decision to take in the Americans immediately.”The Americans spent more than two months holed up in the diplomats’ homes fighting boredom. After a sixth American appeared, four were in Mr. Sheardown’s residence and two in Mr. Taylor’s as an escape plan was hatched.With Canada winding down its diplomatic presence in Tehran, Mr. Taylor favored issuing the Americans Canadian passports and mixing them in with other Canadians who were departing Iran. The Canadian government agreed to the plan.Meanwhile, the Central Intelligence Agency was devising a much more elaborate escape plan. Tony Mendez, a C.I.A. agent, and a forger, who has never been identified, were to enter Iran posing as Canadian producers of a science fiction movie in the works called “Argo.” The Americans, pretending to be Canadian film crew members, would then leave with them.The American plan was initially met with little enthusiasm in the Canadian government or at the Canadian Embassy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Mendez changed the scenario,” Mr. Taylor told the historian Robert Wright for the 2011 book “Our Man in Tehran,” which recounts Mr. Taylor’s role in the affair. “He had them as filmmakers, and we had them as nutritionists.”But the “Argo” plan won out, and the hostages were shepherded to the airport and escaped to the United States on Jan. 28, 1980.AdvertisementMr. Taylor and the remaining Canadian diplomats closed the embassy and left for Denmark that evening.Ben Affleck’s hit film “Argo,” a thriller released in 2012, was based on the episode, though it took liberties with events and was criticized in Canada as underplaying the Canadians’ role. The Canadian actor Victor Garber played Mr. Taylor. The movie won the Oscar for best picture.Mr. Taylor was portrayed by Gordon Pinsent in a 1981 Canadian television film, “Escape From Iran: The Canadian Caper.”When the escape became known to the public, the participants became celebrities in both Canada and the United States. Mr. Taylor told The Toronto Star that for several years afterward, taxi drivers in New York, recognizing him from news coverage by his nimbus of curly hair, refused to let him pay for rides.Ralph E. Lean, a Toronto lawyer and friend of Mr. Taylor’s, said in an interview that when he and Mr. Taylor traveled the world on golf trips, it was routine for Americans to approach and thank him for his role in the crisis.Kenneth Douglas Taylor was born on May 10, 1934, in Calgary, Alberta. He earned a bachelor’s degree at Victoria College of the University of Toronto and a master’s in business from the University of California, Berkeley.Mr. Taylor was the Canadian consul general in New York before retiring from the foreign service in 1984. He was later an executive with Nabisco Brands and RJR Nabisco and a political risk consultant.Mr. Sheardown, his collaborator in the Americans’ escape, died in 2013.Mr. Taylor, who died at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, learned of his colon cancer in August. Besides his wife, he is survived by a son, Douglas, and two grandchildren.Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Kenneth D. Taylor, Guardian Envoy in Iran, Dies at 81.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.