
APRIL 6, 2015

Overnight beginning on April 13, the police in China released five women’s rights activists who had been detained in March as they planned a public awareness campaign against sexual harassment on public transportation. Their detention  had set off an international campaign for their release.
Related Article
Also called Li Maizi (李麦子), Ms. Li became more widely known in 2012 when she participated in a campaign demanding more public toilets for women. She later headed the L.G.B.T. program at the Beijing Yirenping Center. Ms. Li also participated in ‘‘Vagina Monologues’’ performances in Beijing last December. Ms. Li’s apartment in Beijing was searched in the late evening of March 6. Police detained her following the search. Yirenping’s offices were raided on March 24.She was released on bail in the late hours of April 13, her lawyer Yan Xin said.Ms. Wu worked at the Aizhixing Institute in Beijing, which helps people living with AIDS. She also led women’s rights programs at the Beijing Yirenping Center until last year, when she set up a center for women in Hangzhou.Ms. Wu was detained upon arrival at the airport in Hangzhou on March 7. She was first transferred to a detention center in Beijing, where she was denied access to medication for a chronic liver disease and forced to sleep on the floor of her cell, according to Human Rights Watch.Ms. Wu had then been transferred to a medical facility in another detention center. She was released on bail in the early hours of April 14, a family member said. Ms. Wang is a known figure in China’s rights movement for raising awareness on the rising wealth gap, the Shanghai-based gender researcher Chen Yaya wrote in her blog. Ms. Wang taught in rural China for two years.She was taken to a police station in the Haidian district of Beijing for questioning on March 6. Ms. Wang has congenital heart disease and suffered a heart attack during detention, her lawyer, Zhao Xia, said in a phone conversation on March 20. Ms. Wang was hospitalized in a detention center in Beijing.She was released on bail on April 13, according to the lawyers Liang Xiaojun and Wang Qiushi.Ms. Wei is the director of Ji’ande, an unregistered L.G.B.T. rights group in Beijing, according to Chinese Human Rights Defenders.Also known by the nickname Waiting, Ms. Wei co-directed early performances of ‘‘The Vagina Monologues’’ in Wuhan and helped set up L.G.B.T. rights groups there and in Beijing.As a project manager at the Beijing Gender Health Education Institute, Ms. Wei helped stage an annual AIDS Walk on the Great Wall. She was questioned along with Wang Man at a police station in Beijing on March 6 and was held at a detention center there. She was later sent to Nanning and released on bail there on April 13, Mr. Wang said.Nicknamed Datu (大兔), or Big Rabbit, Ms. Zheng has publicly campaigned against gender discrimination and sought dialogue with government officials on discriminatory policies for several years.Last November, Ms. Zheng was briefly detained at Guangzhou Baiyun Airport and barred from traveling to Bangkok to attend a women’s rights conference. In an interview, she said that the police had told her that  ‘‘relevant departments’’ had instructed them to bar her from leaving the country.Six police officers detained Ms. Zheng at her home in the southern city of Guangzhou shortly before midnight on March 6. She was later transferred to Beijing. She was released on bail on April 13, the lawyers said.Officials were apparently trying to forestall a campaign against sexual harassment on public transportation coinciding with International Women’s Day.AdvertisementOfficials were apparently trying to forestall a campaign against sexual harassment on public transportation coinciding with International Women’s Day.