By SOMINI SENGUPTA and RICK GLADSTONEOCT. 16, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  Israel’s new ambassador to the United Nations plunged into his first public diplomatic engagement here on Friday, ruling out any international protection force for a disputed holy site in Jerusalem, as the Palestinians demand.In an appearance outside the Security Council chambers, the new ambassador, Danny Danon, a former deputy defense minister in Israel known for hawkish views, also condemned the Palestinian leadership for what he called its instigation of violence against Jews.Mr. Danon portrayed the series of stabbings and other attacks on Israelis in recent weeks, coupled with an arson attack at the holy site known as Joseph’s Tomb in the West Bank city of Nablus on Friday, as the direct result of what he described as hate-filled incitement of Palestinian children.“I wish my first time speaking to you was on happier terms,” Mr. Danon, 44, told reporters as the Security Council convened a meeting on the latest Palestinian-Israeli violence.AdvertisementAn underlying cause of the mayhem has been tensions surrounding the holy site in Jerusalem known as the Temple Mount to Jews and the Noble Sanctuary to Muslims.AdvertisementPalestinians have said they fear Israelis are planning to take over the site, which under a longstanding arrangement is administered by a religious council under Jordanian custodianship. Israel has repeatedly called such fears false, unfounded and inflammatory.
            Seven Israeli Jews have been killed and dozens injured in more than 20 violent attacks by Palestinian assailants since the beginning of the month.        Circles are sized to represent the number of reported attacks on Israeli Jews in October 20 milesISRAELSea ofGalileeAfulaMediterraneanSea2Raanana2WEST BANKTel AvivJerusalem16attacksGAZASTRIPDeadSea3Kiryat ArbaJORDAN37At least 37 Palestinians have died in the violence, with more than a dozen killed by Israeli security forces and citizens in connection to reported attacks on Israelis.Palestinians killed by Israelis774433222Jan.Feb.MarchAprilMayJuneJulyAug.Sept.Oct.OCT. 16, 2015
Mr. Danon dismissed a request by the Palestinian delegation for an international protection force to provide security at the site.“We don’t think any intervention will help,” Mr. Danon told reporters. “Keeping the status quo is right thing to bring stability and to keep stability in the region.”France said it intends to advance a draft statement calling for “restraint” and “maintaining the status quo.” The Security Council has not discussed any text. A statement is not legally binding and has little effect.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Palestinian ambassador, Riyad H. Mansour, told the Council that the need for international protection at the site had become “more urgent than ever before.”The United Nations legal office has prepared a confidential memorandum listing examples of how a protection force could be deployed. But to make it public and bring it up for discussion would require consensus among all 15 Security Council members. That has proved elusive.Seven Israelis and more than 30 Palestinians have been killed in recent weeks, the United Nations assistant secretary general, Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, told the Council.He said the loss of hope in prospects for a Palestinian state had contributed to what he called the “anger and frustration” that fuels the violence. He welcomed Israel’s commitment to maintaining the status quo.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Israeli Envoy Rejects Plan for a Holy Site.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.