By SALMAN MASOODAPRIL 5, 2015
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —  A man killed 10 relatives in northwestern Pakistan over a marriage dispute on Sunday, just months after he killed his own parents, police officials said.The killings took place near Tangi in the Charsadda District of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province when the man, Gul Ahmed Said, entered the house of his uncle, Jamal Khan, and opened fire on his sleeping relatives, the police said.Among the dead were Mr. Said’s uncle, aunt, four male cousins and four female cousins, including the woman he wanted to marry, the police said.“There was a dispute over a marriage proposal,” Shafiullah Khan, senior superintendent of police of Charsadda, said by telephone.AdvertisementMr. Said had been on the run for five months after killing his parents and two brothers after his father ordered him to wait before marrying his cousin, said Mr. Khan, the police officer. The family had a small house and did not have a separate room to accommodate a married couple, and Mr. Said’s father asked him to wait until he raised the money to build another room.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Mr. Said could not wait and opened fire on his family, killing his parents and two brothers,” Mr. Khan said.AdvertisementMr. Said, believed to be in his mid-20s, resurfaced Sunday at 3:30 a.m. in the village to carry out the killings before escaping again, the authorities said.The victims were shot in the heads and faces, according to officials at the district hospital where the bodies were taken by neighbors. The eldest male cousin was 23, while the youngest was 12. Naveeda, the woman Mr. Said wanted to marry, was 24, according to police records.Police officials said it was not immediately clear if Mr. Said acted alone.“It does not seem to be the work of one person,” Mr. Khan said. “It could be that he had help.”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Pakistanis: Man Killed 10 Relatives.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.