By MAX BEARAKOCT. 16, 2015
JOGBANI, India — As Nepalese officials prepared the country’s new Constitution this fall, scenes of grisly violence were unfolding in the country’s Terai region, a new report from Human Rights Watch says.Protesters in the region, which has close ties to India, were outraged by the proposed Constitution — which was eventually adopted on Sept. 20 — saying that it favored the traditional ruling class in the northern and Himalayan regions.In Tikapur, a city in Nepal’s far west, protesters armed with spears and with bamboo sticks spiked with nails beat eight lightly armed police officers to death, including one who shared an ethnicity with his attackers and begged them to take mercy, the report says. Another officer’s 18-month-old son was shot in the head after the initial clash, according to the report, which was released Friday.In the southern town of Birgunj, the police dragged a 14-year-old protester out of the bushes, threw him to the ground and, while one officer stood on his legs, shot him in the face at point-blank range, eyewitnesses said, according to the report. Doctors who examined the boy’s body said his injuries were consistent with the account.AdvertisementThe region’s clashes resulted in nine police deaths and 16 deaths among civilians, including six apparent bystanders, the report says.CHINATikapurNEPALBirgunjBiratnagarTERAI REGIONJogbaniINDIA200 MILESOCT. 16, 2015
While not ignoring violence by the protesters, the report accuses the police of carrying out extrajudicial killings and using disproportionate force.AdvertisementThe protests, led primarily by two groups, the Madhesis and Tharus, have left much of the country’s south under curfew for months. India has complained that the new Constitution is unfair to the Madhesis, with whom India has close geographic and historical ties. Two months ago, India shut its major border crossings with Nepal, saying the protests had made them too hazardous. That, in turn, has led to severe fuel shortages in Nepal.Nepal has accused India of imposing a de facto economic blockade as retribution for the new Constitution, which passed hastily over India’s objections. Nepal, which is landlocked, relies on India for all of its fuel and most of its other imports. The impasse threatens to replace Nepal’s amicable if not dependent relationship with its giant neighbor with something pricklier.With a major festival for Nepal’s Hindus approaching, a logjam of trucks waiting to enter Nepal from India for weeks has eased at some crossings in recent days. Customs officials at the Jogbani border crossing said more than 500 trucks crossed into Nepal this week, though thousands of trucks were still waiting in lines that were miles long. According to protest leaders, Madhesi agitation will regain steam after the conclusion of the Dashain festival late this month.“Ever since the Nepali state came into being, we have been treated as second-class citizens,” said Jaya Ram Yadav, a former lawmaker based in Biratnagar and a member of the Madhesi People’s Rights Forum (Democratic), one of the groups participating in the protests. Power in Nepal has traditionally been concentrated in the hands of the Pahadi, who populate the Himalayas and their foothills. Madhesis and Tharus make up about 30 percent of the population, and they are on average poorer and less educated than Pahadis.The Human Rights Watch report describes a police crackdown tinged by ethnic division. “The police only call us Indians, Biharis,” a Madhesi witness in the city of Janakpur is quoted as saying. “They say, ‘They are Bihari, shoot them.’”A spokesman for Nepal’s Home Ministry, Laxmi Prasad Dhakal, rejected the report’s findings that the police had used excessive and unnecessary force, saying the report “had been prepared totally in a biased manner.”Advertisement“Security agencies have opened fire as a last resort to save their lives,” he said. “They opened fire when the protesters involved in anarchist activities, and the situation went out of control.”Before India’s independence, groups from India’s northern plains were some of the first to clear the forests of southern Nepal and settle there, and the border remains porous. Indians cross it without documents to shop and to visit relatives, and they have watched the Madhesi protests with deep interest.“Madhesis are Indians,” said Ajay Kumar Gupta, the owner of a fertilizer business in Forbesganj, a town seven miles from the border. “To be Madhesi means that you migrated from here to there — maybe yesterday, maybe 20, 50 or 100 years ago.”Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Gupta does not consider himself Madhesi, but he explained that term was more a geographical indicator than an ethnic one. He said the term could be applied to a spectrum of people, belonging to various castes and speaking several languages, provided that they or their ancestors originated in the lowlands that straddle the border.“Ask anyone here and you will find that not one person doesn’t have a family relation with a Madhesi,” said Mohammed Kalam, who works for a nongovernmental organization in Forbesganj. “It is impossible to exaggerate how many marriages happen across the border.”Caught between two governments trying to assert themselves, those on the Nepalese side have been caught in precarious circumstances, particularly those in the Terai.Walking out of a state-owned salt distribution warehouse on Wednesday near Biratnagar, a Madhesi named Birendra Yadav, 40, said he cared little about the political ambitions of his community’s leaders.With the long-awaited arrival of trucks carrying salt from India, he was able to get back to work after two months of supporting his family of eight on the meager harvest from an acre of land where he grows vegetables and keeps a cow.“We won’t benefit if we keep on fighting. Our leaders must sit, talk, and solve the problem,” Mr. Yadav said softly, scratching his three-day gray stubble. “I want peace so that I can work and support my family. We all suffer from the protests. It will be very difficult for us to survive if protests continue.”Deepak Adhikari contributed reporting from Biratnagar, Nepal, and Bhadra Sharma from Kathmandu, Nepal.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Report on Protests Against Nepal’s New Constitution Details Grisly Violence .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.