AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim ArangoISTANBUL — As a hostage crisis at the central courthouse gripped this city last week, a photograph coursing through social media conveyed the situation more concisely than any words: a beret-wearing militant, face obscured by a red scarf, holding a gun to the head of a well-known prosecutor.After an evening raid by Turkish special forces ended with gunfire, leaving two militants and the hostage dead, the debate that ensued was not over the wisdom of the raid but over the publication of the photograph.Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu called the outlets that circulated the photograph “tools of terrorist propaganda.” The day after the crisis, reporters representing Turkish newspapers that had published the photograph were barred from covering the prosecutor’s funeral in Istanbul.On Monday, the Turkish authorities went further: An Istanbul court issued a ruling blocking Twitter and YouTube, which the semiofficial Anadolu News Agency said had failed to remove images of the prosecutor, Mehmet Selim Kiraz, as well as 166 other websites that had distributed the photograph, including the individual pages of several prominent Turkish newspapers that had displayed it.Several Turkish newspapers published the photograph, as did some foreign news organizations, including The New York Times.By evening, Twitter was unblocked. Turkish press reports said the company had agreed to remove postings that included the image. But YouTube, among others, remained blocked.At a news conference on Tuesday, Ibrahim Kalin, the spokesman for Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, said: “Media groups that should be acting responsibly in publishing these photos are almost doing the propaganda of a terrorist organization. And continuing to do so despite all warnings and criticisms is unacceptable.”Mr. Kalin continued: “For one moment, put yourself in the shoes of the family and children of our slain prosecutor. What would you gain by sharing that photo?”He added: “There is an effort to present the demands within the context of a violation of freedoms. This is unacceptable.”The photograph was first distributed over social media by the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-Front, a militant Marxist group that claimed responsibility for the attack.In any other country with a tradition of freedom of the press, the photograph might have set off a discussion within the news media about the ethics of publishing it. But in Turkey, where an intensified crackdown on expression has fueled discontent with the government, the authorities’ tough reaction has become another chapter in the long struggle between the state and the press.Still, some experts said the decision to publish the photograph raised legitimate ethical questions.Ahmet Sik, a reporter at Cumhuriyet, a secular daily newspaper, and a former journalism professor at Bilgi University in Istanbul, said that the photograph should have been published but that Mr. Kiraz’s face should have been blurred “because he was confined against his will and it’s important to respect his family.”Though Mr. Sik called the social media ban “disproportionate,” he said, “There are ethical problems with the fact that it was published in its original form.”In an editorial after its reporter was barred from covering the prosecutor’s funeral, Hurriyet, a newspaper, wrote: “We think that a democracy with the freedom of the press cannot accommodate a prime minister allocating himself the authority to punish newspapers, correspondents, photojournalists and cameramen or be busy with the process of accreditation. This is more reminiscent of practices particular to third world regimes.”Turkey has become one of the most aggressive censors of the Internet. Mr. Erdogan has called Twitter “the worst menace to society,” and last year Turkey blocked Twitter after it was used to disseminate leaked audio recordings that purported to implicate government officials in a corruption investigation. The government has also blocked websites that it regarded as an assault on Islamic values, including that of a Turkish atheist association and the Paris newspaper Charlie Hebdo, which published cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad and was targeted in a deadly attack.Turkey’s crackdown on expression has further distanced the country from the European Union, which it has long aspired to join. In a message posted on Twitter on Monday, Carl Bildt, the former foreign minister and prime minister of Sweden, wrote: “Turkey is really damaging itself by laws that allow prosecutors to shut down Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. Simply stupid.”In the conclusion of its editorial, Hurriyet wrote: “We just want to do journalism. We do not want to face bans with policemen waiting on street corners, trying to prevent our colleagues from doing their work.“Furthermore, we will not let anyone question our love for the homeland.”Sebnem Arsu and Ceylan Yeginsu contributed reporting.Advertisement