Chinese patients are fed up  with their doctors, and doctors are fed  up with their patients. During a two-week stay in a Beijing  hospital, here’s what I wrote in my diary: ‘‘One has a curious sense of being  in a machine, an irritant, like a grain of  sand. … No one has the right to anything, not even medical care. You can  only demand, beg or seize.’’ And people do. ‘‘Kan bing nan,’’ or  ‘‘It’s hard to see a doctor,’’ they say  about the country’s oversubscribed, underfunded, often corrupt, health system. In frustration, patients may attack  their physicians. Bribery is common.Patients’ relatives gather in hospital waiting rooms and corridors, or camp out in wards cooking and tending to the  sick, to make up for inadequate nursing. They may stage noisy protests to  get the attention of staff members.‘‘I think you will find that most doctors are good people,’’ said a doctor at another Beijing hospital. Yet, physicians are unpopular and need advice on ‘‘upholding their rights,’’  according to an article on the website of  the Chinese Medical  Doctor Association.  Common problems:  What should a doctor  do when bitten by a  patient with syphilis? Assaulted by a  drunk? Besieged at home for 10 years  by a couple angry over their daughter’s  unsuccessful operation?China’s medical system is a ‘‘market  of distrust,’’ according to Cheris Shun-ching Chan, a sociologist at the University of Hong Kong. An emphasis on  profits, a culture of ‘‘gift giving’’ and a  lack of professional ethics have produced a difficult atmosphere, she said.‘‘During the Mao period, doctor-patient relationships were relatively harmonious,’’ Ms. Chan said. Money was  scarce and resources were few, for all.  But after decades of market liberalization as hospitals sought to generate  revenue, contributing to treatment  shaped by commercial rather than  medical concerns, trust is gone. ‘‘The  conflict really is between patients and  doctors,’’ she said.The government says 90 percent of  Chinese have some health insurance,  but underfinanced state programs  leave many patients covering the bulk  of their costs themselves. One attempt  to overcome the inefficiencies of the  system and ensure a physician treats a  patient well is to give ‘‘hongbao,’’ or  red envelopes — bribes.Such payments are illegal. In 2014  the National Health and Family Planning Commission issued its 13th notice  in two decades demanding that patients not give them and physicians not  take them, Ms. Chan said.Hongbao, typically of 1,000 to 5,000  renminbi per envelope, or $160 to $800,  are particularly common before major  surgeries, said Ms. Chan, citing a survey she conducted. Of 572 people interviewed in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, 31 percent said they had offered  hongbao, and these were accepted in 80  percent of cases, she said.‘‘You have to ‘buy’ a doctor’s effort  to save the life of a person,’’ she said.  ‘‘The main aim is to get the physicians  to perform the surgery to the best of  their ability. It’s what surgeons are  supposed to do, of course.’’The government recognizes the problems. On April 1, a meeting of the Central Leading Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms discussed the  need for change in the medical system.‘‘We must realize the responsibility  of the state to provide medical care,  break the system of public hospitals  pursuing profit, and build an appropriate salary system that matches the  special skills of the medical profession,’’ reported Xinhua, the state news  agency. Leaders know more investment is needed. But money may not be enough. A  lack of professionalism skews everything, according to a recent report by  David Blumenthal and William Hsiao  in The New England Journal of Medicine. A century into China’s quest to be  a modern state, ‘‘the norms and standards of medical professionalism’’ and  ‘‘the independent civic organizations  that could promote and enforce them’’  are still missing, they write. Said Ms. Chan: ‘‘Doctors often joke  that they are afraid to sit in offices with  their backs to the door in case they’re  stabbed.’’ And everyone feels the deficit of humanity. 