AdvertisementSupported byLetter From EuropeBy Katrin BennholdLONDONDERRY, Northern Ireland — Gearoid O hEara was there when British soldiers opened fire on a civil rights march on Jan. 30, 1972, a day that has become known as Bloody Sunday. The leader of the Irish Republican Army’s youth wing at the time, Mr. O hEara was more recently a co-chairman of Northern Ireland’s policing board.“It’s been a strange old journey,” he said.The same could be said about Northern Ireland 17 years after the Good Friday peace agreement. Take Londonderry, known as Derry to nationalists, which has changed in ways unimaginable in 1998: The former British Army barracks has become a cultural venue. Since 2011, a “peace bridge” has spanned the River Foyle, giving unionists on the east bank and nationalists on the west bank easy access to each other’s neighborhoods.Most important, the killing has largely stopped. But as 3,700 deaths recede into history, one question just won’t go away: Can there be peace without justice?The families of the 14 people who died as a result of Bloody Sunday obtained an apology from the British government in 2010. But some now want convictions. These and other cases highlight another rift in this divided society: between those who demand hard justice, and those who want to leave the past behind. The peace agreement was deliberately ambiguous on the causes of the conflict and a long-term solution. “The agreement basically told everyone they won,” said Christine Bell, a professor at the University of Edinburgh and former member of the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission. The piecemeal approach to justice has produced an array of truths and forms of accountability, from a victims’ commissioner to the Historical Enquiries Team, a body established by the police to investigate conflict-related deaths, among many others. But there is an emerging consensus that this is no longer enough.A South African-style process of truth and reconciliation may seem an obvious compromise: truth-telling in return for immunity, allowing victims to obtain closure and perpetrators to unburden themselves, perhaps even find forgiveness. But the apartheid regime on whose watch the atrocities were committed was replaced. Northern Ireland had no such fresh start.“It’ll never happen here because the state and the British government have played such a vicious and violent part in it that they can’t afford to be honest about it,” said Mr. O hEara, echoing the misgivings of other senior Republicans.The same, of course, could be said about those senior Republicans, many of them former I.R.A. militants who have pursued high-profile political careers since. Sinn Fein, the political party with links to the I.R.A., is the second party in Northern Ireland and popular in the Republic of Ireland, too.Martin McGuinness, once a high-ranking member of the I.R.A. and now deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, was Sinn Fein’s chief negotiator in the years leading up to the Good Friday agreement. In a recent interview, he acknowledged that justice meant different things to different people. But he made his own preference very clear.“British soldiers tried to kill me, and I’ve been physically harmed in interrogations,” he said. “I don’t want any of them in prison. I don’t even want their apologies. If I’m to be genuine about the work of peacemaking, I have to leave behind all the anger and bitterness and focus on the future.”Not everyone on the nationalist side thinks it’s that simple. “The reality is that these boys have blood on their hands, and until the truth is told, we can’t move on,” said Brenda Stevenson, the city’s mayor. “But it needs to be done without destabilizing the peace.”Contrary to popular assumptions, the biggest obstacle for tackling the past may no longer actually lie in Northern Ireland. In December, all parties backed a proposal offering victims a menu of options to seek justice, from traditional legal avenues to a mechanism allowing access to information in return for waiving the right to use that information in court.But that proposal has yet to become law in Westminster. And at a time of austerity and imminent elections, dealing with the past in Northern Ireland has not been a priority in Britain. “Our peace process can withstand lots of truths,” Professor Bell said. “This has become a question of political will and cost.”Advertisement