By THOMAS FULLERAPRIL 7, 2015
BANGKOK —  Three years after abolishing detention without trial, the Malaysian government revived the practice on Tuesday with the passage into law of a highly contentious antiterrorism bill that opposition leaders fear could be used against government critics.The bill, the Prevention of Terrorism Act, was passed early Tuesday by a vote of 79 to 60 after more than 10 hours of debate.The government, which arrested 17 people this week for what the chief of police said was a plot to attack army camps and police stations, has sought to justify the law as necessary to combat the threat of terrorism in Malaysia.Critics say the law is a further slide toward authoritarianism in Malaysia and a definitive reversal of personal freedoms that Prime Minister Najib Razak vowed to introduce soon after assuming power in 2009.AdvertisementThe Prevention of Terrorism Act bypasses the judiciary and allows for detention for as many as 59 days at the discretion of the police. Suspects can be held for two years, renewable for an unlimited period of time, on the decision of a Prevention of Terrorism Board, whose members are appointed by the country’s sultan.AdvertisementIn Mr. Najib’s early years in power, his program of liberalization featured the abolishment in 2012 of the Internal Security Act, a law that allowed for detention without trial and was used against government opponents and anyone who presented a vaguely defined threat.But in recent months, Mr. Najib has hewed to a hard line. He faces both an ascendant opposition and an open revolt within his own party. In November, he announced that he would toughen another law that he once vowed to abolish: the Sedition Act, a British colonial relic that calls for jail terms for anyone who “excites disaffection” against religion, the country’s sultans and the government.On Tuesday, Mr. Najib’s coalition introduced changes to the Sedition Act in Parliament, including an increase in the maximum jail term to 20 years, up from five. The revised law would also rule out bail in certain cases.Malaysian lawyers are among the most vocal critics of both the antiterrorism law and planned changes to the Sedition Act, which are likely to pass, given Mr. Najib’s comfortable majority in Parliament.“Now free speech is being exterminated,” Michelle Yesudas, a Malaysian lawyer, said in a Twitter post. She circulated a modified picture on social media of the board game Monopoly in which nearly every square said, “Go to jail.”Eric Paulsen, another Malaysian lawyer, said on Twitter, “Soon we will have farcical scenes like in Egypt where half of the opposition/dissidents will be behind bars on political trials.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About 20 people, including journalists, opposition politicians and a university professor, have been charged with sedition over the past year.On Friday, Zulkiflee Anwar Ulhaque, a cartoonist who goes by the name Zunar, was charged with nine counts of sedition for criticizing a decision in February by the country’s highest court to uphold a five-year prison term for Anwar Ibrahim, the leader of the opposition. Mr. Zunar called the judges who upheld the sentence for sodomy “lackeys in black robes.”AdvertisementHuman rights groups have criticized the jailing of Mr. Anwar, who was one of Mr. Najib’s biggest rivals. The opposition has staged demonstrations urging his release.But Mr. Najib also faces fierce opposition from one of the leading personalities inside his own party, Mahathir Mohamad, a former prime minister who still wields influence and whose views are widely circulated.Mr. Mahathir wrote on his blog last week that the Malaysian people “don’t trust Najib.”He listed a number of scandals, including the murder of a Mongolian model by Mr. Najib’s bodyguards and a government investment fund set up by Mr. Najib that has teetered on the edge of insolvency.Mr. Mahathir predicted that the governing coalition, which has won every election since independence from Britain in 1957, would be voted out of power if Mr. Najib remained as prime minister.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Malaysia Reinstates Detention Without Trial.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.