AdvertisementSupported byBy William NeumanMEDELLÍN, Colombia — A top adviser to Secretary of State John Kerry was in Venezuela on Wednesday for a surprise meeting as the United States appeared to be seeking to lower the volume in the rancorous relationship between the countries ahead of a regional meeting of heads of state.The Venezuelan government invited the United States to send a senior official to Caracas, the Venezuelan capital, to meet with President Nicolás Maduro before the Summit of the Americas meeting, according to a statement issued Wednesday by the State Department. That meeting of heads of state, including President Obama and President Maduro, will take place in Panama, starting Friday.It was not clear whether the official, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., whose title is State Department counselor, met with Mr. Maduro. The statement said that he arrived on Tuesday and was scheduled to leave on Thursday.The Venezuelan Foreign Ministry issued a statement saying that Mr. Shannon met with the Foreign Minister Delcy Rodríguez on Wednesday.The United States is Venezuela’s largest trading partner, and Venezuela is one of the largest foreign oil suppliers to the United States.But Mr. Maduro, a leftist, regularly denounces Washington and accuses it of trying to overthrow his government. Officials in Washington have denied the charge.Mr. Maduro faces a growing economic crisis, with one of the highest inflation rates in the world and shortages of many basic goods.At the same time, he has stepped up a crackdown on the political opposition, throwing some opposition leaders in jail. On Tuesday the national prosecutor’s office announced that it had formally filed conspiracy charges against one of the jailed leaders, Mayor Antonio Ledezma of Caracas, who Mr. Maduro claims was plotting to stage a coup.The United States has been one of Mr. Maduro’s harshest critics internationally, and last month, Mr. Obama signed an executive order levying sanctions against seven Venezuelan officials who the Obama administration said were responsible for human rights abuses or violations of due process.The order also called Venezuela a threat to the national security of the United States.Mr. Maduro responded with a propaganda campaign, accusing Washington of planning an invasion of Venezuela as he sought to drum up support at home and abroad in the face of what he said was American imperialist aggression.His government says that it has collected millions of signatures from Venezuelans on a petition calling for Mr. Obama to rescind the executive order. Officials have said that Venezuela planned to give the signed petitions to Mr. Obama at this week’s summit meeting.The statement Wednesday from the Foreign Ministry said that Mr. Shannon “brought a message from his government” and that Ms. Rodriguez reiterated the demand that the executive order be rescinded.A day before Mr. Shannon’s visit was announced, a White House official backed off the language in the executive order that declared Venezuela to be a national security threat.“The United States does not believe that Venezuela poses some threat to our national security,” said Benjamin J. Rhodes, deputy national security adviser for strategic communications, during a telephone call with reporters to discuss the president’s trip.Patricia Torres contributed reporting from Caracas, Venezuela.Advertisement