By HARI KUMARAPRIL 8, 2015
NEW DELHI — Human rights advocates in India on Wednesday called for an investigation into the deaths a day earlier of 20 loggers in a raid on what the police said was an illegal operation in the state of Andhra Pradesh to cut and sell endangered red sandalwood trees.Law enforcement officials said Tuesday that officers had opened fire on the loggers in self-defense, and that some of the loggers had firearms. However, two doctors who treated injured police officers after the confrontation said they had been pelted with stones, and none had gunshot wounds.Early Tuesday morning, the police surprised a large group of loggers — estimates varied from 50 to 100 — and the ensuing shootout left 20 bodies on the forest floor, an episode that dominated Indian news reports on Tuesday.Abhirr V.P., of Amnesty International India, condemned the use of force on the workers.“In many cases the smugglers are poor woodcutters employed by organized gangs,” he was quoted as saying in a news release. “The curbing of red sandalwood smuggling must not be used as an excuse to ignore human rights.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday, India’s National Human Rights Commission, an independent body, called on the authorities in Andhra Pradesh to submit a report explaining the police action.AdvertisementGovernment doctors who conducted post-mortems on the dead loggers refused to divulge details, but local news media reports suggested that most of them died from gunshots to the upper part of their bodies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Dr. C.S. Sandhya, the medical superintendent of a government hospital in the nearby town of Tirupati, where the police officers had been treated, said by telephone that there was no evidence that the officers’ injuries had been caused by firearms. “The injuries on the policemen were most likely caused by stones that were thrown at them,” Dr. Sandhya said. She added that some of the injuries were serious.The government of Tamil Nadu, the home state of most of the dead loggers, on Wednesday announced a compensation package of 300,000 rupees, or about $4,800, to their family members.Red sandalwood is not especially prized in India, but it sells for thousands of dollars a ton in other parts of Asia.The government of Andhra Pradesh has initiated an inquiry into the killings. The state has cracked down on illegal logging over the past 10 months, jailing 1,000 loggers and impounding 6,000 vehicles carrying illegal wood.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.