By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISOCT. 16, 2015
President Obama welcomed President Park Geun-hye of South Korea to Washington, where the two leaders spoke about diplomatic efforts to solve the problem of North Korea’s nuclear program.WASHINGTON —  President Obama on Friday said he stood ready to negotiate with North Korea on easing sanctions in exchange for limits on its nuclear weapons program if the North showed a willingness to discuss dismantling its growing arsenal, citing his recent experience forging a nuclear accord with Iran as a model for engaging American antagonists.Mr. Obama said there had been no sign that North Korea would be willing to engage in such talks, and during a summit meeting with President Park Geun-hye of South Korea at the White House on Friday, the two leaders issued a sharply worded statement condemning the “deplorable” human rights situation in the North and promising to address its advancing nuclear and ballistic weapons proliferation “with utmost urgency and determination.”But the president also said he and Ms. Park shared a common determination to “engage nations with which we have had troubled histories,” comparing her attempts to forge better relations and trust between South Korea and the North Korean government in Pyongyang to his own push for a reconciliation with Cuba and the Iran nuclear deal.“At the point where Pyongyang says, ‘We’re interested in seeing relief from sanctions and improved relations, and we are prepared to have a serious conversation about denuclearization,’ I think it’s fair to say we’ll be right there at the table,” Mr. Obama said at a news conference with Ms. Park at the White House, following their Oval Office meeting and working lunch. “But we haven’t even gotten to that point yet because there’s been no indication on the part of the North Koreans, as there was with the Iranians, that they could foresee a future in which they did not possess or were not pursuing nuclear weapons.”AdvertisementHis remarks came the same day American officials said that a ballistic missile test Iran conducted last weekend ran afoul of United Nations Security Council resolutions that bar the launching of missiles capable of delivering a nuclear weapon. Samantha Power, the American ambassador to the United Nations, said the United States would “continue to press the Security Council for an appropriate response to Iran’s disregard for its international obligations,” although Mr. Obama would offer no detail on Friday about what that response might be.AdvertisementMr. Obama said Iran’s activities inside of Syria, where their forces are working along with Russia’s to beat back rebels challenging the Syrian government, were nothing new, arguing that both would ultimately fail to resolve the conflict there. He said the United States and Russia had reached a limited “understanding,” aiming to ensure that their respective military aircraft do not get in each other’s way in the skies over Syria.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We have arrived at an understanding and some channels for communications” with Russia, Mr. Obama said. “Where we will continue to differ is in the basic set of principles and strategies we are pursuing inside of Syria.”But Mr. Obama made clear there were few disagreements between him and Ms. Park, asserting that their alliance had “no cracks” and was the strongest it had ever been. Weeks after the Korean president visited Beijing, where she was photographed standing shoulder-to-shoulder at a military parade with President Xi Jinping of China and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Mr. Obama said he was not concerned that her warming relationship with China would upset the rebalance he has been working to strike in Asia.“There’s no contradiction between the Republic of Korea having good relations with us, being a central part of our alliance and having good relations with China,” he said, adding that he had told Ms. Park during their meetings that he would insist that Korea “speak out” when Beijing flouted international rules.Ms. Park, for her part, said she met with the Chinese and Russian leaders to secure their cooperation in confronting the nuclear threat from North Korea. If she was looking to Mr. Obama for the diplomatic space to pursue such alliances, Ms. Park appeared to come away from Friday’s meetings satisfied.“President Obama affirmed that Korea-U.S. relations and Korea-China relations could be compatible, and supported Korea’s policies toward China,” Ms. Park said. “We believe that this will play a positive role in insuring peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and throughout Northeast Asia.”She also pressed Mr. Obama about the potential for Korea to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the 12-nation trade accord completed last week.“I believe that we make natural partners in terms of the T.P.P.,” Ms. Park said, noting that the United States and Korea have their own, two-way, free-trade agreement. “And since T.P.P. negotiations have now been concluded, we will be engaging in closer cooperation with regard to Korea’s possible participation.”Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from the United Nations.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on October 17, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama and South Korean Leader Emphasize Unity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.