AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod NordlandBAGHDAD — The Iraqi Army and militia forces carried out an attack against the Islamic State outside the city of Ramadi on Wednesday, with some local officials claiming it was the beginning of a major offensive in western Anbar Province, though others said that was premature.The attack came only a week after Iraqi officials declared victory over Islamic State extremists in the city of Tikrit, where fighting to wipe out pockets of resistance was continuing.“Today we announce the beginning of the Anbar liberation operation, and we have started from the Sajariya area east of Ramadi,” said Sabah Karhot, chairman of the Anbar Provincial Council, the regional Parliament. Security forces were advancing on that area from the north and east, he added.That announcement seemed to come as a surprise to officials of the central government, however, even as Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, along with top commanders, flew to the Habbaniya air base, a government-held outpost between Ramadi and Falluja, to meet with American advisers there about the new offensive, according to officials in Anbar Province.“This is not the big joint operation. We didn’t say anything about that,” said Gen. Saad Maan, the spokesman for Baghdad Operations Command. “Maybe he was in a hurry,” he said, referring to the Anbar official’s statement.Mr. Abadi has promised that Iraqi forces would soon turn their attention to Anbar Province, an overwhelmingly Sunni and largely desert area where the extremist Sunni group the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, controls more than 60 percent of the territory. Much of the territory was seized as long ago as January 2014, six months before the fall of the northern city of Mosul.But General Maan said the prime minister was meeting with senior officials to decide when the offensive would begin.“Until now there is no official announcement, we didn’t say anything, it depends on the results of the prime minister’s visit,” he said. Mr. Abadi was accompanied by the general commanding his military’s ground forces; the commander of the elite Golden Brigade, which is expected to lead the Iraqi Army’s offensive in Anbar; and the federal police commander.Hikmat Ayada, an adviser to the governor of Anbar, said the operation that began on Wednesday was a partial attack on an area east of Ramadi. The Islamic State holds areas around that city, the provincial capital, as well as all of the cities of Falluja, Hit, Qaim and Rawa, and parts of Haditha. “It’s a mistake. The council announced the whole operation but this is just a partial operation,” he said.Mr. Karhot, the chairman of the provincial council, said that Wednesday’s attack was by a combined force of the Iraqi Army and popular mobilization forces, including some Shiite militia groups. Many local tribes oppose the inclusion of Shiite militias in Anbar.Efforts to stem the rise of the Islamic State.Mr. Ayada said that while there were some Shiite militiamen fighting in Ramadi, they were there only as individuals, not in groups, and were under the command of the Iraqi military. There were also Sunni militiamen and tribal fighters involved, he said.“We got promises from the prime minister, the head of Parliament and many others that there will be no extension of popular mobilization from southern provinces in Anbar,” Mr. Ayada said.In Tikrit, the government has announced that the city fell to its forces on March 31, but fighting has continued, particularly in the Qadisiyah neighborhood, as recently as Wednesday, according to local Iraqi military officials. So far, residents have not been able to return to their homes and businesses there.General Maan said it was not correct to characterize that as continued fighting in Tikrit. “There are thousands of houses in Tikrit, and you can find some groups here and there inside this and that house,” he said. “But this is not a fight. They are just trying to escape and engage our forces when they do.”Near the Kurdish city of Kirkuk in the north, the Islamic State released 227 Yazidi prisoners it had been holding since last summer. They were exclusively older and disabled people and young children, according to a pesh merga commander in the Kirkuk area, Westa Rasool, but no young men or women.It was the second time the extremists had released Yazidi prisoners; about 200 were freed in January, also mostly ill or older. Yazidi men of fighting age are believed to have been executed and women to have been enslaved and forced to marry Islamic State fighters.Iraqi employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Salahuddin, Anbar and Kirkuk Provinces.Advertisement