During a regularly scheduled news conference in Beijing on Thursday, a Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman was asked about the infrastructure China has been constructing around reefs, rocks and shoals in waters of the South China Sea that are claimed by other countries. The question arose in response to a series of satellite photographs released by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, based in Washington, depicting Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands, which the Chinese call Meiji Reef in the Nansha Islands.Following is the statement by the spokeswoman, Hua Chunying, translated by Mia Li:Newly published satellite images show that China is reclaiming land around Meiji Reef within an area the Philippines regards as its Exclusive Economic Zone. What is China’s comment on the negative remarks made by some countries on China’s maintenance and construction work on islands and reefs in the South China Sea? China has indisputable sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and adjacent waters. The Chinese government has been carrying out construction and maintenance work on some of the Nansha Islands reefs, mainly in order to improve the living and working conditions of personnel stationed there, to improve relevant functions the islands and reefs provide, to better safeguard national territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, to better meet China’s international responsibilities and obligations in maritime search and rescue, disaster prevention and mitigation, marine scientific research, weather observation, environmental protection, navigation safety, fishery production services and other areas. Such construction is within China’s sovereignty and is fair, reasonable and lawful, and does not affect or target any country, and is thus beyond reproach.After the construction, the islands and reefs will be able to provide comprehensive services to meet various civilian demands in addition to satisfying necessary military defense requirements. The maritime areas of the South China Sea, intersected by shipping lanes and fishing routes, are far from the mainland. These areas have suffered frequent marine accidents due to typhoons and monsoons. In this round of reef expansion, we will construct civilian facilities such as typhoon shelters, navigation aids, search-and-rescue centers, marine meteorological forecasting stations, fishing services and civil administration offices. These will provide necessary services to China and its neighboring countries, as well as international vessels sailing in the South China Sea.China’s construction projects on the islands and reefs have gone through scientific assessments and rigorous tests. We place great importance on both construction and protection, following high environmental standards and requirements. We have taken full consideration of the protection of the environment and fishing resources. The ecology of the South China Sea will not be damaged. In the future, we will take further steps to monitor and protect the ecological environment of relevant waters, islands and reefs.Regarding the negative and erroneous comments of some countries, I would like to emphasize two points:First, China adheres to the path of peaceful development and pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in nature. Maintaining peace and stability in the South China Sea serves China’s development and security interests. China is committed to resolving disputes through direct negotiations with the countries concerned and to safeguarding peace and stability in the South China Sea jointly with the Asean countries.Second, we note that some countries have kept silent while other countries have illegally occupied China’s Nansha islands and reefs and even constructed major structures on the islands, but then made irresponsible remarks as China conducted normal activities in its own territory. This behavior reflects a total double standard, is unfair and not constructive. I hope the relevant parties will earnestly abide by their own promise not to take sides on the South China Sea issue and commit themselves to promote regional peace and stability.