By MICHAEL R. GORDONAPRIL 9, 2015
WASHINGTON —  For a year after the North Atlantic Treaty Organization cut back its cooperation with Russia as punishment for the country’s incursions into Ukraine, Russia’s NATO mission has seemed curiously impervious to the deteriorating ties.Its delegation to the military alliance’s headquarters in Brussels still has more than 50 members, more than the delegations of a number of NATO countries.Not for long. NATO, publicly citing an administrative effort to limit the size of delegations from “partner nations” like Russia, has capped them at 30 members.But Western officials said the move also followed a confidential assessment by the alliance’s Civilian Intelligence Committee that intelligence agents had been part of Russia’s delegation.AdvertisementNo one is shocked that spies might be in Russia’s delegation, and shrinking its size would hardly eliminate the risk of espionage, said the Western officials, who asked not to be identified talking about intelligence issues. But they said it could make the problem easier to manage.AdvertisementBesides, now that cooperation between Russia and NATO has been suspended, the Russian delegation has far more people than it could possibly need, the officials said.Well staffed though it may be, the Russian Mission to NATO has not rushed to comment on the decision. A spokeswoman for the mission said Thursday that Alexander V. Grushko, Russia’s ambassador to NATO, might speak, but not before Friday morning.The move is only the latest difficulty in a relationship that has been fraught from the start.President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has objected strenuously to the alliance’s decision to take in new Central European members and expand to include 28 nations. He has been equally vociferous about NATO’s plans to field antimissile defenses in Europe.The United States maintains that the antimissile systems are directed against a potential Iranian threat, but Russia fears they may eventually evolve into a system that could blunt Russia’s nuclear deterrent.Still, NATO has sought to work with Russia on Afghanistan, maritime operations and counterterrorism, among other issues. And after the collapse of the Soviet Union, that cooperation became a potent symbol of the reduction in Cold War enmity.In 1994, Russia joined NATO as a partner nation that would not officially belong to the military alliance but would cooperate with it. (There are now 41 partner nations.)A “Founding Act” between NATO and Russia, issued in 1997, proclaimed that the two sides no longer saw each other as adversaries and were committed to “overcoming the vestiges of earlier confrontation.” A year later, a senior Russian envoy to NATO said that the alliance and Russia would “make our way step by step.”AdvertisementThe NATO-Russia Council was later established to discuss security concerns. And early last year, NATO’s and Russia’s navies planned to jointly escort the Cape Ray, a specially configured American vessel that destroyed tons of chemical weapons ingredients removed from Syria. But after the Ukraine crisis erupted, the joint naval mission, which was supposed to be a model for American-Russian cooperation, was scrubbed, though the destruction of the chemical weapons went ahead.And by May 2014, it was the Founding Act that seemed to be the vestige from a previous era.“Clearly, the Russians have declared NATO as an adversary, so we have to begin to view Russia no longer as a partner but as more of an adversary than a partner,” Alexander R. Vershbow, the deputy secretary general of NATO and a former American ambassador to Moscow, told reporters in Washington last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last April, NATO decided to curtail military and civilian cooperation with Russia, while maintaining political contacts, because of its role in the Ukraine crisis.Since then, just four members of Russia’s large delegation have credentials that allow them to go to NATO headquarters without an escort: the ambassador, the deputy ambassador, a driver and an assistant.Despite the precipitous downturn in relations, Mr. Grushko has continued to meet with senior NATO officials in Brussels and has been included in meetings with other partners.But with no real cooperation to nurture, Russia’s delegation shrank to the current 50-plus from 70 at the end of last year.The new 30-person ceiling — NATO calls it a “guideline” — is not being imposed immediately. Partner nations have nine months to comply and will be able to decide which staff members to keep. Russia and the other partner nations were officially notified of the new personnel limit last week.With NATO set to move into a new headquarters in Brussels next year, the alliance has publicly presented the move as an administrative effort to manage the growing number of partner nations.“Currently, NATO pursues dialogue and practical cooperation with 41 partner countries,” said Carmen Romero, a deputy NATO spokeswoman. “This is a practical measure, which applies to all partners at NATO headquarters, including Russia.”AdvertisementBut Western officials said Russia might, in fact, be the only partner nation affected by the new cap.NATO’s intelligence committee, which made the assessment that members of the Russian delegation had been using their status to spy, is led by Norway under a rotating chairmanship and is made up of representatives from the intelligence services of all of the alliance’s members.The West has previously expelled Russian diplomats for espionage. But the suspension of NATO’s cooperation with Russia and the alliance’s coming headquarters move have provided it with an opportunity to take more far-reaching and, some Western diplomats say, long overdue action.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: NATO Caps Size of Russia’s Mission After Internal Reports of Espionage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.