By ELISABETH MALKINAPRIL 9, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  When a helicopter landed on a grassy patch in an exclusive suburb here on a recent Sunday morning, Ignacio Vizcaìno, a mathematician and aircraft enthusiast, snapped a few photos from his window — and set off the latest scandal to rock Mexico’s political class.The photos, uploaded to Facebook, showed a helicopter marked with the logo of Mexico’s National Water Commission and a family boarding it with their suitcases on March 29. David Korenfeld, the commission’s director, along with his wife and his children, were clearly not on official business.After 10 days of frenzied news coverage of his use of the government helicopter, Mr. Korenfeld, a close associate of President Enrique Peña Nieto, resigned on Thursday. “As human beings we are always susceptible to making a mistake,” he said at a news conference. “But we must have the courage to accept them, apologize and assume the consequences.”Mr. Korenfeld’s travails added a new picture to an expanding slide show of conspicuous consumption by Mexico’s political elite. The images of luxury watches and sumptuous mansions are stoking public indignation over what seems to be an elastic understanding by many public officials over how public money can be spent.Advertisement“Korenfeld’s resignation shows that citizen complaints and demands are powerful because they are legitimate,” Mexicans United Against Crime, a leading civil society group, said in a Twitter message. “Let’s continue like this!”AdvertisementThe outrage has been mounting since the end of last year, with the disclosure that Mr. Peña Nieto’s wife, Angélica Rivera, and Finance Minister Luis Videgaray both bought luxury houses built and financed by a government contractor.Ms. Rivera, a former soap opera star, dropped out of sight for months but recently emerged on the cover of the celebrity magazine Hola, which featured an extensive spread on the presidential family’s state visit to Britain. The timing of the magazine feature was uncomfortable because the government had just announced budget cuts to compensate for falling oil export revenue.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This week, the American Spanish-language network Telemundo showed video of Ms. Rivera shopping in Beverly Hills with her daughters and others.Opposition parties have been slow to make an issue of the personal excesses in Mr. Peña Nieto’s Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, because of corruption scandals in their own parties.But with midterm elections scheduled for June, that may be changing. The center-right National Action Party ran ads this week pointing out that the PRI’s president, Cesar Camacho, owns multiple luxury watches.Nobody believes that Mr. Korenfeld is the only public official who has blurred the lines when it comes to using government helicopters. The columnist Ciro Gómez Leyva described him as “a casualty of war of a government with no space” for debate.Officials may become more careful about using helicopters. Five helicopters landed on Sunday at the opening of a campaign for governor by a candidate of the left-wing Democratic Revolutionary Party. They carried governors and party officials.Although officials hastened to show that the party and the campaign had paid for the trips, the event was quickly called “helicóptero-gate.”A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexican Official Quits Over Helicopter Ride.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.