AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael D. ShearWASHINGTON — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. offered an upbeat assessment of the battle against Islamic extremists in Iraq on Thursday, saying the government in that country was making “significant and growing” progress with help from the United States and its allies in the region.Speaking at the National Defense University ahead of the new Iraqi prime minister’s visit to Washington next week, Mr. Biden declared that Iraq had halted the momentum of Islamic State fighters, who have controlled some regions of the country, and he largely dismissed criticism about increased Iranian influence over the country.“There’s just one problem with these critiques,” Mr. Biden told students, faculty and staff members at the university. “The claims do not represent the circumstances on the ground.”Mr. Biden cautioned repeatedly that the fighting in Iraq was far from over, saying at one point: “The jury is still out. That’s the truth. It’s not over yet.” He conceded that Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi’s new government had a “great deal of work” remaining to improve its military forces and strengthen its political institutions now that the country had taken charge of its own security from the United States and its allies.Efforts to stem the rise of the Islamic State.American military leaders in recent weeks have told members of Congress that the Islamic State, also referred to as ISIS or ISIL, remains a serious threat, having lost little of the territory it had seized in the last year. The director of the Central Intelligence Agency, John O. Brennan, said in a speech last month that “ISIL is well-armed and well-financed. ISIL will not be rolled back overnight.”Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, the head of United States Central Command, told a House committee in March that the battle against the Islamic State was nowhere near won.But in his speech Thursday, Mr. Biden said that gloomy reports of the battle with the extremists understated the improved political situation and the gains that were being made on the battlefield.“Today in Iraq, ISIL has lost large areas it used to dominate,” Mr. Biden said. “Leaders have been eliminated. Supply lines have been severed.” He added, “The reports of demoralization within ISIL ranks are rife.”Mr. Biden said that he did not want to “paint an overly rosy” picture of the fight. But he said, “ISIL’s aura of invincibility has been pierced.”In recent months, Shiite militias backed by Iran have aided in the fight against the Sunni militants in Iraq, most notably in the effort to retake control of Tikrit. American military officials have privately conceded that the efforts of the Iranian-backed fighters, in conjunction with Iraqi ground forces and American air power, was succeeding.American officials insist that they are not coordinating or cooperating directly with the Shiite militias, though privately they say they are concerned about the potential that Iran might gain too much influence in Iraq. But on Thursday, Mr. Biden rejected the idea that Iranian influence in Iraq was growing. Mr. Biden said that Iran’s efforts to exert control in the recent fight against extremists in Tikrit had stalled. That allowed Mr. Abadi to reassert the government’s role in the battle and it prevented militias backed by Iran from exerting greater influence, he said. “Today, Iraq’s national flag, not ISIL’s, hangs over the city of Tikrit,” he said.As vice president, Mr. Biden was a central player in helping President Obama craft Iraq policy. But a spokesman for the House speaker, John A. Boehner, mocked Mr. Biden’s qualifications for offering an assessment of the situation in that country.“As a senator, Vice President Biden publicly advocated dismembering the Republic of Iraq along sectarian lines,” Michael Steel, Mr. Boehner’s spokesman, said in a written statement. “As vice president, he led the effort for an early and unwise withdrawal in 2009, and failed to reach a crucial status-of-forces agreement to protect American troops. His record of poor judgment and failure makes him a laughable choice as the face of the administration’s efforts in Iraq.”Advertisement