AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea said Thursday that she was willing to meet one-on-one next month with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan, a development that would be welcomed by American officials, who have repeatedly urged Washington’s two key East Asian allies to mend their strained relationship.Speaking in Washington, where she is scheduled to meet on Friday with President Obama, Ms. Park said that a November meeting in Seoul between herself, Mr. Abe and Premier Li Keqiang of China would provide a chance for her to meet alone with the Japanese leader for the first time.“I think I can take that opportunity to hold a bilateral summit with Prime Minister Abe,” Ms. Park said while addressing the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington research institute.Her comment was the clearest indication yet that the two countries were preparing for such a meeting, after months of negotiations. Mr. Abe on Friday reiterated his desire for bilateral meetings with both the Chinese and South Korean leaders, said Takeo Kawamura, a former chief cabinet secretary who is serving as an envoy for Mr. Abe on the issue.“I’m going to South Korea, and we’re going to do Japan-China and Japan-South Korea,” Mr. Abe said Friday, according to Mr. Kawamura, who spoke to reporters after meeting with the prime minister.Ties between South Korea and Japan, its former colonizer, have been strained for years, largely over issues rooted in their painful history. The United States is eager for them to improve the relationship, especially given the anxiety in the region over China’s growing assertiveness and North Korea’s nuclear arms program.Mr. Abe had previously expressed interest in meeting with Ms. Park, but until Thursday she had seemed cool to the idea. She has met several times with President Xi Jinping of China, however, raising concern in Washington that South Korea might be drawing closer to Beijing.Here is a look at major statements on Japan’s war legacy by monarchs and senior officials since its defeat in 1945.South Korea has said that for a meeting with Mr. Abe to be possible, Japan must take steps toward what Seoul regards as proper atonement for its history during World War II and the preceding decades — particularly the recruitment of Korean and other women to work in military-run brothels, which many historians say involved coercion. Seoul has complained that under Mr. Abe, Japan has played down state responsibility for the abuses suffered by those women, often referred to euphemistically as comfort women.Ms. Park reiterated that condition on Thursday, saying that for a meeting with Mr. Abe to be “meaningful,” Japan should “help ease the agony” of those women, 47 of whom she said were still alive in South Korea.Japan has argued that the issue was settled half a century ago in a treaty that normalized relations with South Korea. Many Japanese, especially nationalist politicians and activists, say South Korea is being unreasonable in repeatedly demanding apologies that they feel Japan has already offered for its World War II deeds.No date has been announced for the meeting between Ms. Park, Mr. Abe and Mr. Li, but Ms. Park said Thursday that it would be held in Seoul in early November.  Japan, South Korea and China began holding annual, trilateral meetings among high-ranking officials in 2008, but they were suspended after the 2012 meeting amid flaring regional tensions, notably over a dispute between Japan and China over islands in the East China Sea. The three countries agreed earlier this year to resume the meetings by the end of 2015.Jonathan Soble contributed reporting from Tokyo.Advertisement