By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISAPRIL 12, 2015
PANAMA —  President Obama fiercely defended the framework nuclear agreement with Iran on Saturday and criticized those Republicans he said were politicizing foreign policy and working to derail the deal.“I don’t understand why it is that everybody’s working so hard to anticipate failure,” Mr. Obama said of the negotiations to hammer out a final nuclear accord, during a news conference at the end of a summit meeting of Latin American nations here. “My simple point is let’s wait and see what the deal is.”He said he remained “absolutely positive” that if a final agreement codified the commitments agreed upon earlier this month, it would be the best way of preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. And he said that he was worried that Republican critics of the deal were trying to “screw up” its completion.Mr. Obama singled out Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who he said had suggested that Secretary of State John Kerry was “somehow less trustworthy” than Iran’s supreme leader in describing the deal, calling it “an indication of the degree to which partisanship has crossed all boundaries.”Advertisement“That’s not how we’re supposed to run foreign policy,” Mr. Obama said. “That’s a problem. It needs to stop.”AdvertisementAs he departed the summit meeting where a historic meeting with President Raúl Castro of Cuba provided concrete evidence of one of his most significant foreign policy achievements, Mr. Obama faced mounting questions about another goal — the Iran deal. The framework was forged in Switzerland this month, and American negotiators and allies are working with Iran to finalize an agreement by June 30.“We’ve got work until the end of June to make sure that we’ve got a document that works,” Mr. Obama said. “If, in fact, we’re not satisfied that it cuts off the pathways for Iran obtaining a nuclear weapon, then we won’t sign it.”Mr. Obama is facing a double bind over the next two months with the deal pending. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has suggested that his country will not comply with crucial conditions, including unfettered access to nuclear sites. He has insisted that sanctions be lifted immediately after a deal is signed, something the United States has said would not happen. Closer to home, the Republican-led Congress is demanding review power over any agreement, and will begin considering bipartisan legislation next week that would allow them to review the deal, vote to disapprove it and limit Mr. Obama’s ability to waive sanctions.Some Republican critics of the accord, including Mr. McCain, have seized upon the assertions of Iran’s leaders to argue that Mr. Obama is on the brink of ceding too much in the talks.“It’s not surprising to me that the supreme leader or a whole bunch of other people are going to try to characterize the deal in a way that protects their political position, but I know what was discussed in arriving at the political agreement,” Mr. Obama said.As for Congress, he said he had talked to Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and a sponsor of the review bill, and Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, the panel’s senior Democrat, about how to give Congress a voice in the debate.“I want to work with them so that Congress can look at this deal when it’s done,” Mr. Obama said. “What I’m concerned about is making sure that we don’t prejudge it,” he added, or allow opponents of the deal to “try to use a procedural argument essentially to screw up the possibility of a deal.”A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Denounces Attempts to Derail Nuclear Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.