By BRYONY CLARKEAPRIL 11, 2015
LONDON — The requests come in to local councils with appalling regularity: “How many residents in Sutton own an ostrich?” “What procedures are in place for a zombie invasion of Cumbria?” “How many people have been banned from Birmingham Library because they smell?”In Wigan, the council was asked what plans were in place to protect the town from a dragon attack, while Worthing Borough Council had to outline its preparations for an asteroid crash.Government secrecy has long been a hallmark of Britain, where neither laws nor traditions made it easy to obtain the documents and records that are the underpinnings of any bureaucracy. But a decade ago, the doors were swung wide open to allow the sunshine of public scrutiny into agencies, bureaus and councils, and the result has been both gratifying and slightly alarming.While Britain’s Freedom of Information law has established itself as a potent tool to scrutinize the work of public authorities and hold those in power accountable, it has also had some expensive consequences — and, in some cases, revealed the absurdity of public whim.AdvertisementThe hundreds of thousands of requests that have been received at various levels of government in the last decade have not only been time-consuming for agencies and councils, they have also proved extremely costly.AdvertisementSuch, though, is the side effect of transparency, say the proponents of open government, who also argue that the benefits outweigh the burdens.“What people often forget is just how much F.O.I. saves money, because it exposes wasteful and extravagant spending,” said Paul Gibbons, a freedom of information campaigner and blogger. “Just one example: a local council in Scotland was spending thousands every year sending a delegation to Japan for a flower festival. Once F.O.I. came into force, they quickly realized they couldn’t justify doing that.”Before the law, Britain was known for its culture of closed ranks and doctrine of neither confirming nor denying. David Vincent, a professor who teaches social history at the Open University, said the secrecy can be traced to the 1844 postal espionage crisis, when government ministers were accused of opening the letters of Italian exiles. Since then, he said, members of Parliament “had an attitude of essentially, ‘We will only release information if we absolutely have to.’ There was a default policy of nondisclosure.”Heather Brooke, a British-American journalist who used the government access law in 2009 to obtain details of the expenses of members of Parliament, said she had earlier found a stark difference from the United States. Though information in the United States is frequently held back from reporters by federal, state or local governments, it is often done in defiance of an overall philosophy, if not actual laws, supporting the public’s right to know.In Britain, when she requested information that she had routinely accessed in the United States — like public officials’ names or salaries — “it was as though I’d asked for the keys to a nuclear bunker,” she said. “Not just a ‘no,’ but a disbelief that I’d had the temerity to even ask.”It was Tony Blair, then a young opposition leader poised to take the reins of government, who pioneered freedom of information legislation in Britain. “We want to end the obsessive and unnecessary secrecy which surrounds government activity, and make information available to the public,” he said in 1996.It took nine years, but the law finally came into force on Jan. 1, 2005, permitting anyone to request and obtain information held by the public authorities.AdvertisementMr. Blair would later lament that this was one of his greatest mistakes in office, accusing the Freedom of Information law of being “utterly undermining of sensible government.”“Freedom of information,” he wrote in his 2010 memoir, “A Journey.” “Three harmless words. I look at those words as I write them, and feel like shaking my head till it drops off my shoulders. You idiot. You naïve, foolish, irresponsible nincompoop.”But Lord David Clark of Windermere, the cabinet minister in Mr. Blair’s government who drafted the Freedom of Information bill, said he remained happy that he was able to do so.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The law was long overdue — Britain was among the last in a long line of Western countries to adopt F.O.I.,” he said.In the decade since its adoption, the Freedom of Information act has been exposing incompetence, inefficiency and even corruption across more than 100,000 public bodies. Financial reports, expenses records, meeting minutes and private email correspondence have all been dragged into the public domain.According to the Ministry of Justice, more than 400,000 requests have been made under the act since its implementation, and central government bodies are now receiving almost 1,000 requests a week.A slew of political scandals have come to light under the act. It was Ms. Brooke’s F.O.I. request that ultimately led to the parliamentary expenses scandal in 2009, resulting in the imprisonment of five Labour members of Parliament and two Conservative peers.More recently, Jeremy Hunt, the current health secretary who formerly was culture secretary, was embroiled in controversy after F.O.I. requests revealed his close relationship with Rupert Murdoch’s media empire during News Corp’s approximately $12 billion bid for the broadcaster BSkyB. And Eric Pickles, the minister for communities and local government, landed in hot water for spending about $110,000 on tea and biscuits in a single year.Still, the Freedom of Information law has been met with resistance. Local governments in particular complain that they lack the resources to process a growing volume of requests.AdvertisementAt Buckinghamshire County Council, workers last year spent 11,276 hours handling more than 1,700 requests, costing the taxpayers more than $400,000. The leader of the council, Martin Tett, complained of the cost in “times of austerity.”“This is money we could be spending on other vital services, like children’s services or care for the elderly,” he said.Mr. Blair and Lord Clark envisioned ordinary citizens primarily using the act. But according to Ms. Park, a substantial proportion of requests come from corporations “asking about subcontracting opportunities and so on.”That is not unusual. In the United States and Canada, the largest single user group is companies seeking information about their competitors or regulators, and the pattern is similar in other countries with F.O.I. laws. But the act is also used to indulge perverse curiosities.The authorities do not have to respond to what are described in the law, vaguely, as “vexatious” requests — those seeking information of a “frivolous” nature or deliberately aimed at disrupting the work of an authority. But Gareth Cosslett, a communications adviser at the Cumbria County Council, said local governments were wary of applying this clause too often as “it risks incurring the wrath of the information commissioner.”The expense of freedom of information is impossible to calculate precisely. A 2010 survey of the local authorities by University College London, estimated that responding to F.O.I. requests cost councils about $46 million annually. On the national level, rough estimates can be made using research from Frontier Economics, which calculated an individual F.O.I. request takes an average of 7.5 hours and costs about $430 to process. Between October 2013 and September 2014, central government departments received 48,727 requests, which would put the approximate annual cost of freedom of information at over $20 million.Still, as advocates point out, that represents about 0.0019 percent of the budget — and $20 million is less than what the British taxpayer has paid for the travel expenses of Prince Andrew, the Duke of York. Also, often it pays for itself, they say, in exposing corruption or unreasonable public spending.Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the benefits and drawbacks of Britain’s 10-year-old Freedom of Information law omitted, in some editions, the given name and the position of an official who said local governments were wary about ignoring frivolous requests for information. He is Gareth Cosslett, a communications adviser at the Cumbria County Council.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: From A to Z (Asteroids to Zombies), British Just Want Facts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.