By RICK GLADSTONEAPRIL 11, 2015
The top United Nations official for aiding Palestinian refugees visited Syria on Saturday as part of an intensified effort to avoid a humanitarian calamity at the besieged Yarmouk camp. About 18,000 civilians are trapped there as government forces clash with Islamic State militants who seized control of that area more than a week ago.The official, Pierre Krähenbühl, commissioner general of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, was undertaking “an urgent mission” in coordination with Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, the agency’s spokesman, Christopher Gunness, said in a statement.The visit was prompted by the agency’s “deepening concerns for the safety and protection of some 18,000 Palestinian and Syrian civilians, including 3,500 children, as Yarmouk remains under the control of armed groups, and as civilian lives continue to be threatened by the effects of the armed conflict in the area,” Mr. Gunness said.Mr. Ban has warned of what he has called an impending massacre at the Yarmouk camp just outside Damascus, Syria’s capital, and has said it is like a “death camp” because residents have no access to food, water or medicine. He has implored all sides in the conflict to stop the fighting there.AdvertisementThe relief agency’s workers have been unable to deliver supplies to the camp, and Mr. Krähenbühl has said that the residents have been subsisting on about 400 calories a day instead of the recommended 2,000, suggesting that they are slowly starving.AdvertisementMr. Gunness said that Mr. Krähenbühl would seek to visit areas close to the camp to interview people who have managed to leave, and that he would be consulting with Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, the United Nations deputy Syria envoy, who was sent to Damascus on Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The spokesman also suggested that Mr. Krähenbühl would be seeking ways to communicate, at least indirectly, with fighters of the Islamic State, who are believed to control most of Yarmouk and are known for flaunting their ruthlessness.Mr. Gunness said part of Mr. Krähenbühl’s emergency mission was to “consult with the deputy U.N. special envoy on approaches to nonstate actors in order to secure humanitarian access to civilians.”The question of negotiating with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL and Daesh, its Arabic acronym, has been problematic for agencies that are trying to provide aid to those affected by the Syria conflict. United Nations officials have said they do not talk with the group.The Islamic State, which controls areas in northern and eastern Syria and across the border in Iraq, has boasted about its brutality in Internet videos and other propaganda that show fighters killing hostages and training children how to kill.The group has been almost universally condemned as a terrorist organization.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Official Visits Syria to Press Case of Refugee Camp.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.