The following is a translation of a letter sent by families and partners of five detained Chinese feminists to state prosecutors asking for their release. It was delivered in Beijing last Friday.A Letter from the Families of the Five Feminists to the Haidian District People’s Procuratorate.Esteemed Haidian Procuratorate,
Chief Prosecutor Comrade Wang Wei,
Procuratorate Judge Comrade Li,Hello!We are the families and very close relatives of Wu Rongrong, Zheng Churan, Li Tingting, Wang Man and Wei Tingting, the five women detained in the Haidian district detention center on suspicion of “gathering a crowd to disturb public order.” On April 9, we heard that the case had already been sent to your esteemed prosecutor’s office on April 6, with a request for the formal arrest of all five women who were detained around International Women’s Day. Before this, only Zheng Churan’s family had been notified of her detention. The Public Security Bureau did not issue any formal notice at all of the detentions of the four other women. We are astonished, puzzled and indignant at this, and the pain in our hearts is hard to express! We hereby send this joint letter to the esteemed office, attaching the signatures of all the families below. We cordially hope you can listen to the will of the people, respect the facts, judge the case strictly according to the law and regulations, consider carefully whether to formally arrest them and, by fully deploying the supervisory function of the People’s Procuratorate, offer the legal protection of citizens’ rights, uphold justice and actively protect the independence and impartiality of our country’s legal system.The five women are our daughters, wives, companions. They are young, good, law-abiding and socially responsible citizens. And they share a common identity as feminists who actively support our country’s national policy on gender by devoting themselves to and advocating women’s rights.The word “feminism” is certainly not unfamiliar to people in our country. The pioneers who founded our party proudly called themselves feminists, and starting with the time of Mao Zedong steadfastly realized the national policy of gender equality. The Women’s Federation is our biggest nongovernmental and feminist organization. Its existence constantly represents and protects feminism, and advances the historical mission of male and female equality.Activities to oppose sexual harassment promote the knowledge of the law and are in line with the spirit of the criminal law, with our law for the protection of women and children and with the core values of socialism, raising social awareness, and are important for establishing the good image of the country. Given the reality of our fine historical tradition, the reality of sexual harassment in society, and our laws and policies, we firmly believe that the ideas and actions of our five relatives in no way violated national policy or laws.Well-educated and facing a tough job market, our five young women feel strongly about our country and people and chose the road of public service and material deprivation. They are brave, and this has been a worry, but more than that, they have made us proud. They have each worked hard in their fields, and have contributed in their own ways to advancing the socialist cause.Wu Rongrong is the oldest of the five. Early on at China Women’s University, she cared about social issues and problems and volunteered for public interest activities to highlight discrimination against hepatitis sufferers, the need for AIDS prevention, and migrant workers’ rights to education. She felt for those at the bottom of society and the grass roots, and with her specialist social knowledge and loving care won their trust and affection.Zheng Churan graduated from Sun Yat-sen University in Guanzhou. She wrote a letter to the biggest 500 companies in China calling on them to implement gender equality employment policies, and was an initiator of the “Occupy Men’s Toilets” action, a lighthearted and relaxed “happening” to draw attention to the issue of inequality in the provision of men’s and women’s toilets. Backed by the news media and government departments, she used the freedom of information laws to obtain information on the serious issue of gender discrimination in government job advertisements. Through her hard work she received responses from companies and in a few years drew attention to a problem that for years had been accepted by people as normal.Li Tingting was an organizer of the “Occupy Men’s Toilets” action for female equality, winning positive responses from government departments on the issues of women’s rights and the shortage of public toilets for women, and the support of many members of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. This was reported by People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency, Reference News and many other important domestic media. Because of the positive response, many leading universities in China increased the proportion of women’s toilets as the women requested. Today, every woman who doesn’t have to wait in line for the toilet at a university in China should thank her.Wei Tingting holds a master’s degree from Wuhan University. As a student, she took part in a campus production of “The Vagina Monologues.” This helped her appreciate the importance of gender equality. After graduating, her interest in women, homosexuals and people with H.I.V./AIDS and other vulnerable groups grew. She made “wedding photos” as part of a performance artwork titled “Wounded Bride,” to remind people not to ignore domestic violence, a widespread problem that needs to be addressed. The efforts that she and many other women’s rights workers made have contributed greatly to the country’s law against domestic violence.Wang Man has been concerned about poverty and development issues since she received a master’s degree in international relations from Nankai University. She worked for a nongovernmental organization in Zhongdian, Yunnan Province, helping local Tibetan women escape poverty through handicrafts. With a weak constitution but a stubborn heart, she has always been mindful of women in poor and remote areas, caring about their gender equality and development.These five women whom we deeply love haven’t done anything wrong, let alone broken any laws. As their families, we are proud of them and comfortable that we have raised good children for the party and the country. We hope they will be given their freedom and fair treatment as soon as possible. Some of them have health problems. Wu Rongrong suffers from liver disease, and requires long-term medication. Wang Man has a heart condition and has relapsed because of fatigue from the interrogations. Li Tingting has chronic asthma and allergies, which often flare up under harsh living conditions. Zheng Churan and Wei Tingting are severely near-sighted and suffer from astigmatism. It is difficult to imagine how difficult it is for them to cope without their eyeglasses in the detention center. We are very worried about their health and current living conditions. We hope the chief prosecutor can reconsider their arrests because of their physical condition, and end their detention as soon as possible.These five women’s behavior is reasonable and legitimate. And they have a very good image in society and are loved by people. When we think about our loved ones who are kind and law-abiding citizens but have been detained for more than a month, we can’t help feeling bitter and angry. We are committed to continue paying attention to this matter and standing by their side, supporting and trusting them. We call on the chief prosecutor to understand our feeling as families, and reconsider arresting them. We believe the case of the five young women is a great opportunity for the Haidian District People’s Procuratorate to show our independent and fair judicial system to the country and the world. We believe that the procuratorate will withstand the pressure from all sides and give a reasonable response to the people, who are closely watching the young women’s fate. We hold on to our belief that the five girls are innocent. Opposing sexual harassment is lawful. Protecting women’s rights is lawful. Supporting equality between men and women is lawful.We plead sincerely with the chief procurator to think of the future of our youth, to think of the equality and rights of women, to think of the unity of the socialist motherland, to protect the good judicial image of the procuratorate, to actively implement the policy of rule of law, and to return freedom and dignity to these five innocent citizens.We hope the procuratorate will realize the fairness and duties of the judiciary and carefully review the case. We wish for a smooth handling of the case.Signed:
Wu Rongrong’s husband
Zheng Churan’s mother
Zheng Churan’s father
Zheng Churan’s boyfriend
Li Tingting’s mother
Li Tingting’s father
Li Tingting’s girlfriend
Wang Man’s mother
Wang Man’s father
Wei Tingting’s motherApril 10, 2015