AdvertisementSupported byBy Kareem FahimCAIRO — Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister accused Iran on Sunday of meddling in Yemen and pointedly dismissed Iranian appeals for the Saudis to end their bombing campaign, in the latest sign of deepening tensions between the regional heavyweights.“How could Iran call on us to stop the fighting?” the foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, said, adding that Tehran had played no constructive role in Yemen’s development process. “On the contrary, it intervened in decision-making in Yemen,” he told reporters in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, according to a transcript by the Al-Arabiya news channel. The escalating feud between Saudi Arabia and Iran, which has inflamed conflicts and sectarian rhetoric around the region, has dampened hopes that there will be a swift end to the fighting in Yemen.  Analysts say the Saudi military intervention, which began last month and was driven at least partly by fears of Iranian intervention, has hardened political divides in Yemen while exacerbating an armed conflict that has killed hundreds of people and led to an intensifying humanitarian crisis. Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East, is embroiled in a struggle for power that has serious implications for the region and the security of the United States. More than 200 people have been killed in the southern port city of Aden in fierce urban fighting that has lasted for weeks. Human rights workers have also accused Saudi Arabia of conducting reckless airstrikes, leading to many civilian deaths.Early Sunday, at least 11 civilians were killed in a Saudi airstrike that hit a slum near the city of Taiz, according to Yemeni officials. The victims were all members of a marginalized Yemeni social class referred to pejoratively as “the servants,” according to Mohammed al-Qayra’i, an activist who works on behalf of the group.  Saudi officials have said the aim of their military campaign is to restore President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi to power; he was forced from office, and then into exile, by the Houthis, a former rebel group from northern Yemen. On Sunday, Prince Saud said the Saudis were not fighting a war against Iran in Yemen, rebutting accusations that its offensive amounted to a proxy battle. But analysts say Saudi leaders were clearly alarmed at the rapid territorial gains made by the Houthis, whom the Saudis accuse of acting on the orders of Iran. Yemeni officials and Western diplomats say the Saudis have greatly overstated the degree of influence Iran exerts over the Houthis. Mr. Hadi, the exiled president, echoed the Saudi position on the Houthis on Sunday, in combative language that made the prospect of a negotiated end to the conflict seem quite distant. Writing in an Op-Ed article for The New York Times, Mr. Hadi said that “chaos in Yemen has been driven by Iran’s hunger for power and its ambition to control the entire region.”  “If the Houthis are not stopped,” he wrote, “they are destined to become the next Hezbollah, deployed by Iran to threaten people in the region and beyond. The oil shipments through the Red Sea that much of the world depends on will be in jeopardy, and Al Qaeda and other radical groups will be allowed to flourish.”Mr. Hadi’s tough words on Sunday came amid possible signs that he might not return to Yemen as president. Seen by many in Yemen as an insipid, weak leader, Mr. Hadi made many missteps that were widely viewed as contributing to the Houthis’ rise. He is said to retain little support in the country, including in the south, where anti-Houthi sentiment is most pronounced.   Yemeni officials and local media reports said Sunday that Mr. Hadi had appointed Khaled Bahah, a former prime minister who is viewed as a conciliatory political figure in Yemen, as vice president in the exile government. The appointment was seen as an effort to coax Yemen’s warring parties back to negotiations, while providing a possible alternative to Mr. Hadi’s leadership. Mohammed Ali Kalfood contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen.Advertisement