By JOSEPH GOLDSTEINAPRIL 13, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — Fierce fighting between the Taliban and the Afghan Army has broken out in the remote northeast of the country, claiming the lives of at least 20 Afghan soldiers, with some reportedly beheaded, and raising the specter of what many anticipate will be the most violent year since the start of the war.The Afghan government is bracing itself for the coming months as the Taliban test the nation’s security forces, which are now backed by only a fraction of the American and international forces they have relied on in past years.The sudden eruption of violence in northern Badakhshan Province is an early indication of what could lie ahead for the Afghan military, which has lost not only soldiers but also armored vehicles and weapons to the insurgents in the last week of fighting.The fighting season typically begins in late spring, when melting snow opens up the mountain passes that the Taliban rely on for mobility. But through last autumn and into the winter, there was more fighting and violence than usual as the Taliban maintained a campaign of suicide attacks, assassinations and hit-and-run attacks.AdvertisementOne indicator of the violence: Civilian casualties as a result of ground engagements, were 8 percent higher in the first three months of 2015 than during the same period last year. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan documented 136 civilian deaths and 385 civilians wounded from ground engagements through the end of March.AdvertisementProlonged ground battles this spring have been largely limited to Helmand Province in the south, where the Afghan Army tried to end the Taliban’s stranglehold of the Sangin district, a region that has been a way station for the opium being harvested across much of the south.The military’s operation in northern Helmand, called Zulfiqar, has been a struggle for Afghan forces for more than two months. In the face of public statements proclaiming the mission a success, locals tell stories of soldiers refusing to fight or bulldozing homes. Government forces, particularly the police, have suffered heavy casualties.On Friday, a large Taliban force attacked army outposts in several villages in the Jurm district, in the center of Badakhshan Province, which is among Afghanistan’s most remote mountainous regions. The province shares borders with Pakistan, Tajikistan and China and has been a hot spot of insurgent activity in recent years.Since Friday, 20 Afghan soldiers were killed in Jurm, the province’s governor, Shah Wali Adeeb, told Tolo News, an Afghan television channel, on Monday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The governor’s spokesman, Ahmad Naveed Frotan, said that eight of the soldiers had been beheaded. Mr. Frotan said that 10 more soldiers had been wounded and another 10 were missing and presumed to have been captured.Mr. Frotan said at least 19 insurgent fighters had also been killed. The fighting in Jurm, he said, continued on Monday.The Taliban force is believed to have numbered as many as 1,000 fighters, said the deputy governor of the province, Gul Ahmad Bedar, adding that perhaps one-quarter of the fighters were foreigners who had sought shelter in Badakhshan after fleeing a Pakistani military offensive. In its initial accounts, the government often inflates the number of Taliban fighters involved in large-scale ambushes.For years, Badakhshan was considered one of the safest and most peaceful parts of Afghanistan. But it has recently emerged as an unexpected locus of the war.AdvertisementThere are several reasons for that, including the presence of lapis lazuli mines that have at times been a focal point of fighting. The remote province’s mountainous terrain and limited road network have made it difficult for the Afghan military to respond quickly to Taliban attacks.In the past two years, the Taliban have on at least three occasions overrun a district center in Badakhshan, before being fought off or quickly retreating.In the past three years, the Taliban have gained control of about 70 percent of the Jurm district, which is home to more than 35,000 people, said Mr. Bedar, Badakhshan’s deputy governor. They have also expanded their presence in the districts to the north, south, and east of Jurm, Mr. Bedar said, adding that if the Taliban were able to seize all of Jurm, other districts might also fall.“The downfall of Jurm district actually means the fall to the Taliban of other adjacent districts, too,” he said.Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Afghanistan: Soldiers Are Killed in Fighting With the Taliban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.