AdvertisementSupported byLetter From AmericaBy Anand GiridharadasWhen I lived in India, people often told me, “Send your man.” Medical test ready for pick up? Send your man. Need some onions last minute from the grocer? Send your man. I had no man. But this I could not confess. Any self-respecting man, it seemed, had a man.Sometimes these men were called “boys.” Sometimes, they were called P.A.s, as in personal assistants. Sometimes they were “peons,” but pronounced more like “punes,” making the Spanish conquistadors’ term for forced servitude sound worse than it already does.The culture of send-your-man was jarring to me, having grown up in an America where even rather privileged people did many things for themselves, including things easily outsourced. They drove themselves and their children around, went to the supermarket themselves, contested their own parking tickets in person. While living in India, I remember seeing a photograph of a United States Supreme Court justice driving himself into work and thinking to myself: No lowly municipal judge in India would do that.But as India’s economy has begun to surge and the country to modernize, send-your-man culture has foundered. As new possibilities open to those who might have been peons, the tiresome complaint at rich-people parties in New Delhi and Mumbai is how hard it is to find a servant. Well, they should come to America, because that, evidently, is where all the servants have gone.Uber’s chauffeurs and couriers, Instacart’s grocery deliverers, Handy’s home cleaners, Zeel’s on-demand masseurs, Seamless’s bicycle warriors of takeout, Alfred’s butlers, Amazon Home Services’ electricians and plumbers — all of this is the slick, mobile-enabled, venture-capital-backed servitude of our time. As Lauren Smiley wrote in the online magazine Matter recently, “In the new world of on-demand everything, you’re either pampered, isolated royalty — or you’re a 21st-century servant.” Now in America, too, you can have yourself a man.To those of us who have lived in extremely rich and extremely poor countries, these developments in America may be especially worrying. What if all this convenience, of which I avail as much as the next person, is microgood and macrobad, reflecting the coming of a society where, as in the developing world, large numbers of people have no better opportunities than to wait on the fortunate?As my colleague Lydia Polgreen, who has reported from Africa and South Asia for The Times, wrote to me on Twitter recently, “The first world is using tech to devolve to developing world servant culture.” Technology, she said, “is essentially de-formalizing developed economies.”Is technological innovation the handmaiden of progress? People tend to use the two concepts interchangeably. But it’s possible that we live in a peculiar age that, in America at least, is innovation-rich and progress-poor. Just as we came to learn that democracy and liberalism don’t necessarily go together, that there can be illiberal democracies (Argentina, Iraq), perhaps we are starting to discover something we might call regressive innovation.This isn’t, on its own, dispiriting. It just means that innovation, like democracy, is without content. Democracy doesn’t automatically safeguard women and minorities. Those are layers we have to add. Likewise, perhaps, innovation doesn’t necessarily make the world flat, free and equal. It just gives us new ways of achieving the aims, good and bad, that have motivated us forever.One of those eternal aims seems to be access to servitude. In India, even today, you hear some say their servants aren’t really servants; they’re “family.” And yet few ever think to help these “family” members rise out of servitude. At the most, the employer will open a bank account for them or teach them a skill or two. But to threaten one’s convenience by giving them the chance not to have to serve you — well, that would be foolish. Now Americans are learning to play this game: savoring the convenience and trying to forget where it comes from. Join an online conversation at http://anand.ly and follow on Twitter.com/anandwrites  Advertisement