AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris BuckleyHONG KONG — Jiang Jiemin, a former Communist Party official who once ran China’s largest oil and gas firm confessed to taking huge bribes, according to official reports from his trial on Monday, when prosecutors also said Mr. Jiang lubricated the corrupt dealings of the former security chief, Zhou Yongkang.Mr. Jiang stood trial at the Hanjiang Intermediate People’s Court in the central Chinese province of Hubei. His case has attracted particular attention because of his ties to Mr. Zhou, the former head of domestic security and law and order, who has also been indicted on corruption and other charges. And the trial gave the first signs of the charges that Mr. Zhou is likely to face at his later trial.According to the court’s summaries of the trial, issued on the Internet, Mr. Jiang pleaded guilty to the charges: taking bribes, accumulating unexplained wealth and abusing his powers as a state company employee. Prosecutors said the bribes amounted to 14 million renminbi, or $2.25 million, and Mr. Jiang and his family had another 14.8 million renminbi, or $2.4 million, in unexplained wealth, which is a crime in China, according to a report in the People’s Daily newspaper on Tuesday.Like many other ousted Chinese officials put on trial for graft, Mr. Jiang also declared that he was abjectly remorseful for his crimes.“I relaxed my self-restraint,” he said, according to a summary from the court. “I betrayed principles and gravely violated the party’s rules and state laws, causing losses for the country that cannot be redeemed.”The prosecution and defense finished making their arguments in the afternoon, but there was no immediate announcement of a judgment, which under China’s party-run judiciary was almost certain to be a guilty verdict and a long prison sentence.Mr. Jiang, 59, had been the director of the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, which regulates China’s biggest state companies, for less than six months when party investigators announced in September 2013 that he was under investigation on suspicion of graft.Mr. Jiang was also a member of the Central Committee, a Communist Party leadership council with about 200 full members. He was among the first senior officials, or “tigers,” toppled in President Xi Jinping’s campaign against corruption.But the charges against Mr. Jiang announced in March concerned his earlier posts as a deputy manager, general manager and finally chairman of the China National Petroleum Corporation, the country’s biggest oil producer, which is also the parent company of PetroChina, a company traded on the Shanghai, New York and Hong Kong stock exchanges.The prosecutors said that from 2004 to 2013, Mr. Jiang took bribes, directly or through his wife, in return for granting projects and job promotions, according to a report from the trial by Xinhua, the state news agency. They also said that Mr. Jiang took orders from Mr. Zhou, a much more powerful figure, to illegally parcel out gas and oil field development rights, natural gas supply deals, and other energy business opportunities, People’s Daily said.The corrupt deals “brought particularly serious losses to national interests,” the newspaper quoted prosecutors saying.Mr. Zhou also started his career in the oil sector and rose to become general manager of the China National Petroleum Corporation. He continued to pay attention to the company after he moved to higher positions, eventually assuming a seat on the Politburo Standing Committee and overseeing the domestic security apparatus before his retirement in November 2012. Party investigators announced Mr. Zhou was under investigation in July.Prosecutors said this month that Mr. Zhou would face trial on charges including taking bribes, abusing his official powers and leaking state secrets. The prosecutors said the charges included crimes committed while Mr. Zhou was an executive of the China National Petroleum Corporation. The brief court summaries and the Xinhua report from Mr. Jiang’s trial did not mention Mr. Zhou.Advertisement