AdvertisementSupported byOpen SourceBy Robert MackeyA court in Russia convicted an opposition activist of theft on Tuesday for removing a grimy piece of street art from a wall in a provincial city and presenting it to his boss, the anticorruption blogger Aleksei Navalny.The activist, Georgy Alburov, a researcher at Mr. Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation — who took his laptop and iPhone to the courtroom — wrote on his blog that he would appeal his sentence of one month of community service.Последнее слово Георгия Албурова. Текстhttp://t.co/3IGgOEG7vm pic.twitter.com/9R36esdkzMMr. Alburov, who is known for exposing the mysterious wealth of government officials, argued that he did not steal the street art, a cartoonish painting made by a janitor who hangs his work near a train station in the town of Vladimir, about 125 miles east of Moscow.The painting, “Bad/Good Person,” contrasts two Russian figures, one negative, associated with “the Internet,” and the other positive, beaming with “love of the Motherland.”An image of the work being presented to the court was posted on Twitter by Kira Yarmysh, a colleague of Mr. Alburov’s at the Anti-Corruption Foundation, known as F.B.K.During the trial, Mr. Navalny, who until recently was under house arrest, sat directly in front of the defendant, as Mr. Alburov noted on his own Twitter feed.A journalist for the pro-government channel NTV testified at the trial that she was ordered to film Mr. Alburov presenting the painting to Mr. Navalny as a birthday gift last June 4, one day before it was reported missing. That account was reported by Andrei Kozenko for the news site Meduza, which is run by Russian expatriates based in Latvia. Investigators then raided Mr. Navalny’s apartment late that same night and confiscated the painting. The journalist did not get more specific when asked how NTV knew that the painting would be given to Mr. Navalny.As Leonid Ragozin reported for Bloomberg News, Sergei Sotov, the creator of the work, initially told Russian journalists that he did not mind his works being taken and valued the painting, attached to cardboard he recovered from the trash, as worth no more than about $2. He also said that he had been asked to file a complaint.The case caused some disagreement between the head of Russia’s Investigative Committee, an elite force similar to the F.B.I., and the prosecutor who charged the activist, according to leaked correspondence obtained and posted online by Mr. Alburov.In his closing remarks at the trial, Mr. Alburov insisted that the prosecution was politically motivated, and related more to his research into the ill-gotten gains of senior officials, than any desire to protect Mr. Sotov’s street art.Even while on trial, Mr. Alburov continued to post aerial photographs of the palatial residences of government bureaucrats online.The trial was staged merely “to frighten” donors and staff members who supported the work of Mr. Navalny’s foundation, Mr. Alburov told the court, according to a translation by The Interpreter, a news site financed by the dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky.”But we’re not afraid,” Mr. Alburov said. “I am prepared to become the suspect in 100 criminal cases, but I will not stop doing what I’m doing.””The government which is now in Russia,” he added, “these are the real guest-workers who come to Russia to steal, but their families, their property, their bank accounts they keep abroad. For them, Russia is a place where they can steal.””We think these people should go to jail,” he concluded. “They should bear criminal responsibility for their deeds and we must not be in the courtroom, they should be.”Advertisement