By SOMINI SENGUPTAAPRIL 14, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  Staffan de Mistura, the beleaguered United Nations envoy for Syria, will seek to restart political negotiations intended to bring an end to a four-year conflict by holding “one on one” meetings with representatives of the warring parties and the countries that support them, a United Nations spokesman said Tuesday.Left unsaid was whether those talks could involve Iran, perhaps the Syrian government’s most vital supporter, now that there are steps toward a reconciliation between Tehran and the West.The United Nations spokesman, Stéphane Dujarric, declined to say with whom Mr. de Mistura would meet, saying only that he would consult “all those who have influence in the conflict.”Iran wields a great deal of influence over President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, supplying arms and fighters to help his forces battle rebel groups. The war has killed more than 220,000 people, uprooted 12 million Syrians and given rise to the worst humanitarian crisis in decades, according to the United Nations.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, the United Nations spokesman made it clear that new talks, which would start in May in Geneva, would be convened under the terms of a June 2012 agreement, known as the Geneva Communiqué, that set out a plan for a political transition and Mr. Assad’s exit from power. Efforts to involve Iran in previous peace talks were quashed in early 2014 because Iran did not accept the terms of the agreement. Mr. Dujarric said although the invitation list had not been drawn up, it would include “Syrian parties, regional parties and international parties.”The previous round of talks collapsed in Geneva in early 2014 over disagreements about what to talk about. The two previous envoys, Lakhdar Brahimi and Kofi Annan, both seasoned United Nations diplomats, quit.AdvertisementMr. de Mistura, appointed in July, spent months trying to persuade the government and opposition fighters to agree to “freeze” fighting in the strategic northern city of Aleppo. So far, that effort has not been successful. This month, just days after a preliminary nuclear deal was announced by Iran and six world powers, including Russia and the United States, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations announced that his envoy, Mr. de Mistura, would seek a fresh start.“What are the other options? Abandon all hopes?” the spokesman, Mr. Dujarric, said in response to questions from reporters. He added that Mr. Ban had “instructed Mr. de Mistura to kick-start, to restart, and that’s what we are going to do.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In another United Nations-led effort that has faced frustration, the top official of the agency that administers aid to Palestinian refugees completed an emergency three-day trip to Damascus, Syria’s capital, where he visited areas near Yarmouk, the Palestinian camp that was seized by Islamic State fighters in early April and is a no-go zone for aid workers. About 18,000 Palestinians are trapped there.The official, Pierre Krähenbühl, commissioner general of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, talked with Syria’s deputy foreign minister, Faisal al-Miqdad, whom he described as supportive, but there were no breakthroughs, according to a statement by the agency’s spokesman, Christopher Gunness.The United Nations — and indeed the world powers that control the Security Council — has come under mounting criticism for failing to stanch the suffering in Syria. The West blames Russia for casting four vetoes on Council resolutions intended to punish the Assad government. Russia asserts the Syrian government, its ally, is battling terrorists.Even the rise of the Islamic State, opposed by both sides, has failed to bridge the gap. The new variable may be Iran, which has not been at the table for discussions on ending the war or relieving the humanitarian crisis. Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N.’s Syria Envoy Looks to Revive Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.