By THOMAS ERDBRINKAPRIL 14, 2015
How does a true believer in Iran’s theocracy confront what even he admits is a losing battle against modernity and his government’s nuclear deal with “the Great Satan” and world powers.Hamid-Reza Ahmadabadi, a supporter of Iran’s hardliners who is profiled in the fourth episode of “Our Man in Tehran,” answered New York Times readers’ questions about the recent agreement on a framework for an Iran nuclear deal, his view of the United States and other countries, and Iran’s position in the world.Q. What countries have you visited and did you admire anything about them? — Camron Amin; Berkley, Mich.A. I have visited six or seven countries including Turkey, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Syria. To me, Turkey was the best. The people and the police were really hospitable. I have good memories from this country. I could even meet with the Turkish science minister very easily. I shook hands with him and we had a conversation.Q. I would like to ask Mr. Ahmadabadi how does he feel about a possible suspension of the sanctions. How would that reflect to the daily life of the Iranian people? — Anton Matev; BulgariaAdvertisementA. I do not think sanctions will be lifted or suspended. Why should the U.S. want to remove them at all? The United States is not crazy enough to suspend the sanctions. And, even if they remove the sanctions, it will not have any effect on people’s lives because the value of the dollar will never decrease very much, and prices keep going up.AdvertisementAll they are doing is playing a political game. They will never return the money that they have been taking from this country since the discovery of oil here in Iran. They are used to taking Iran’s money away.Putting sanctions on Iran is the safest way for them to prevent Iran from developing. If they bomb Iran and level the country, nothing useful remains for them. But, by keeping the sanctions, they prevent Iran from progress and development. Therefore, I am sure that they will not ease the sanctions.Q. What do you feel Iran’s place is in the Middle East and the world? — Matt Smith; BuffaloA. Iran ranks first considering its Islamic position in the region. Imam Khomeini [Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini] said that we would export our revolution, and we did. But, other countries do not have such great and understanding people as we do, and they are not independent. So, their revolutions failed.The reason that we could protect our revolution is that we are a self-sufficient nation. We can make everything. I can say that we are about 60 percent independent from other countries. We just need to produce medicines and airplanes. If we can do that, there will be no need to import anything from abroad.And, on a larger scale, Iran is the seventh country in the world, right after the P5-plus-1 countries. Because we are able to make the products that we need and then we are independent.Q. What is your opinion concerning the Saudi Arabian government? — Saadiq Shaik; Baltimore; @milkshake_98 on TwitterA. Saudi Arabia is the most miserable country of the world. I have been to Saudi Arabia. There are many poor people in that country. You see lots of beggars in the streets. It is not just Saudi Arabia; all of the Arab countries have been under pressure and are broken. Believe me: I am sure that the Saudi government will be toppled in a year.AdvertisementCompared to Arab countries in general, here in Iran, our people have a better life. For example, I get 182,000 tomans — around $55 — as a monthly cash subsidy for our family of four people that I can use to pay all of my electricity, water and gas bills. It is wonderful here in Iran.Q. You are clear in your belief that America is Satan, but how do you feel about Americans themselves? Does your anger extend to the citizens of the U.S., Israel and the U.K.? Or are your concerns only with these countries’ governments and policies? — K. Lynch; New YorkA. People of one country are no different from their government. The American government is the same as its people, and its people are the same as their government.Look at Israelis: They have occupied Palestinians’ lands, and as long as they have weapons, those poor Palestinian people do not dare get their properties back.These nations have been created satanic.Q. What kinds of actions on the part of everyday Americans — many with the desire to have better relations with the Iranian people — would help change your attitude of the U.S.? — George Modica; Chelmsford, Mass.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We can never trust Americans’ good deeds. We have nothing to do with them. We just want them to leave us alone to live our lives. But, if they compensate us for all of the damages they caused in our country, like compensating the martyrs’ families who have been suffering and endured losses during the war, it might help, and then our politicians might change their minds about them.It is the only way that families of the martyrs, families of the veterans and those whose sons and husbands have been held captive for years might get relief because it will make them feel as if they have gained what they wanted.Q. If you could change one thing about Iran now, what would it be? — Nour Seleem; Old Bridge, N.J.A. If I had some power in this country, I would like to do three things:One, I would establish an extensive health insurance program that covers all of the treatment expenses of the people. It should be for everyone in the country.Two, I would make our schools and universities free for studying, and no one would have any worries about university fees.Three, I would amend the employment situation and would focus on employment contracts to prevent employers from illegally firing any worker or employee. It would result in increased job security. No worker should be stressed when they are going to bed at night; they should not be afraid of losing their job the next day.AdvertisementDate of Birth: April 30, 1969Hometown: TehranEducation: I received my diploma in architecture. But later I received my B.A. in international law from Tehran University of Applied Science and Technology. I also studied public relations in another branch of the same university in Tehran.What is your greatest wish in life? My first and greatest wish in life is to help my country and serve my people. Sincerely. People, like chess pieces, each with their own movements, should serve and protect their system. I like to serve my country based on our leader’s orders. If, one day, he asks us to shake hands with the Satan, the United States, we will do that. To serve the people, one should listen carefully to the leader.How many children do you have and what do they do? I have two sons. One of them has just finished his obligatory 24-month military service. He just started working for a milk-production company. My younger son is about 12 or 13. He is a junior high school student.How do you feel about a possible nuclear deal with the United States and other world powers? I do not accept this deal. I think every detail regarding the deal must be told to the people very honestly. I believe that if it were a fair deal, then the content would have been shared with the people. But, in the very first place, my question is: Why have we agreed to sit at the negotiation table with them when we do not want to make a nuclear weapon at all? Why would Iran need a nuclear weapon when the country has 70 million people who are ready to obey their leader if he asks them for anything? We do not doubt our politicians or the nuclear negotiating team at all. But I wish our cabinet members had studied at Iranian universities rather than at foreign universities. That way, they could win our trust even more.Is everybody in Iran like you or are there different people, too? I think that people think like me and they do not like the U.S. One of the positive points about the Islamic Revolution is that the literacy rate, which was only 25 percent before the revolution, has dramatically increased to 99 percent. Now, Iranian people are literate and understanding. They can read and analyze the news, and that is why they believe in their leader. Our people have sacrificed their children for this revolution, and they are either families of martyrs or families of veterans. They do not like the United States. This was why the Islamic Revolution toppled the former regime.What do you love about Friday prayers? Friday prayer sermons are in two parts. The first part is religious and spiritual, and the second part is political. I love the second part. It is full of excitement and makes my blood rush in my veins. The good thing about the second sermon is that the speakers are straightforward and honest. They do not observe special considerations of different people or officials. They just tell the truth. It is why I find it honest and exciting.I have been going to the Friday prayers since the first Friday prayer after the revolution. I remember that my father and I jumped on the back of a double-decker bus because we did not have enough money to pay the bus fare. People used to be poor in those days. Now, fortunately, every family has one or two cars.Follow Thomas Erdbrink on Facebook and Twitter @ThomasErdbrink.To learn about new episodes, subscribe to the Times Video email newsletter, like The New York Times on Facebook or follow @nytimesworld on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.