AdvertisementSupported byBy Mohamed IbrahimMOGADISHU, Somalia — Militants detonated a car bomb outside the Ministry of Higher Education building in Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, and then stormed into the building on Tuesday, witnesses and officials said. The attack left at least 19 people dead, including seven attackers, and 15 more were wounded.The Shabab, an Islamist group in Somalia affiliated with Al Qaeda, claimed responsibility for the assault. The same group  attacked Garissa University College in Kenya on April 2, killing 148 people.Witnesses said the Somali minister of higher education left the building minutes before the attack began on Tuesday. Officials were meeting at the ministry to discuss plans announced on Monday to introduce standardized examinations for the nation’s schools, witnesses and officials said.The attack began with the suicide car bombing. “A huge explosion shook the area, with huge smoke and flying shrapnel,” said Nadifa Ali, who runs a kiosk near the ministry. “The car bomber struck at the outer walls of the ministry, but I survived.”The scene immediately became one of smoke, debris, pools of blood and burned bodies on the ground, witnesses said. After the blast, gunmen charged into the ministry and exchanged fire with guards.A unit of the National Intelligence and Security Agency troops known as Onkod reached the scene within minutes, according to a statement by Gen. Abdirahman Mohamed Tuuryare, the head of the agency. “Our army managed to rescue all the people inside very quickly,” the statement said. “All seven attackers were killed.”Mohamoud Ahmed, a senior official at the ministry who was in the building at the time of the attack, said at least nine civilians and three soldiers had been killed, including the police officer in charge of security at the ministry and a soldier from an African Union peacekeeping force.Shabab fighters have been carrying out attacks in both Kenya and Somalia for years, including one in March on a Mogadishu hotel that turned into a 16-hour siege and left 15 people dead.President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of Somalia condemned the attack on the ministry, as did Nicholas Kay, the special representative in Somalia of Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations.Mr. Kay said in his statement that he was “appalled by the complete disregard for the lives of innocent people shown by the attackers,” and called the attack “an assault on Somalis’ brave efforts to build a brighter future for the youth of their nation.”videoAdvertisement