The simple funeral was fitting for a man who was the last surviving sibling of China’s final emperor, but who led a commoner’s life.Friends and relatives of Jin Youzhi, a younger half-brother of Henry Pu Yi, who abdicated as emperor in 1912, gathered on Thursday at the Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery in Beijing for a ceremony where more than 100 visitors paid their respects to a figure widely regarded as a final link to the Qing Dynasty. Mr. Jin died last week at the age of 96.In the morning, guests lined up outside Babaoshan’s East Hall for a final viewing of Mr. Jin’s body, before family members walked in a ceremonial procession carrying flowers. Among them were Mr. Jin’s children, including his three sons and at least one of his two daughters. Mr. Jin’s life followed a markedly different course from that of Pu Yi, who was forced to give up his throne in a revolution that ended imperial rule in China but who in 1934 was installed as emperor of Japan-controlled Manchukuo. After the Communist victory in 1949, Pu Yi was imprisoned for a decade as a war criminal, and later worked as a gardener. He died in 1967.By contrast, Mr. Jin, who was born six years after his brother’s abdication, kept his distance from politics and was a teacher for more than 40 years. In his retirement, he researched his family’s history and practiced calligraphy.At a gathering at Mr. Jin’s courtyard home this week, his sons described their father’s simple tastes, warmth and passion for teaching. They recalled how he kept in close touch with many of his former students.“He was very willing to serve the people,” said Jin Yulan, the youngest son. “He lived a difficult life. But he put all his efforts into educating the people.”Mr. Jin’s heritage was clear on the sign posted outside of the East Hall. It read, using his Manchu name: “Mr. Aisin Gioro – Pu Ren, for the ages.” Mr. Jin had later adopted a Chinese name. Jin, like Aisin, means “gold.”Jia Huaying, a historian who attended the funeral, said it signaled a farewell to China’s imperial past.“His death is like a full stop,” Mr. Jia said. “He is Pu Yi’s very last brother, so this era has come to an end.”