AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini Sengupta and Rick GladstoneThe United Nations envoy who had tried to avert a conflict in Yemen said Wednesday that he wants to resign, following vocal criticism of his four years of fruitless diplomacy.The envoy, Jamal Benomar, said in an interview at The New York Times that he had already expressed his desire to Secretary General Ban Ki-moon.Stéphane Dujarric, a spokesman for Mr. Ban, said Mr. Benomar “has expressed an interest in moving on to another assignment.”He added: “A successor shall be named in due course. Until that time and beyond, the United Nations will continue to spare no efforts to relaunch the peace process in order to get the political transition back on track.”Another United Nations official said possible successors included Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmad, a Mauritanian diplomat.Despite Mr. Benomar’s efforts at achieving a political transition in Yemen, what began as a domestic political dispute has turned into a war.Houthi rebels swept into the capital last fall; drove out the country’s Saudi-backed president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, in January; and then sought to take control of much of the country. A coalition of Arab states led by Saudi Arabia responded with air attacks that have been pounding the country for three weeks.Annotated maps showing the Houthi rebels’ drive south, U.S. airstrikes and historical divisions.The conflict has spiraled into a broader Middle East crisis. Iran, the regional rival of Saudi Arabia, is supporting the Houthis and has denounced the airstrikes.Mr. Benomar, a Moroccan diplomat, has been acting as a mediator in talks among rival political groups in Yemen since 2011, when Arab Spring revolts were sweeping the region. Mass protests in Yemen forced the country’s longtime leader, Ali Abdullah Saleh, to resign.The talks led to what Mr. Benomar has described as a power-sharing plan that included the Houthis, a minority group from the north of the country. But the Houthis grew openly hostile to the plan because they felt it marginalized them. Mr. Benomar kept the talks going even as the Houthis took the offensive.Fighting between the Houthis and forces loyal to President Hadi plunged Yemen into chaos, leading to Mr. Benomar’s exit before the Saudi bombing began.Mr. Benomar’s work as a mediator drew criticism, particularly from Mr. Hadi’s loyalists and from the Saudis. Mr. Hadi’s envoy to the United Nations said last week that his government, which is now essentially in exile, would no longer take part in talks mediated by Mr. Benomar.Hundreds of Yemenis have been killed in the most recent fighting, and international aid groups have called for a pause to allow emergency distribution of food, water and medicine. More than half the country was considered to lack secure food supplies even before the conflict intensified.Citing maritime tracking data, Reuters reported Wednesday that at least five cargo ships carrying food bound for Yemen were being held offshore by warships from the Saudi-led coalition, to search them for smuggled weapons. Yemen imports more than 90 percent of its food.On Tuesday, the United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution imposing an arms embargo on the Houthis, along with Mr. Saleh and his son, a former military commander, who have aligned themselves with the Houthis in the conflict.Advertisement