
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
APRIL 15, 2015
If the wrangling in Washington to give Congress a say on the terms of a final deal on Iran’s nuclear program caused some irritation in Tehran, the compromise bill approved by a Senate committee on Tuesday also drew catcalls from the far right of the American political spectrum.
            Our counterpart is not US Senate or Congress; it's P5+1. They should all know, if there is no end to #sanctions, there will be no #IranDeal.        Richard Viguerie, a veteran conservative activist who helped invent the political direct-mail business to elect Republican candidates, called Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, “a traitor” for agreeing to a plan that could give Congress the right to review the agreement but also make it difficult to block a deal entirely.
#tcot #Republican @SenBobCorker is a TRAITOR http://t.co/1xhnj7J3cv #IranDeal #IranNuclearWeapons #AprilFoolsDeal #TeaParty #MolonLabe For Mr. Viguerie, a vocal supporter of efforts by Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, to subvert President Obama’s negotiations with the Iranians, opposition to arms control agreements with American adversaries runs very deep. In 1988, Mr. Viguerie even turned against President Ronald Reagan for negotiating a pact with the Soviet Union to eliminate an entire class of nuclear missiles.
#47Patriots or #47Traitors? take my no sign-in poll at http://t.co/4SLHXEYVq2 to stand with @SenTomCotton on #IranDeal #tcot #TeaParty As Hedrick Smith reported in The New York Times Magazine in 1988, Mr. Viguerie was part of a coalition of conservative activists who took the fight to Mr. Reagan in full-page newspaper ads that compared his arms-control deal with the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev to Neville Chamberlain’s accord with Adolf Hitler in 1938.AdvertisementWriting about decades of consistent conservative opposition to all arms control accords, Jonathan Chait dug up a copy of the Reagan-as-Chamberlain ad published on Jan. 25, 1988.
            A history of conservatives calling all presidents who negotiate with enemies appeasers http://t.co/EYZe4fSYCp pic.twitter.com/rJUOfCJsuw “Conservative opposition to Obama’s expected deal with Iran is based on a critique of Obama’s peculiar failings,” Mr. Chait argued in New York magazine. “He is naïve in the face of evil, desperate for agreement, more willing to help his enemies than his friends.Advertisement”The problem is that conservatives have made this same diagnosis of every American president for 70 years. They do not merely oppose this deal, they oppose all of them, because they believe evil regimes cannot be negotiated with.”Daniel Larison, a senior editor at The American Conservative, echoed those thoughts earlier this week, writing that hard-line critics of the proposed deal with Iran “have never really accepted” the logic of arms control. “Indeed, most of them have never seen an arms control or nonproliferation agreement that they haven’t wanted to derail or defeat,” he wrote.”We saw that in the vehement hawkish opposition to New Start a few years ago, and that was over the renewal of an earlier arms reduction treaty that one would have thought had become completely uncontroversial,” Mr. Larison added. He was referring to the updated Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with Russia to limit the deployment of nuclear weapons that  the Senate approved in 2010 despite conservative objections.”These critics are ideologically opposed to making diplomatic compromises of any kind with regimes like the one in Iran,” Mr. Larison continued. “They are the political descendants or, in some cases, the very same people that accused Reagan of appeasement when he pursued arms control agreements with the Soviets. Past warnings about these agreements have been repeatedly discredited over time, but that doesn’t stop them from being recycled in the next debate.”As the conservative blogger Jennifer Rubin noted, Senator Cotton told The Atlantic this week, “It’s unfair to Neville Chamberlain to compare him to Barack Obama.”
            Cotton: It's unfair to Neville Chamberlain to compare him to Barack Obama, http://t.co/ADAEaje9xg But if, as F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote, “in a real dark night of the soul it is always three o’clock in the morning,” in the historical memory of conservatives who fight arms control deals with American enemies as the appeasement of evil empires, it is always 1938 in Munich.One of Mr. Viguerie’s old allies, Newt Gingrich, denounced President Reagan’s first meeting with Mr. Gorbachev in 1985 as “the most dangerous summit for the West since Adolf Hitler met with Neville Chamberlain in 1938 in Munich.”AdvertisementTwo years later, The Times reported that a candidate to succeed Mr. Reagan, Pat Robertson, attacked his talks with the Soviets by “comparing the President to Neville Chamberlain, the British leader who was the architect of the policy of appeasement toward Nazi Germany.”In 2008, when Mr. Obama suggested during the presidential campaign that year that he would negotiate with the Iranians, then-President George W. Bush, in a speech to Israel’s Parliament, the Knesset, compared that idea to appeasing the Nazis.When asked about those remarks, Senator John McCain, Mr. Obama’s opponent in the campaign, agreed with Mr. Bush, telling reporters, “Yes, there have been appeasers in the past, and the president is exactly right, and one of them is Neville Chamberlain.”That comparison to Chamberlain has been used increasingly against President Obama’s foreign policy team by hard-line critics of the negotiations with Iran. Speaking to Politico two weeks ago, Senator Mark Kirk, the Illinois Republican who now holds Mr. Obama’s old Senate seat, turned his fire on Wendy Sherman, the lead American negotiator in the multinational talks with Iran.“I would say that Neville Chamberlain got a lot more out of Hitler than Wendy Sherman got out of Iran,” Mr. Kirk said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »