AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick LymanBRANIEWO, Poland — Several hundred leather-clad motorcyclists from the Night Wolves, a club closely allied with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, plan to roar from Moscow to Berlin this month for the 70th anniversary of the Soviets’ victory over Nazi Germany.Like the Red Army before them, the Night Wolves will have several countries to cross on the way, including Poland. And given the current tensions over Ukraine and widespread worries that Mr. Putin may have other aggressive designs on his neighbors, the prospect of hundreds of Russian bikers’ roaring across the Polish countryside — not to mention Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Austria or Germany — is not being greeted with joy in all quarters.“I wish they would never come here,” said Monika Trzcinska, the mayor of Braniewo, a small Polish town a stone’s throw from the Russian border, which will be the first stop in Poland for some of the riders on April 25.A Facebook page opposing the event had 11,000 likes by Wednesday afternoon with a logo featuring a Polish eagle with a lit match chasing a flaming wolf. Meanwhile, a petition calling for the motorcycle rally to be banned had attracted 4,000 signatures, and some Polish lawmakers were calling on their government to find some way to block the event.Prime Minister Ewa Kopacz called the rally a “provocation” in an interview Tuesday on Polish radio, and said it would be up to Polish border guards to decide whether Russian bikers would be allowed into the country.Some Polish biker groups said they intended to take to the highways to block the Russians, but others were more welcoming.Wiktor Wegrzyn, the commander of Poland’s annual Katyn Raid, a motorcycle rally from Poland to the Russian city of Smolensk, said he hoped that the Polish authorities would let the Night Wolves pass in peace. “We should treat them the same way they treat us,” he said, adding that some members of his group might even want to ride alongside the Russians.The club, which claims 5,000 active members, is known for supporting patriotic causes in Russia, and the group’s leader, Aleksandr Zaldostanov, known as the Surgeon, is said to be a close friend of Mr. Putin’s. An event by the group celebrating Russia’s annexation of Crimea last year was broadcast across Russia.Mr. Zaldostanov has declined interviews in recent days as opposition in Poland has become fierce. Before that, he warned that any action against the group “will cause a reaction.”A second Russian group, the Volunteer Association for the Support of the Armed Forces, said this week that it would stage a concurrent Moscow-to-Berlin car rally.Most of the Russian bikers plan to follow a roundabout route from Moscow that passes through Minsk, Belarus; Wroclaw, Poland; Bratislava, Slovakia; Vienna; Prague; and Munich before reaching Berlin on May 9. But a group of about 300 will first cross into Poland from the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad on April 25.They have made regular visits to the Soviet soldiers’ cemetery in Braniewo, usually without incident. Last year, though, in the early weeks of the crisis in Ukraine, Polish bikers said they would try to block the Russians; the Polish police headed off a confrontation by changing the Russians’ route at the last minute, Ms. Trzcinska said.“This year, the Polish bikers will be ready for them,” she predicted.Most of the bikers who visit the cemetery, accompanied by two busloads of students and officials, plan to hold a ceremony, listen to an orchestra, lay flowers on the graves, eat lunch and go home. But some plan to ride on and join the main column of Russian bikers, who will cross into Poland farther south.Ms. Trzcinska said that she had asked the provincial authorities for extra security, and that she planned to be out of town that day. “I am not the hostess of this party,” she said. “I got invited, but I am not going.”“Have you heard the Polish saying, ‘It’s not my circus; they’re not my monkeys’?” the mayor asked grimly. “Well, they are not my monkeys.”Advertisement