AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleSHEFFIELD, England — With Britain approaching a tight general election on May 7, it remains difficult to forecast who will win — but picking the likely big loser is easy.Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister and head of the centrist Liberal Democrats, has shouldered most of the blame for spending cuts made by the coalition government he joined with David Cameron, the Conservative prime minister, and has seen his own effigy burned in the streets.The question is no longer whether the Liberal Democrats will lose some of their 57 seats in Parliament; it is whether they will suffer a mere reversal or a major rout.Still, Mr. Clegg matters. If, as the polls suggest, neither the Conservatives nor the Labour Party emerges a clear victor next month, his Liberal Democrats may once again tilt the balance of power.“They could still decide the makeup of the next government,” said Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary University of London. As long as they hold enough seats to be mathematically useful, he said, the Liberal Democrats have a big advantage in coalition talks: Unlike some other smaller parties, they can work with either the Conservatives or Labour.Accordingly, the Liberal Democrats’ pitch to voters is that they alone can restrain either side’s excesses: keeping a Conservative government from cutting public spending too deeply, or a Labour government from borrowing too heavily.But it is a hard sell, and the climate could hardly be more different from the 2010 election, when Mr. Clegg, then a fresh face in British politics, proved to be the surprise star of the campaign debates.Bright, telegenic and multilingual (his mother is Dutch, his wife Spanish), Mr. Clegg was a novelty. And when neither Labour nor the Conservatives won a parliamentary majority, the Liberal Democrats joined Britain’s first full coalition government since World War II.But five years as the junior partner in an austerity-minded government have taken a severe toll. Mr. Clegg lost a 2011 referendum on making the voting system more proportional. And he failed to deliver on a campaign promise to eliminate student tuition fees; in fact, the maximum annual fee was tripled, prompting student protests and charges that Mr. Clegg’s reversal had poisoned trust in politics.According to Professor Bale, the venom directed at Mr. Clegg, 48, comes both from those in the Labour Party who are angry at his alliance with Mr. Cameron and from right-wing Conservatives “who load everything they don’t like about their party’s participation in the coalition onto Clegg.”“Put that together with a manner that some people would describe as sanctimonious, and that’s a lethal combination,” Professor Bale said.Exactly how lethal will be decided in Sheffield Hallam, the Yorkshire constituency that Mr. Clegg represents. In 2010, he received over 15,000 more votes than the Conservative candidate here and over 19,000 more than Labour. But recent polls suggest that Labour, which has never represented the area, could win the seat this time.Oliver Coppard, the Labour candidate, says that his campaign is not a “personal vendetta” against Mr. Clegg, despite newspaper speculation about a “decapitation” strategy aimed at the Liberal Democrats’ leader. Still, Mr. Coppard calls Mr. Clegg someone “who has done very little for the city and let a lot of people down.”Unlike Mr. Clegg, who lives in London, Mr. Coppard, 33, grew up and lives in Sheffield; local residence is not required but usually conveys an advantage at the polls. His campaign has also been helped by an influx of campaign contributions and eager student volunteers.In the Stannington suburb, a local voter, Mary Reast, was asked if she had supported Mr. Clegg in 2010. “We all did round here,” she replied, but now, “we are very disillusioned — I don’t think he’s done anything for this area.”The coalition government’s spending cuts have aroused opposition, though it is less strident now than it was a couple of years ago, when one protest poster portrayed the party leader as “Cleggzilla,” a giant figure crushing the city underfoot.Ben Curran campaigned alongside Mr. Clegg in 2010, but left the Liberal Democrats later that year to join Labour, and is now a member of the Sheffield City Council. He said that by aligning with the Conservatives, Mr. Clegg betrayed the center-left platform on which he was elected.Mr. Curran said many voters backed the Liberal Democrats in 2010 hoping to keep the Conservatives out of power, not to align with them. “I do feel incredibly let down,” Mr. Curran added. “A few years ago I would have said I was spitting feathers with anger.”Still, Andrew Sangar, the head of the Liberal Democrats’ campaign in the district, said he was “confident but not complacent” about winning Sheffield Hallam. “We feel we have been doing enough, and that Nick Clegg has a good reputation in the constituency,” he said.Olly Grender, a strategist for the Liberal Democrats, said the party was counting on sophisticated canvassing software and the power of incumbency to help it at the polls.“We have had a strategy in place for a long time now where we focus as many resources as possible onto our key seats,” she said. “People are starting to listen to Nick and are more open-minded about him than in the first year of the coalition.”Ms. Grender noted that “he didn’t have to go into government, but the economy would have been in a worse place if he hadn’t.”Under Mr. Clegg’s leadership, the Liberal Democrats have remained disciplined despite their plummeting popularity, and even some opponents acknowledge Mr. Clegg’s resilience.During a recent meeting in London organized by the Mumsnet website, Mr. Clegg patiently fielded questions, including some on tuition fees.“If there is one policy that you don’t do, that tends to be the one thing people remind you of,” he said. But he insisted that, “far from feeling embarrassed by what the Lib Dems have done in government, we have stepped up to the plate and done, broadly, the right things with the right policies.”Afterward he reflected on a harsh lesson he learned from five roller-coaster years at the heart of British politics.“Smaller parties in coalitions tend to get the blame for the bad stuff,” he said, “and don’t tend to get the credit for the good stuff.”Advertisement