On June 9, 1992, Xiong Yan embarked on the fishing boat that smuggled him out of China.The former law student had once been one of China’s most wanted: one of the 21 men and women the government accused of orchestrating pro-democracy demonstrations in 1989.Now an American citizen and a United States Army chaplain, Major Xiong said in a telephone interview on Friday that he had asked to return to his homeland. His mother, who is in her 70s, is dying, he said, and he has asked the Chinese authorities to allow him to travel back to say goodbye.But Chinese consular officials have so far ignored his request, he said, reflecting how the country has yet to come to terms with the protests 26 years ago. Only seven of the 21 most-wanted protest leaders from 1989 now live in mainland China. Most, like Wang Dan and Wu’er Kaixi, have never returned from exile.Although Major Xiong has been able to visit Hong Kong, his requests for visas to the mainland have been consistently rejected, he said.Earlier this month, Major Xiong wrote an open letter to President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang, asking permission to return to see his mother.“Last night, I found a photo my mother gave me,” he wrote in the letter. “She had taken me to a photographer when I was 100 days old. I took it out and held it next to a photo of my mother, now close to death at the Hunan City Loudi Rehabilitation Hospital Building No. 3, and I cried. The pain in my heart is unspeakable.”The letter circulated widely among civil rights advocates over the past week. Several have since gone to the Hunan hospital to visit Major Xiong’s mother, Xiong Yuanwu, and have shared online photos of themselves standing next to her hospital bed.Although the government has ignored Major Xiong’s plea, state news outlets appear to have taken notice of his letter and the activists’ photos.On Thursday, Global Times, a newspaper under the Communist Party’s flagship People’s Daily, carried a commentary arguing that the Chinese government had not forgotten Major Xiong’s political activities.“When they were young, they committed crimes inflicting tears and trauma on Chinese society; now middle-aged, they still refuse to reconsider or express regret and continue to stand opposed to China’s political system,” the commentary read. “They should be very clear about what this means for themselves.”In an interview, Major Xiong said he felt that he had nothing to apologize for.“I saw the corpses,” he said, referring to those killed by troops during the military suppression of the protests in Beijing on June 3-4, 1989. “What did I do wrong?”Mr. Xiong was studying law at Peking University when the demonstrations erupted around Tiananmen Square following the death of the former Communist Party chief Hu Yaobang in April 1989. He was detained following the crackdown and released in 1992.He then fled to Hong Kong in an operation in which smugglers tied to organized crime took dozens of protest leaders to safety in what was still a British colony. A week later, he moved on to the United States. His mother visited him once in the 1990s, but she later returned to China.Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter at @mrbaopanrui.