By ELLEN BARRYAPRIL 16, 2015
NEW DELHI — Fifty-seven days after the Indian National Congress party’s heir apparent, Rahul Gandhi, mysteriously absented himself from New Delhi, leaving word through his office that he needed a few weeks off to “reflect on recent events,” he returned with equally little explanation on Thursday, striding into his house as a scrum of television reporters said things like “He has stepped out of the vehicle!” and “He was wearing dark glasses!”There was no official word on where Mr. Gandhi had spent the last two months, missing a parliamentary budget session and a bruising battle against Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s overhaul of land use laws. Mr. Gandhi made no public statements. But party spokesmen bridled at the notion that his absence indicated anything out of the ordinary.“He has taken a sabbatical; he has gone to introspect,” Anand Sharma, a former commerce minister, said huffily. “Is this the problem of others?”In a television interview, Sachin Pilot, a Congress lawmaker, recommended that the news media “let it go.” “Mr. Gandhi took some time off,” he said. “It’s not something that no one has ever done before.”AdvertisementSome information did escape. A report surfaced on social media of a round-trip business-class airplane ticket to Bangkok. Citing unnamed officials, the news station CNN-IBN reported that Mr. Gandhi, 44, had been at a “famous meditation retreat center” in Myanmar and had left behind his security detail. Another news channel, NDTV, said he had been engaged in Vipassana meditation, which emphasizes heightened awareness of the moment.AdvertisementWhatever inner peace Mr. Gandhi might have achieved, he will most likely need it. Many are expecting him to take over Congress’s presidency at a coming party gathering, replacing his mother, Sonia, who was first elected to the position in 1998. But the party is still reeling from a punishing defeat in last year’s elections, and in Mr. Gandhi’s absence, a number of senior members have questioned whether he is ready to take charge.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I am yet to meet anybody who has any critical remarks to make about the leadership of Sonia Gandhi,” said Sheila Dikshit, 77, the former chief minister of Delhi, in comments to The Press Trust of India. “Whereas Rahul, of course, there is skepticism, because you have not seen him perform as yet.”Mr. Gandhi is expected to lead a rally of farmers in Delhi on Sunday, hoping to harness popular resistance to Mr. Modi’s land acquisition bill.His reappearance was greeted deliriously, if a bit sarcastically, by the pundit class known as Twitterwallahs. They invoked other long-awaited returns, like that of Rama, the hero of the Hindu epic poem “Ramayana,” who spent 14 years in exile and endured numerous tribulations before returning home to claim his throne. Shekhar Gupta, a journalist, expressed gratitude that there was no cable news during Rama’s time.Mr. Gupta also told NDTV that Mr. Gandhi had done his party no favors by behaving so mysteriously. “Everybody has the right to a sabbatical,” he said, “but why not be transparent about it?”A version of this article appears in print on April 17, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: An Indian Heir Apparent Ends a Secretive Absence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.