AdvertisementSupported byBy Jim Yardley and Gaia PianigianiROME — The Italian police on Thursday charged 15 Muslim men with homicide aggravated by religious hatred after survivors of a migrant boat rescued in the Mediterranean told investigators that the men had menaced Christians on board and thrown a dozen Christians overboard to their deaths.The arrests were made in Palermo, Sicily, where the police interviewed survivors from a smuggling ship that had departed from the coast of Libya en route to Europe. In a statement, the Palermo police offered few details but said an argument had broken out on the ship. The assailants, provoked by religious hatred, then tossed 12 Christians overboard, the police said.The victims came from Ghana and Nigeria, the police said, while the accused are from Ivory Coast, Mali and Senegal. The police based the charges on interviews with 10 survivors who were brought to Palermo on Wednesday among a group of 100 migrants rescued in the Mediterranean.Michele Prosperi, a spokesman in Italy for Save the Children, confirmed that members of his organization had interviewed survivors after they arrived at the port of Palermo, but he declined to comment on the group’s findings.“We provided everything to the authorities as is the protocol,” Mr. Prosperi said. “We don’t comment when there is such a delicate situation.”For the second consecutive year, Europe is facing a humanitarian crisis in the Mediterranean as migrants from Africa and the Middle East flee war and poverty on rickety ships operated by ruthless smuggling rings. Last year, Italian Navy and Coast Guard vessels rescued more than 130,000 migrants.It is a perilous journey: More than 3,200 migrants are thought to have died at sea last year, and humanitarian groups estimate that more than 500 people have died in the first three and a half months of this year.Europe is also struggling with how to respond at sea. An Italian rescue program, Mare Nostrum, has been phased out in favor of a European-led program, Triton, that humanitarian groups worry could be much less effective.The huge number of migrants arriving in Europe has raised concerns that smuggling ships might provide an easy way for terrorists to enter the Continent, a concern that has not yet been borne out. But the possibility of religious hatred onboard the ships would be a new and worrisome development.“Religion has never been an issue,” said Flavio Di Giacomo, a spokesman in Italy for the International Organization for Migration.Mr. Di Giacomo said reports of arguments and fighting are relatively common on migrant ships, given that hundreds of people jockey for space on badly overcrowded vessels. But he said he had never heard of a case where fighting and persecution erupted along religious lines.“This is something new,” Mr. Di Giacomo said, noting that his group had no information about the allegations. “We have never heard something like this.”Advertisement