AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — The attacks came in rapid succession on Saturday: By nightfall, Palestinians had stabbed or attempted to stab five Israelis, most of them members of the security forces, according to the police and the military.They all survived with mostly minor wounds or escaping injury. Four of the suspected assailants were fatally shot on the spot, and a fifth was critically wounded.After a turbulent two weeks, the roiling violence was showing no signs of abating. Seven Israelis have been killed this month by assailants using mostly kitchen knives, but also guns. At least 16 suspected assailants have been shot dead, and more than 20 Palestinians have been killed in clashes with Israeli security forces.The wave of stabbings has hit hardest in Jerusalem, where Israel has responded by flooding the city with security forces and placing roadblocks at the entrances of several Arab neighborhoods, where tensions are high. But the turbulence has also spread to other Israeli cities, as well as the West Bank and along Israel’s border with Gaza.Three of Saturday’s assaults took place in the volatile West Bank city of Hebron. In one case, a Palestinian man tried to stab a Jewish settler, who shot him dead. In another, a young Palestinian woman asked a female border police officer for directions, according to the officer’s account, then tried to stab her, lightly wounding her. The border guard pushed the woman away and fatally shot her. In the third case, a Palestinian man stabbed a soldier, lightly wounding him. The assailant was shot, but his condition was not immediately known.In Jerusalem, a Palestinian boy of about 16 pulled out a knife while border police officers were checking his papers, and the officers fatally shot him, the police said. And at the Qalandia checkpoint between Jerusalem and the West Bank city of Ramallah, a Palestinian man stabbed a border police officer, who was unharmed because he was wearing a protective vest, then tried to stab a soldier.Palestinian leaders have accused Israel of using excessive force against suspected assailants and of killing them “in cold blood.” Israel’s minister of defense, Moshe Yaalon, praised the security forces on Saturday, saying they had acted “with vigilance, resourcefulness and coolheadedness.” Advertisement