AdvertisementSupported byBy Saba ImtiazKARACHI, Pakistan — An American citizen was critically wounded in what was apparently a militant attack on Thursday in the southern port city of Karachi.The American, identified as Debra Lobo, 55, was shot twice in her car by two men on a motorcycle as she left work on Thursday afternoon to pick up her husband and daughter, the police said. Ms. Lobo, a longtime resident of Karachi, works at the Jinnah Medical and Dental College, a private medical school, as the vice principal of student affairs.“She was critically injured — one bullet hit her right cheek and passed out of the left, and another bullet was lodged in her right arm,” said Syed Pir Mohammad Shah, a senior police officer for the district.A little-known group calling itself the Daulah al-Islamiyyah claimed responsibility for the attack. The gunmen appeared to have scattered leaflets in English and Urdu at the site of the attack. Titled “We Will Burn America,” the typed notes claim to be from “Lions of Daulah al-Islamiyyah, the Falcons of our Caliph” and state that they had “killed this Kansas lady ‘Lobo.’”The group said the attack was retaliation for the deaths of five “fellow fighters” in a paramilitary raid in Karachi’s Kiamari area last week.The police said that they were investigating the attack on Ms. Lobo, but that it was too early to comment on the group, which left similar threatening notes at a private school recently. “It’s too early to say,” Mr. Shah said. “They call themselves Daulah, like ISIS, but these typed letters seem very crude. We still need to verify this.” The Arabic name of ISIS, also known as the Islamic State, is Dawla al-Islamiya fil-Iraq wa al-Sham.Arif Rafiq, an adjunct fellow at the Middle East Institute, said the pamphlets suggested “that the attackers may have come from a loose jihadi network or a terrorist group like Jundullah that operates in a gray zone between a declining Al Qaeda and upstart ISIS.”The police said Ms. Lobo had lived in Karachi since 1995 and had a master’s degree in public health. She has two daughters, and her husband works at the Karachi American School, a private international school in Karachi. Drawing on conversations with Ms. Lobo’s husband and colleagues, the police said there was no indication that Ms. Lobo had received any threats from militants or extortionists.Advertisement