
APRIL 17, 2015

The Germanwings co-pilot Andreas Lubitz received certifications allowing him to fly, even though he had exhibited suicidal tendencies and was treated by psychotherapists.
2008Mr. Lubitz was admitted into Lufthansa's pilot training program.2009Mr. Lubitz broke off from his training for several months when he had an “episode of severe depression.”He was readmitted after passing company medical and psychological tests.June 2010The Federal Aviation Administration issued a student pilot’s license to Mr. Lubitz. He began flight training in Arizona shortly thereafter.Mental Health RequirementThird-class medical certificate. It requires that the pilot has no history or diagnosis of a mental health condition that “makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges.” It is valid for five years.
Mental Health RequirementThird-class medical certificate. It requires that the pilot has no history or diagnosis of a mental health condition that “makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or exercise the privileges.” It is valid for five years.
Jan. 2011Mr. Lubitz received a German private pilot’s license. It was issued in Bremen.Jan. 2012Mr. Lubitz received a private pilot’s license from the Federal Aviation Administration.According to prosecutors, Mr. Lubitz was treated by psychotherapists over a long but unspecified period prior to receiving his pilot's license and had exhibited suicidal tendencies.Later in 2012Mr. Lubitz received his commercial pilot’s license.Mental Health RequirementFirst class medical certificate. It involves a more intense physical exam, but the mental health requirements are the same as a third-class medical certificate. It is valid for one year.First class medical certificate. It involves a more intense physical exam, but the mental health requirements are the same as a third-class medical certificate. It is valid for one year.Sept. 2013Mr. Lubitz was offered a position as a copilot for Germanwings.Aug. 2014Mr. Lubitz passed the most recent annual checkup with a certified flight doctor.Mental Health RequirementRequired annual checkup.The mental health component is a questionnaire that the pilot signs on his or her honor.Required annual checkup.The mental health component is a questionnaire that the pilot signs on his or her honor.Feb. and March 2015Mr. Lubitz visited a series of doctors, some of whom pronounced him unfit for work.March 2015Mr. Lubitz crashed Germanwings A320 jetliner with 150 people on board.Advertisement