AdvertisementSupported byBy Joanna BerendtWARSAW — An engine on an aging Serbian government plane carrying the president failed on Friday, sending the aircraft into a horrifying 60-second plunge over the Adriatic Sea, according to Serbian officials and news reports.The plane, bound for Rome, safely returned to Belgrade, the Serbian capital, after the pilot managed to steady it. But President Tomislav Nikolic had to cancel his planned meeting with Pope Francis and Cardinal Pietro Parolin, the Vatican secretary of state, said Vuk Fatic, a coordinator for media relations in the president’s office.After the plunge, Mr. Nikolic’s cabinet ministers decided to stop using government planes and to take commercial flights instead, Mr. Fatic said.The aircraft, a Dassault Falcon 50, was carrying 10 people, including the president and four political advisers, and it took off from the Belgrade airport at 9 a.m. local time, Mr. Fatic said in a telephone interview. About an hour after takeoff, at an altitude of about 33,000 feet, one of the three engines on the plane stopped working, he said. During the next minute, the plane dropped over a mile.“The aircraft became unstable, there was turbulence,” Ivan Mrkic, one of Mr. Nikolic’s advisers, told the daily newspaper Vecernje Novosti of Belgrade. “We were literally thrown around the plane.”Stanislava Pak Stankovic, another presidential adviser on board, seemed astonished to have survived the plunge. “Believe me, at one point we were literally dropping like a rock,” she told the newspaper. “We will be celebrating this day as our second birthday.”Both said a disaster had been averted thanks to the pilot’s “great professionalism” and “exceptional skill.”Mr. Fatic said that no one on board was hurt and that Mr. Nikolic, 63, was back at work “10 minutes after arriving at his office straight from the airport.”The Falcon 50, built in 1981, is one of Serbia’s two official jets. A smaller plane, a Learjet 31A, has been in use for 24 years.The French-built Falcon has experienced five serious malfunctions in recent years, Mr. Fatic said. He denied that any of the problems were the result of negligent maintenance.The government’s press office did not respond to questions about whether it would investigate the cause of the engine’s failure.“We are lucky that nobody died today, and we should all make sure that this will never happen again,” Mr. Fatic said.Advertisement