By MICHELLE INNISAPRIL 18, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia —  The Australian police arrested five men on Saturday who they said had been planning terrorist attacks to be carried out next weekend, during a national holiday. Prime Minister Tony Abbott said the men had been inspired by the Islamic State extremist group.The police said they believed that two of the men, both 18, had been preparing to attack police officers in Melbourne, Australia’s second-largest city, during the Anzac Day holiday on April 25. Anzac Day honors the landing of troops from the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps on the Gallipoli Peninsula in Turkey during World War I. This year is the centennial of the landing, and large-scale public commemorations are planned for next Saturday, Sunday and Monday.“We believe that the potential attack was inspired by the Daesh death cult in the Middle East,” Mr. Abbott said at a news conference here hours after the arrests. Daesh is an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which controls territory in Iraq and Syria.The arrests followed raids early Saturday on several residences in Melbourne by about 200 police officers.AdvertisementThe five men arrested had been under surveillance, and the raids were conducted after the police became aware of a specific threat, Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan of the Australian Federal Police said at the news conference where Mr. Abbott spoke. “These people have been on our radar,” Mr. Phelan said.AdvertisementMr. Phelan said he was “extremely confident that this particular cell and these particular plans” had been stopped.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The two men were likely to be charged with preparing to commit a terrorist act and possessing prohibited weapons, the police said. A third man, also 18, was expected to face weapons charges; two others, ages 18 and 19, were expected to be charged after more questioning by the police.At a news conference in Melbourne, Neil Gaughan, an acting deputy commissioner for the federal police, said the five men were associates of Abdul Numan Haider, who was shot and killed in Melbourne last September after attacking two police officers with a knife. The police said Mr. Haider was a “known terrorist suspect” whose passport had been confiscated.The Australian government said it had confiscated the passports of about 100 Australians to prevent them from traveling to the Middle East to join extremists there. Mr. Abbott said Saturday that domestic intelligence agencies were conducting more than 400 investigations of “people who would do us harm.”In February, two men were arrested in suburban Sydney after a police raid on their home found weapons, a homemade Islamic State flag and a video recording of one of the men plotting an attack. The police also found a machete and a hunting knife.Australia has joined the American-led coalition that is carrying out airstrikes against the Islamic State group in Syria, and last week Australian and New Zealand troops left for Iraq to help train the Iraqi Army in its fight against the militants.A version of this article appears in print on April 19, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Police in Australia Arrest 5 in Terror Plot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.