Ian Holliday, a University of Hong Kong vice president, met with students on Monday to discuss his earlier comments on travel to the Chinese mainland. A senior official of the University of Hong Kong apologized on Monday and retracted remarks suggesting that the university would make visits to mainland China mandatory for all undergraduate students.Ian Holliday, a vice president of the university and a professor of politics, said he had told students at a dinner on Friday: “If students do not wish to go to China, they should not come to Hong Kong U.” The statement drew criticisms from students who have misgivings about China’s growing influence on Hong Kong.“I apologize unreservedly for the clumsy and inappropriate remarks that I made last Friday,” Mr. Holliday told reporters after an hourlong meeting with students. The suggestion that travel to the Chinese mainland might become an academic requirement fed fears of encroachments on the high degree of autonomy and civil liberties in the former British colony.In August, Beijing ruled that although five million Hong Kong voters could vote for the city’s leader starting in 2017, a small committee dominated by Beijing loyalists would select the candidates. The announcement led to almost three months of protests in the streets of the city.“It’s important that students can make their own choice,” Billy Fung, president of the university’s student union, said after the meeting on Monday. “The University of Hong Kong is an international institution. Our students should have international exposure, not confined only to mainland China, and should not be specified to mainland China.”In a survey conducted by Campus TV, a student journalism organization at the university, 97 percent of roughly 1,400 students said they disagreed with compulsory exchange programs to any specific destination. Seventy-eight percent of the respondents said they did not wish to go on an exchange program to the Chinese mainland.During the hourlong meeting with Mr. Fung and other students, Mr. Holliday said that his vision for the university was to provide, by 2022, all undergraduate students with the opportunity to visit another country and mainland China, producing “global citizens with China knowledge.”“I think any student in Asia — and almost any student in the world — needs to have some knowledge of China,” he said. “We can give our students a great life chance, some great opportunities for the rest of their lives by giving them a good and deep knowledge of China.”Mr. Holliday said that the university would hold a public meeting this week and further consult students and other stakeholders before drafting a policy on student requirements.The university’s push for greater interaction with the Chinese mainland coincides with the Hong Kong government’s forging ever closer ties with China, the world’s second-largest economy, behind that of the United States.Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, has been a champion of fostering closer economic ties between the city and the mainland, and of Hong Kong serving as a “super-connector” between the mainland and the rest of the world. He plans to subsidize local primary and secondary students to join at least one  exchange program with the mainland, his annual work report this year shows.In 2012, a proposal to introduce patriotic education to the city’s high schools met with vigorous opposition, antagonizing a generation of young people, including Joshua Wong, who led a protest that eventually caused the plan to be suspended. Mr. Wong went on to play an even more pivotal role in the protests last year.The Hong Kong government is set to release on Wednesday a formal proposal for the election that follows Beijing’s ruling last year.Follow Alan Wong on Twitter at @alanwongw.