China is in the midst of a sweeping government-led effort to transform the country from a once-predominantly rural economy to a land of modern city dwellers, with a goal of integrating 70 percent of the population, or about 900 million people, into urban areas within the coming decade.A study released on Saturday by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, based in Paris, looks at the challenges of China’s rapid urbanization and the need to shift away from a development model based on exports, cheap labor and land, and a discounting of environmental costs, as well as the need to move toward one that relies more on productivity growth and domestic consumption. Among its findings is that China already has more than twice as many megacities, defined as urban areas with more than 10 million people, than the official data suggests. Here are some of the main points of the report:More MegacitiesThe Chinese government only counts six cities with more than 10 million inhabitants, as its calculations exclude migrant workers and the suburban population. But according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which looked at the population of metropolitan areas beyond these more narrowly defined administrative boundaries, there are now 15 such cities in China. MagnitudeEconomic liberalization has spurred urbanization. In 1980, only 19 percent of Chinese lived in cities. By 2020, that figure could reach 60 percent, according to government projections. Migrant workers, from rural areas or other cities, already account for about half of China’s urban population. About 274 million migrants live in cities across the country, the report said, citing government figures. One in three people in the southern province of Guangdong are migrants from elsewhere in China. Young MenIn 2012, nearly 60 percent of China’s migrants were men 16 to 40 years old. They are much better educated than their counterparts in India or Brazil: four in five Chinese migrants have completed at least junior high school. In 2010, 90 percent of China’s construction workers and 80 percent of coal miners were from a migrant background.China’s city officials lack incentives to cooperate with their neighbors, the report says. As a result, it says, “regional competition has been a major feature of reforms for over three decades.”It continues, “Intercity competition has led to duplication of infrastructure, some of which has been absorbed by high growth rates, but some of which could be considered wasteful.”Less Cash to Meet Local NeedsChanges in the national tax system since 1994 have made the fiscal system more centralized, with an increasing amount of revenue flowing to the central government in Beijing. Central government funding for social services is often based on local household registration, or hukou, figures, which do not account for migrants living in cities without an urban hukou. City governments that are short of cash have fewer incentives to provide social services such as health care or education to migrant workers.To cover their expenses, cities have become overly reliant on the sale of land-use rights and borrowing, the report says.Income GapThe wealth gap between Chinese urban and rural areas has increased over the last three decades. In 1978, when China embarked on economic liberalization, an urban family earned 2.5 times the income of a rural household, according to government figures. By 2012, urbanites earned 3.1 times as much. Although rural migrants earn more in cities than those who stay in the countryside, they are excluded from many of the social welfare benefits and subsidized housing projects often reserved for registered urban residents.Insufficient Citizen Input“There are no formal channels for citizens to take part in the discussions of urban plans or ways for them to provide feedback on the quality of service delivery,” the report notes. “The dominant voices in decisions concerning new developments may be those of developers and local officials, none of whom will remain in the city over the long term, to live with the consequences of those decisions.”The full report is available here.Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter at @mrbaopanrui. 