AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — Prime Minister Lee Wan-koo of South Korea said Tuesday that he had offered to resign over a snowballing bribery scandal, dealing a blow to President Park Geun-hye, whose government has already been rocked by a ferry disaster.Mr. Lee has been under mounting pressure from within Ms. Park’s governing Saenuri Party, as well as from the opposition, to step down after an allegation emerged this month that he took 30 million won, or $27,700, in illegal cash donations from a South Korean businessman in 2013.The businessman, Sung Wan-jong, hanged himself from a tree on April 9, the day he was scheduled to appear before a court to fight attempts by prosecutors to arrest him on corruption charges. He was the first target in the Park government’s widening investigation into corruption allegations that were said to have taken place under her predecessor, Lee Myung-bak.Yet Mr. Sung, a former lawmaker and chairman of a bankrupt construction company, did not go silently: He left behind a memorandum and a tape of a telephone interview that he gave to a South Korean newspaper hours before he died. On the tape and in the memo he detailed illegal cash gifts that he said he had given to Mr. Lee and a few other key political allies of Ms. Park, including both of her former chiefs of staff.Like the others on Mr. Sung’s list, Mr. Lee denied receiving illegal cash. He even denied knowing Mr. Sung well. But his credibility crumbled fast as domestic news media revealed photographs, telephone records and Mr. Sung’s diaries that indicated the two had spoken on the phone or met numerous times. Mr. Lee faced the increasing likelihood that he would become the first sitting prime minister to be questioned by prosecutors in a corruption inquiry.In a statement sent to reporters early Tuesday, Mr. Lee’s office said he had offered his resignation to Ms. Park on Monday. Ms. Park, who was on a trip to South America, called Mr. Lee’s decision “deeply regrettable,” according to her spokesman, Min Kyung-wook. South Korean news media quoted unnamed top aides to Ms. Park as saying that she would officially accept Mr. Lee’s resignation as soon as she returned from the trip next Monday.If that happens, Mr. Lee, once a powerful and cocky party insider, will go down as one of the shortest-serving prime ministers in South Korean history. During his confirmation hearings in February, an audio tape emerged of him boasting to young journalists over lunch in January that he was so well connected with top news media executives that he could ruin the career of unfriendly reporters.Ms. Park has called for a thorough investigation of the bribery scandal. Besides Mr. Lee, Hong Joon-pyo, a former head of Ms. Park’s governing party who now serves as a provincial governor, was cited in domestic news media as the first to face a summons. Mr. Sung said he gave Mr. Hong 100 million won, or $92,000, in illegal campaign donations in 2011. Mr. Hong, who as a young prosecutor built a reputation as an anticorruption crusader, has denied the accusations.Ms. Park’s governing party faced the bribery scandal on the eve of elections for four parliamentary seats next week.Her approval ratings plunged after the ferry Sewol capsized off the southwestern coast a year ago, killing 304 people, most of them teenagers. Corporate greed, regulatory failures and corrupt relationships between government officials and businessmen were cited as factors.In the past week, as the country marked the first anniversary of the disaster, protesters marching on Ms. Park’s office clashed with tear-gas-spraying riot police officers in downtown Seoul. The marchers, including bereaved families, demanded that the government reopen an investigation into its failures in rescue efforts.Advertisement