AdvertisementSupported byBy Bruce WeberElio Toaff, the chief rabbi of Rome for half a century, who as a leader of Italian Jewry during its revival after World War II helped forge more amicable relations between Jews and the Vatican, died on Sunday in Rome. He was 99. The death was reported by numerous news outlets in Europe and Israel. In a radio interview in Rome, the prime minister of Italy, Matteo Renzi, called Rabbi Toaff “a great Italian and a symbol of the Jewish community.” Born on April 30, 1915, in the Tuscan port city of Livorno, Elio Toaff (pronounced TOE-ahf) was the son of the chief rabbi of Livorno, Alfredo Sabato Toaff, who discouraged his son from following him into the rabbinate. He rebelled against that advice, however, studying law and theology and succeeding as a scholar. By the age of 26 he was leader of the Jewish community in Ancona, a port city on the Adriatic. A fighter in the Italian resistance during World War II, he helped hide Jews after the Germans occupied northern and central Italy in 1943 and began mass deportations to concentration camps. Rabbi Toaff was at one point captured by the Nazis and sentenced to die by firing squad — he was reportedly forced to dig his own grave — but he managed to escape. After the war he served as chief rabbi of Venice, and he was chosen as spiritual leader of the Jews of Rome in 1951, at a time when the community, perhaps the oldest in Europe, was severely diminished in numbers and vitality.“The Italian Jewry was devastated and severely traumatized in the wake of the war,” David I. Kertzer, a professor of Italian studies at Brown whose book “The Pope and Mussolini: The Secret History of Pius XI and the Rise of Fascism in Europe” was awarded a Pulitzer Prize on Monday, said in an interview. “Not just by the Holocaust. Preceding that, the Italian Fascist regime enacted racial laws, aimed principally at Jews, and unlike the Jews of Germany, the Italian Jews thought of themselves as quintessentially Italian. They had been there for 2,000 years. All this came as a shock, so it was a double blow. “Rabbi Toaff lived through all this,” Professor Kertzer added. “So even before becoming chief of Rome in ’51, he was a heroic figure, associated with resistance, and with rebuilding.”By his own reckoning, Rabbi Toaff, who retired in 2002, focused the greatest part of his effort on rebuilding Jewish schools and fortifying Jewish education in Rome. But he is perhaps best known for the invitation he extended to Pope John Paul II to pray with him in Rome’s central synagogue, an act that cemented his international legacy. The pope accepted, and subsequently made the first recorded papal visit to a synagogue. The event, on April 13, 1986, came more than two decades after the publication of “Nostra Aetate” (“In Our Times”), the document produced by the Second Vatican Council of 1962-65 that rejected the longstanding belief among many Roman Catholics that the Jews were collectively responsible for the death of Jesus, and it was widely seen as a profound step toward the healing of almost two millenniums of enmity between the faiths. “I see the visit of the pope as the crowning achievement of the church’s policy over the last 20 years,” Rabbi Toaff said shortly before the event in an interview with The New York Times. Greeted by Rabbi Toaff with an embrace on the steps of the synagogue, John Paul addressed a congregation of 1,000 people, almost all of them Italian Jews, referring to the Jews as “our dearly beloved brothers” and condemning anti-Semitism. “The heart opens itself,” Rabbi Toaff said, “to the hope that the misfortunes of the past will be replaced by fruitful dialogue.”In 1994, Rabbi Toaff and Pope John Paul II officiated (along with the president of Italy, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro) a concert at the Vatican commemorating the Holocaust. The performance featured the Royal Philharmonic of London and included works by Schubert, Beethoven and Leonard Bernstein, whose third symphony, known as “Kaddish,” included narration by the actor Richard Dreyfuss.In his last will and testament, John Paul, who died in 2005, wrote, “How can I fail to remember the rabbi of Rome?” A list of Rabbi Toaff’s survivors was unavailable; it includes a son, Ariel Toaff, a historian who lives in Israel, and whose controversial 2007 book, “Blood Passover: The Jews of Europe and Ritual Murder,” suggested the possibility of a historical basis for the charge against medieval Jews of blood libel, the idea that Jews murdered Christian children for use in religious rituals. His father was among those who condemned the book. Advertisement