On Wednesday, Hong Kong’s government presented its proposal for how the city’s top official, the chief executive, could be chosen in future elections, starting in 2017. The government’s initial proposal was vehemently opposed by tens of thousands of protesters who occupied streets in the former British colony for nearly three months late last year. They demanded a far more open and democratic process. The new proposal now leaves opposition lawmakers with the choice of endorsing it and allowing universal suffrage for the first time but restricting the list of candidates, or rejecting it and risking the forfeiting any changes to the electoral system.How does the government propose changing the election of the chief executive? The current chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, was chosen in 2012 to a five-year term by a 1,200-member Election Committee representing various professional and social sectors. The government has proposed that, in 2017, two or three candidates could face election by all five million eligible voters in Hong Kong. However, these candidates would have to be endorsed by at least half of the 1,200 members of a nominating committee, most of whom critics fear would be beholden to the central Chinese government in Beijing, like the members of the current Election Committee.Under the current voting method using the Election Committee, hopefuls need the recommendation of at least 150 members to be candidates for the final vote by the committee. Under the new proposal, prospective candidates could be recommended by 120 members of the nominating committee. On Wednesday, Chief Secretary Carrie Lam said that she expected five to 10 contenders to emerge in this process.The committee would then vote in a secret ballot on that pool of nominees to choose the two or three candidates who would face voters in an election. To run in the general election, each candidate would have to receive the endorsement of at least half of the committee’s 1,200 members. Democratic politicians strongly object to that 50 percent threshold, arguing that the nomination committee would not chosen by a popular vote and would be skewed toward politicians and businesspeople who heed the Chinese government’s preferences.What happens next?The 70 lawmakers in the Legislative Council of Hong Kong are expected to vote on the government proposal by mid-July. A two-thirds vote is required for approval. If it is not approved, the government has said it will maintain the current system for years to come, which means that once again the chief executive will be chosen by an election committee, not by a popular vote. If the lawmakers approve the plan, it must also be vetted by China’s national legislature. (Though, because the Chinese government already laid down the framework for the Hong Kong government plan, this would be a formality.)What will determine whether the government proposal is passed?The Legislative Council’s 27 pro-democracy lawmakers will now have to decide whether they agree with the proposal and vote for it, or to stay united behind their earlier vow to block it from passing. Some democratic politicians have argued that it might be preferable to support the government plan, instead of leaving the city in political limbo. But opponents of the plan argue that it falls so short of the universal suffrage promised to voters that it would be better to reject it and hope that the Chinese government will give more ground in the future.The pro-government side will need to persuade at least four opposition members to vote for the proposal to meet the two-thirds threshold. If it is passed, Mr. Leung will sign it into law.What are the consequences for Hong Kong?The debate over whether to accept the proposal or continue with the current model could further divide the city’s pro-democracy advocates. “It’s damned if you do, damned if you don’t,” said Emily Lau, a Democratic Party member of the Legislative Council.