By MARTIN FACKLERAPRIL 21, 2015
TOKYO — Prime Minister Shinzo Abe sent a ritual gift to a Tokyo war shrine on Tuesday, a gesture that could anger Japan’s neighbors ahead of a visit by Mr. Abe to Washington that will put his views of history under intense scrutiny.Mr. Abe sent a potted evergreen shrub to mark a spring festival at the Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto memorial to Japan’s war dead, including convicted war criminals from World War II. The sprawling shrine in central Tokyo has long been a sore spot between Japan and other Asian countries. In particular, South Korea and China, two victims of Japan’s early 20th-century empire-building, view Yasukuni as a symbol of Japan’s inability to fully come to terms with that past.Their sensitivity toward Yasukuni has heightened under Mr. Abe, an outspoken conservative who has called for restoring Japan’s pride, but who is seen by many Chinese and Koreans as a nationalist trying to whitewash his nation’s militarist past. He has also angered some Korean-American and veterans groups in the United States, which have demanded that Mr. Abe more clearly acknowledge responsibility for Japan’s wartime misdeeds when he visits Washington next week.During that visit, Mr. Abe will hold talks with President Obama that are meant to showcase the close cooperation in trade and regional security between the United States and Japan, two former foes turned close postwar allies. Mr. Abe will also make an address to a joint meeting of Congress that will be closely watched for how clearly he acknowledges Japan’s wartime aggression, and for whether he tries to water down past apologies.Mr. Abe’s offering Tuesday to the shrine may add to concerns in Washington about the prime minister’s views of history, which American officials worry could isolate Japan in the region. A strong Chinese backlash could also hurt the chances for a proposed meeting between Mr. Abe and the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, later this week on the sidelines of a regional summit meeting in the Indonesian capital, Jakarta.Mr. Abe may have been hoping to avoid a strong reaction by choosing to send an offering to the shrine instead of going in person, as he did in December 2013. That visit spurred strongly worded protests by not only China and South Korea, but also the United States. Since then, Mr. Abe has limited himself to sending gifts such as shrubs or money as he tries to balance a desire to raise Japan’s diplomatic standing in the region with a need to appease his political base on the far right, which has urged him to visit the shrine.A version of this article appears in print on April 22, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Japan: Abe Sends War-Shrine Gift.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.