By AUSTIN RAMZYOCT. 17, 2015
HONG KONG — Taiwan’s governing party, the Kuomintang, dropped its presidential nominee in favor of another candidate on Saturday, in hopes of preventing what it fears will be heavy losses in the January elections.The party chose its chairman, Eric Chu, the mayor of New Taipei City, as its new presidential candidate at a special party congress. He replaced Hung Hsiu-chu, who in polls has badly trailed Tsai Ing-wen, the nominee of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, and even at times polled behind a third-party candidate.Ms. Hung resisted the change, but she was overruled by party leaders who persuaded delegates to reverse her nomination. “I have said before I will accept the congress’s decision,” Ms. Hung, the vice president of Taiwan’s legislature, told the gathering. “The party may give up on me, but I will not give up on the party.”Mr. Chu urged delegates to support him and put the awkward reversal behind them. “We must be confident,” he said. “We must be united.”AdvertisementBefore the switch, both major parties’ presidential nominees were women. Taiwan has never had a woman serve as president.The Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, is struggling to salvage its electoral prospects just three months before the elections, in which voters will elect members of the legislature as well as the president. Political analysts say the switch to Mr. Chu was driven not just by Ms. Hung’s poor showing in the presidential campaign, but by the prospect of the party’s losing control of the legislature.AdvertisementThe Kuomintang ran Taiwan as an authoritarian, one-party state until democratic reforms began in the 1980s. It favors closer relations with mainland China, which it ruled until its 1949 defeat by Mao Zedong’s Communists in the country’s civil war.Under President Ma Ying-jeou, who is finishing his second and final term, the Kuomintang pushed a series of trade agreements with Beijing. But concerns have grown in Taiwan about the economic sway of China, which considers the self-ruled island to be a part of its territory that must eventually be brought under its control.That unease helped set off the so-called Sunflower Movement protests last year, in which student demonstrators occupied the legislature for more than three weeks to force reconsideration of a trade pact with China.Mr. Ma’s popularity declined drastically over his second term, and the Kuomintang suffered heavy losses in local elections last year, which was seen as a sign that the party would have trouble holding on to the presidency and the legislature in 2016.The party has done itself few favors with its election strategy thus far. Mr. Chu, whose mayoral victory in New Taipei City was one of the few bright spots for the Kuomintang in last year’s elections, was at first widely seen as the party’s likely presidential candidate. But he repeatedly declined to run.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Ms. Hung, the party wound up with a less popular nominee who pushed for even closer relations with China, a position that many analysts say further undermined the Kuomintang’s already weak chances.Advertisement“With incredible lack of foresight, and I suspect a generous dose of ignorance and arrogance, neither Ma nor Chu appear to have sensed that choosing Hung would exacerbate an already fraught situation for the party,” Jonathan Sullivan, associate professor and director of research at the University of Nottingham’s School of Contemporary Chinese Studies, said in an email. “And for months they blithely carried on. Having made the decision to nix Hung, Chu had no choice but to run.”Despite Mr. Chu’s call for unity, the abrupt candidate switch may result in continued squabbling within the party as the election nears. Additionally, an opposition lawmaker has called for an investigation into allegations that Ms. Hung sought or was offered payment to withdraw from the race, a charge she has denied.On Saturday, Mr. Chu spoke of the Kuomintang as the party best equipped to handle relations with China. But while that argument helped the party in past elections, it might be less successful this time.In the past, the Democratic Progressive Party, or D.P.P., has raised concern among some of Taiwan’s voters — and among some foreign countries, including the United States — that it might push for formal independence for Taiwan. But the party has de-emphasized such sentiments during this campaign.“Tsai has staked out the center ground where most voters are by sticking steadfastly to ‘maintaining the status quo,’ ” Mr. Sullivan said. “It is ambiguous enough and palatable enough for most players that China policy will not be an obvious Achilles’ heel for the D.P.P. this time.”Likewise, Taiwan’s slow growth and growing income disparity in recent years have undermined the Kuomintang’s traditional argument that it is the best steward of the economy.A version of this article appears in print on October 18, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Fearing Loss,Taiwan Party Changes Pick for President.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.