By MARTIN FACKLERAPRIL 22, 2015
TOKYO — A small propeller-driven drone possibly tainted with radioactive cesium was discovered Wednesday on the roof of the prime minister’s office, unsettling officials, who said they were reviewing antiterrorism measures in response.The officials said they did not know who had flown the drone, which was about two feet in width with four propellers. They also said they did not know how long the drone had been on the roof. No injuries or damages were reported. The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, was in Indonesia to attend an Asian-African summit meeting when the drone was discovered.The police in Tokyo said that the drone was carrying a camera and a bottle of unidentified liquid that bore a sticker with the universal symbol for radioactivity.The police also said traces of radioactive cesium were detected on the roof near the drone, though it was unclear if they came from the drone. Radioactive cesium is not usually found in nature, but large amounts of it were released into the atmosphere during the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011.AdvertisementStill, the discovery of radioactivity prompted concern about whether the drone might have been part of a terrorist attack. There was also speculation that it could have been a protest against the Fukushima accident.AdvertisementThe Tokyo police said they were testing the liquid in the bottle for radioactivity, though they said the levels found on the roof were harmless to humans.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The discovery drew comparisons to an episode in Washington in January when a drone flown by an off-duty intelligence employee crashed on the White House lawn.The police said it was unclear if the drone in Tokyo had been intentionally landed on the roof of the prime minister’s office or if it had crashed. Local news reports said officials had found it by chance when a tour was being given to new employees.The top government spokesman, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, declined to comment when asked if the drone was being viewed as part of a terrorist act. However, he told reporters that the discovery had prompted the government to review its antiterrorism measures as Japan prepares for a summit meeting of world leaders next year and for the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo.“There is a possibility that drones might be used for terrorist attacks,” Mr. Suga said. “Taking into consideration the latest incident, we will review the use of drones and measures against possible terrorist attacks using drones.”Japan currently has no restrictions on the use of small, low-flying drones, estimated to total about 20,000 nationwide, the Kyodo News Agency said.An article on April 23 about the discovery of a small drone possibly tainted by radioactive cesium on the roof of the Japanese prime minister’s office inTokyo referred imprecisely to cesium. While the stable version of the element ranks in the middle of the naturally occurring chemical elements in terms of its abundance in the earth by weight, the radioactive isotopes, like the one possibly found on the drone, are not usually found in nature. The error was called to the attention of editors only late last month.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Drone, Possibly Radioactive, Unsettles Japan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.