AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld DavisWASHINGTON — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said Thursday that the commitment by him and President Obama to protecting Israel’s security was unwavering and “personal,” saying that he wanted to “set the record straight” at a time of discord between the United States and Israel.“It’s no secret,” Mr. Biden said, that “we’ve had our differences.”“You protect our interests like we protect yours, so let’s get something straight in this moment of some disagreement, occasionally, between our two governments,” the vice president added. “No president has ever done more to protect Israel’s security than President Barack Obama.”Mr. Biden’s remarks, at a reception to celebrate the 67th anniversary of Israel’s independence, came as the Obama administration worked to smooth tensions with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that have erupted in recent months in an unusually bitter and public fashion. The push coincides with Mr. Obama’s effort to make a case for a nuclear pact with Iran that Israel strongly opposes, and after several months of open hostility between the president and Mr. Netanyahu that began with the prime minister’s decision to denounce a deal in an address to Congress. Mr. Biden and Ron Dermer, the Israeli ambassador, who hosted the reception, used the event to strike a softer tone in the American-Israeli relationship, referring to it as a familial one that brings temporary eruptions of anger but is fundamentally solid.A guide to help you navigate the deal between global powers and Tehran.“Sometimes, we drive each other crazy, but we love each other and we protect each other,” Mr. Biden said to an audience of about 1,000 people.Mr. Dermer, using a Yiddish word, said, “We are family, mishpachah.” He added, “All families have disagreements,” but “what unites us is far more important than what divides us.”In choosing Mr. Biden to address the group, Mr. Obama sent an emissary who has strong backing among American Jews and a long involvement with the American-Israeli relationship, as well as a penchant for unadulterated expressions of affection for important constituencies. “I’m Joe Biden,” he said as he began his remarks, “and everybody knows I love Israel.”The stepped-up efforts at outreach come at a time when many American Jewish leaders, including some who wield outsize political influence and donate large sums to campaigns, have expressed worry about Mr. Obama’s policies in the Middle East and his posture toward Israel.Still, the concern is not enough to undercut Democrats’ sizable advantage among Jewish voters, said Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster who has studied the Jewish vote, because they make domestic issues a priority along with concern for Israel.In his remarks, Mr. Biden made a point-by-point case for the Iran deal, emphasizing that “it’s a framework — only a framework, not a final deal,” and vowing that there would be “no deal” if a long list of Mr. Obama’s objectives, including cutting off all of Iran’s pathways to a nuclear weapon, were not achieved. “If you were attacked and overwhelmed, we would fight for you,” Mr. Biden said. “We need you — the world needs you.”Advertisement