AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneOrganizers of a women’s international peace walk across the Korean Peninsula’s heavily mined Demilitarized Zone next month said Friday that the governments of both North and South Korea had given their conditional approval for the event, which is meant to create new pressure for a formal end to the Korean War. But the organizers acknowledged that they did not yet have the final written confirmations or visa approvals.Participants in the walk, which includes a number of Nobel laureates and disarmament activists, are planning to go regardless and have purchased plane tickets, the organizers said. North Korea, the starting point for the May 24 walk, also has presented the organizers with a tentative itinerary.“At this point we consider having obtained the approval of both governments,” said Suzy Kim, a professor of Korean history at Rutgers University who is one of the organizers of the event, which was first announced last month. “It just takes some paperwork to proceed.” The organizers, who also include Gloria Steinem, the feminist author and an honorary co-chairwoman, held a news conference in New York to provide an update on their progress in arranging the walk, which was conceived to punctuate their desire for a permanent peace treaty to replace the armistice that halted — but technically never ended — the 1950-1953 Korean War. That conflict, one of the bloodiest of modern times, left an estimated four million people dead, mostly Koreans but including nearly 34,000 American soldiers killed in combat. It separated millions of families and is an enduring vestige of World War II’s aftermath, when Korea was divided by the Cold War powers. “We’re calling for an end to the world’s longest war, which has not ended, and for women to be involved in all aspects of the peace process,” said Cora Weiss, a longtime American antiwar activist and president of The Hague Appeal for Peace, who is involved in planning the walk.Hyun-Kyung Chung, a professor at the Union Theological Seminary, who also is helping arrange the walk and a related peace symposium in South Korea, told the news conference that Korea was “the only country where World War II is not over.”The plan is for the participants, about 30 female peace activists from around the world, to fly to Pyongyang, the capital of North Korea, and walk the two-mile-wide stretch of land that separates North and South, one of the most militarized borders, protected by land mines and barbed wire. Initially dismissed by some critics as naïve, the organizers have pointed out that female activists played critically important roles in resolving other seemingly intractable conflicts, most notably the sectarian strife that ravaged Northern Ireland in the 1970s and the civil war that upended Liberia more than a decade ago. Ms. Steinem also said the criticism reflected gender bias, asserting that even the Army War College has said that “the only way to prevent the outbreak of catastrophic confrontation is to reach agreement on ending the armistice from the Korean War, in essence a peace agreement, and give a formal security guarantee to North Korea tied to nonproliferation — in other words, it is talking.” The organizers also rejected criticism by some human rights advocates that their engagement with the North Korean authorities had conspicuously avoided challenging that country’s political repressions and human rights record. “If we’re trying to initiate a project for long-term peacebuilding measures, it seems that it’s not quite right to go in with an attack,” Ms. Kim said.Ms. Chung also suggested that discussions of such issues, at this stage, would be counterproductive. “When you go out on a first date, you don’t talk about all the bad things you did last summer.” she said.Advertisement