AdvertisementSupported byBy Saba ImtiazKARACHI, Pakistan — Gunmen killed the director of a popular arts center in Pakistan’s largest city on Friday, shortly after she had hosted a contentious event on human rights abuses in western Baluchistan Province.The gunmen opened fire on the center’s director, Sabeen Mahmud, as she drove through the upscale neighborhood of Defence with her mother shortly after the event.Ms. Mahmud was shot four times in the face, neck and chest. She was pronounced dead at a nearby hospital, doctors said. Her mother was wounded in the attack and was treated at a private hospital early Saturday.Ms. Mahmud, 39, was a well-known figure in Karachi’s arts and activist circles, and the center that she ran, The Second Floor, is a popular site for exhibitions and political discussions.Earlier on Friday, she had hosted an event titled “Unsilencing Baluchistan” that examined military-led human rights abuses in the province, where a separatist insurgency has been raging for the past decade.Ms. Mahmud agreed to host the discussion after it had been canceled at a private university in Lahore a few weeks earlier, reportedly at the behest of the military’s Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate.Hours after the discussion, friends of Ms. Mahmud’s gathered outside a city morgue, many weeping openly. Others were in a state of shock, having seen or spoken to her just hours earlier.Speakers at both the canceled event and the one held at The Second Floor included Mama Qadeer Baloch, the head of a Baluch organization that campaigns for the release of people detained by the military intelligence agencies, and Farzana Majeed, a political activist.The Pakistani government recently prevented Mr. Baloch and Ms. Majeed from traveling to the United States by placing them on the Exit Control List, an official sanction used to bar criminal suspects or people involved in litigation from leaving the country.Before her death, Ms. Mahmud told friends and journalists that she occasionally had come under scrutiny from Pakistani intelligence agents.“I’ve made copies and told my staff to give them everything,” she had told a reporter earlier Friday. “I understand that they’re doing their job. I have nothing to hide.”The death of such a popular and prominent figure led to an immediate outpouring of grief and anger in Karachi. Mohammed Hanif, a prominent author and journalist in Pakistan who has written extensively on Baluchistan, said he strongly suspected that the military had a hand in Ms. Mahmud’s death.“There’s no other way to interpret this,” he said. “The Baluchistan problem is so huge, and Pakistani intelligence agencies are so paranoid, that they will not allow even discussion in a room full of people, let alone a TV channel or a newspaper.”Mir Mohammad Ali Talpur, an activist who took part in the panel discussion, said, “It isn’t a random job, it’s a professional job.”With her signature cropped hair and glasses, Ms. Mahmud was a fixture at many civil society events in Karachi. She participated in protests and supported political activists who sought to reduce the strength of Islamist extremists in Pakistani society.One Valentine’s Day, she organized an online protest against anti-Valentine’s Day banners that had been raised in Karachi by Jamaat-e-Islami, a conservative political party.At The Second Floor, she hosted book readings and public discussions and last year helped host a creative festival.She refused to hire security guards for her center, even after 40 people were robbed there by armed men in 2011.Addressing the audience at the start of Friday’s event, Ms. Mahmud said that while Baluchistan was an emotional issue for many people, she asked for the discussion to be inclusive and dignified, for people to respect each other’s views and allow all kinds of perspectives to be heard.Advertisement