AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa HadidJENIN, West Bank — Two Palestinian men were fatally shot by the Israeli police after attacking officers with knives, one at a contested shrine in the West Bank and the other at a checkpoint near East Jerusalem, a police spokeswoman said Saturday.They were the latest in a recent spate of attacks by Palestinians who appear to be acting alone and without the backing or instruction of any organization. They have carried out several deadly attacks in Jerusalem and the West Bank using vehicles, knives and guns in recent months.The first shooting took place at the Zayyim checkpoint on the outskirts of East Jerusalem late Friday. A police spokeswoman, Luba Samri, said a man identified as Ali Abu Ghannam, 17, ran toward officers with a knife at another checkpoint, then ran to the Zayyim checkpoint and threatened officers there. They shot him when he tried to stab them, she said, but Palestinian medics who arrived later said it was not clear what had taken place. The police later released a photograph of a cleaver and what appeared to be a kitchen knife tipped with blood that they said Mr. Abu Ghannam had wielded. The second shooting occurred on Saturday near the Cave of the Patriarchs in the West Bank city of Hebron, a site revered by Jews, Muslims and Christians as the ancient burial place of Abraham and his wife, Sarah. Ms. Samri said a 20-year-old Palestinian man was shot by one officer after he stabbed another officer, 19, in the head and chest. The wounded officer was treated at a hospital. Ms. Samri did not identify either the injured policeman or his assailant, and Dr. Hijazi Abu Mazyar, an official with the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, said his group had not yet ascertained the dead man’s identity. The Cave of the Patriarchs has been a flash point between Palestinians and Israelis, particularly since 1994, when an American-born Jewish settler opened fire inside the mosque at the site, killing 29 Palestinian worshipers. But it was not immediately clear if Saturday’s attack was religiously motivated. It was also unclear if the attacks were related. Israeli military officials have in recent months eased movement for Palestinians, and it made it somewhat easier to obtain permits to work in Israel.After Mr. Abu Ghannam’s death, Palestinian youths demonstrated at the Zayyim checkpoint on Saturday, hurling rocks at Israeli soldiers, who fired tear gas and rubber bullets.Reuters reported that a relative said the family was refusing to receive the body because Israeli authorities had limited the number of people allowed at the burial. The measure is often imposed by Israel at the funerals of Palestinian militants in Jerusalem and when security officials fear that a funeral will turn rowdy or violent.Also on Saturday, a man wounded three Israeli police officers when he struck them with his car, Ms. Samri said. She said the incident appeared to be an intentional attack. It occurred near Mr. Abu Ghannam’s neighborhood in East Jerusalem.Advertisement