AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — It started as a bit of sarcastic whimsy: Israelis frustrated with the lack of public buses on the Jewish Sabbath and holidays hijacked the Facebook page of the transportation minister during Passover and turned it into a shared-ride board.Nadav Maor wanted a lift to the country’s northern tip, with “room in the trunk” for some equipment. Miki Ezra Stranger needed to get to Friday night dinner at her grandmother’s house in Kiryat Motzkin from Ramat Gan, a journey of about 70 miles. Hamutal Adler, a single mother of two, was more flexible: “Just want a bit of beach,” she wrote.None connected with a ride, but they did manage to catapult the issue to the forefront of political conversation, reviving a thorny debate about the role of religion in the Jewish state.The minister, Yisrael Katz, derisively dismissed the ride-seekers as leftist sore losers after conservatives’ success in elections last month. Then it got more personal: Protesters surrounded Mr. Katz’s house, and a leftist Parliament member introduced legislation to ban him from using his state-issued Chrysler minivan when the buses are not running.“Public transportation is a necessity: I think it should be like electricity or water or gas,” said Omry Hazut, 27, who started the Facebook protest. “State and religion, this bond, is broken a lot of times, but only if you can afford it. If you can afford a car, you can pull the switch and start it on Saturday, but if you can’t, you won’t have any option of leaving your house.”As Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu tries to stitch together a new governing coalition that is expected to be made up of rightist and religious parties, a continuing struggle over Israeli identity is in the balance. The debate over transportation is part of a larger one over a so-called nationality bill that seeks to redefine the relationship between Israeli democracy and Jewish character, which was among the divisive issues that helped collapse Mr. Netanyahu’s previous coalition last fall.Controversy over public transportation predates Israel’s establishment in 1948 — Tel Aviv once banned horse-drawn carriages from its main street on Saturdays — but recent efforts to change the status quo, in which buses are idle in all but a few places, have met stiff opposition.Now, a cooperative is starting minibus service in Jerusalem on May 1, financed by a crowd-funded $30,000. Mr. Hazut plans a new Facebook movement for Shavuot, when buses will be stilled for two days at the end of May. Environmentalists and those concerned about economic disparities have embraced the cause.Orthodox Jews do not use motor vehicles on the Sabbath and holidays because of prohibitions on igniting fuel, creating sparks and traveling beyond certain distances. Though adherents to these strictures make up perhaps a fifth of Israel’s population, others who themselves drive see the bus ban as an important way of distinguishing the Jewish state.“Imagine if there was public transportation on the streets like on weekdays. We would not know it is Shabbat in Israel,” said Rabbi Aryeh Stern, one of Jerusalem’s chief rabbis. “When you walk on the streets of the cities, Jerusalem in particular, you can feel Shabbat; the holiness of Shabbat is striking and present. This in some ways gives the most important grounding for Israel’s right to continue being a Jewish state where Shabbat is felt.”Experts on religion and state say that Israeli politicians have for decades traded control over public transportation on Shabbat — along with marriage, conversion and rules at religious sites — to the Orthodox in exchange for their support on foreign policy. While allowing transportation services could actually reduce the number of drivers violating Orthodox rules, analysts said such specifics were less important than the symbolism.“It is a chapter in a much bigger book,” said Aviad Hacohen, a constitutional law professor. “We’re speaking about a Jewish and democratic state, but what does it mean, exactly? This is the debate. Do we mean a religious state, does it mean a traditional state, do we mean an Orthodox state?”Mr. Katz, his spokesman and officials in his ministry all declined to be interviewed. Mr. Katz said on Israeli television that he supported the status quo “as the right thing” to “preserve the symbols of a Jewish framework in the state of Israel.” He only prompted further outcry by saying that the campaign was led by the left and likening activists to a “wasp’s nest.”Itai Chaim, of the Public Transport Users Association, said he was a member of the Likud Party — like Mr. Katz — and does not ride on the Sabbath. But he still believes there should be “minimal” transportation, with non-Jewish drivers.Israel’s main bus company, Egged, has one million riders each weekday, but on Saturdays provides only minor service in Haifa, a mixed Jewish-Arab city, and the resort town of Eilat. The pre-state status quo limiting Sabbath activities was enshrined in traffic laws in 1991.More than a decade ago, a group of scholars and rabbis called for a reduced Sabbath transportation schedule as part of a 300-page “covenant” for coexistence; the proposal went nowhere. After years of unrequited advocacy, a group of Jerusalemites recently formed a cooperative called Shabus — a combination of the Hebrew words for Sabbath and bus — to take matters into their own hands.Starting May 1, Shabus will run three minibuses on Friday nights on a set route from Jerusalem’s north to south, with some 60 stops. Riders must pay about $12 for a year’s membership, plus about $3 per trip.“The idea is instead of complaining and protesting and just bad-mouthing the ministry, to do something that is practical, possible, legal and will be very user-friendly,” said Laura Wharton, a Jerusalem City Council member and the chairwoman of Shabus.“The religion is one aspect of Jewish culture, but it’s not the only one,” Ms. Wharton said. “You can be a good Frenchman but not love baguettes or croissants; you can be a good Jewish citizen of the Jewish state but not take part of the religion.”Tamar Zandberg, the member of Parliament who introduced the bill that would bar Mr. Katz and other ministers from using their state-leased vehicles on the Sabbath, said she had to rely on her brother to pick her up for family dinners before her election in 2013, which gave her a government car.“Transportation is not about the identity of the state, transportation is much, much, much more about the ability to move and to travel,” she said. “If you look at any other country in the world, you would see that some countries are religious, some countries have different kinds of values, but all of them have some kind of service running on the day of rest because it is so basic.”Just ask Itiel Sharaby, 32, who got stuck with seven friends in a downpour during a Passover camping trip in the Golan Heights. Mr. Sharaby posted a photograph of their waterlogged tents on Mr. Katz’s Facebook page, pleading for a ride. Later, he posted a thank-you note — though the group had been picked up not by fellow protesters, but by passers-by.Irit Pazner Garshowitz and Myra Noveck contributed reporting.Advertisement