Chinese news organizations caused a stir when they published stories last month saying that a senior security and intelligence official ensnared in an anticorruption investigation had six mistresses and two sons with them.The official, Ma Jian, a former vice minister of state security, is the highest-ranking intelligence official to be caught up in the anticorruption drive and political purge overseen by Xi Jinping, the head of the Communist Party and China’s president. The reports, which followed an article in Caixin, a respected newsmagazine, said that two of the mistresses worked in Mr. Ma’s ministry. Mr. Ma also had six villas — perhaps one for each mistress, some people have speculated.Mr. Ma is far from alone in his affinity for extracurricular activities in the bedroom. Adultery is not uncommon among senior party and government officials. But, while not a criminal offense in China, it is a violation of Communist Party rules. “I would say that it’s very common for corrupt officials to have one, two or even more mistresses,” said Wu Changzhen, a professor of civil law and an expert on marriage law at the China University of Political Science and Law. “It’s an open secret.”In the handbook of party regulations, Article 150 in Chapter 14 describes adultery as a breach of party discipline. Punishment comes in three grades, depending on the severity of the case and its negative social impact. These are: 1) receiving a warning or severe warning, 2) being stripped of all party posts or put on probation and 3) being expelled from the party.The handbook also says that the punishment will be extra severe if the adultery occurred with the spouse of someone serving in the military. (There is nothing about an extra penalty if the adultery was committed with a member of the military.) Bigamy warrants immediate expulsion, the regulations say.Below are six former officials who were brought down on corruption charges and have been accused by party investigators or court officials of having mistresses. Some information on their affairs has appeared in official print or online publications. The adventures of randy officials are thoroughly discussed these days on the Internet in China, though some people would prefer not to hear too many graphic details about the exploits of certain less-than-appealing figures. Such was the case in the sex scandal of Lei Zhengfu, a former district party chief in Chongqing whose escapades were captured on video and posted online during what was later revealed to be a “honey trap” blackmail operation.
 
PhotoZhou Yongkang.Credit Jason Lee/ReutersZhou YongkangMember of the Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee who “abused his position to help family members, mistresses and friends gain enormous benefits via business activities” and “committed adultery with a number of women in power-for-sex and money-for-sex trades,” according to Xinhua, the state news agency.
 
PhotoBo Xilai.Credit Andy Wong/Associated PressBo XilaiPolitburo member and party chief of Chongqing who was toppled during a spectacular murder scandal and who Xinhua said “had inappropriate sexual relations with multiple women.” Reports that the actress Zhang Ziyi was one of the mistresses were printed by some news organizations in 2012, the year of Mr. Bo’s downfall. Ms. Zhang sued an online news organization, Boxun News, for libel in a California court, and Boxun retracted the stories and issued an apology as part of a settlement.
 
PhotoLiu Zhijun.Credit Stian Lysberg Solum/Scanpix, via Associated PressLiu ZhijunRailways minister and party Central Committee member who was convicted by a court of corruption, including using his position to benefit a mistress, Ding Yuxin, and 10 others. Xinhua reported that Mr. Liu’s practices led to “an enormous amount of economic benefit” for companies controlled by Ms. Ding and her family members and resulted in “heavy losses of public property, state assets and the interests of the people.” A leaked directive from the Central Propaganda Department said: “All media are not to report or hype the news that Liu Zhijun had 18 mistresses.”
 
PhotoChen Liangyu.Credit Jason Lee/ReutersChen LiangyuPolitburo member and party chief of Shanghai, who had multiple mistresses, according to Xinhua. Two of them were long-term ones, and one had three abortions after he impregnated her.
 
PhotoXu Qiyao.Credit Xiao JieXu QiyaoHead of the Jiangsu Province Construction Bureau who had more than 140 mistresses, including a mother-daughter pair whom he nicknamed “one arrow, two birds,” according to a report by China News Agency, a state news organization.
 
PhotoLü Yingming.Credit Li WenhuiLü YingmingDeputy head of the Guangdong Province Land Resource Bureau, who had 47 mistresses, 63 apartments and accepted 2.8 billion renminbi, or more than $450 million, in bribes, according to a commentary published on the website of People’s Daily, the official party newspaper. A Xinhua report said he took $3 million in bribes and was responsible for the loss of more than $9 million in public property.Follow Edward Wong on Twitter at @comradewong. 