By ISABEL KERSHNERAPRIL 26, 2015
JERUSALEM —  An Israeli airstrike killed members of an armed squad that was preparing to bomb Israeli forces on Sunday along the Israeli-Syrian frontier in the Golan Heights, the Israeli military said.The Israeli news media said that three or four men were killed in the missile strike. A spokeswoman for the Israeli military said the armed squad had crossed from the Syrian side into the Israeli-controlled part of the contested territory, which Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 war. Israel did not immediately identify the men, and it was not clear if they were Syrians or belonged to the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah.This latest flare-up along the increasingly tense cease-fire line came after reports in the Arabic news media of Israeli airstrikes in recent days. One was reported to be against Syrian Army bases in the Qalamoun region near Syria’s border with Lebanon, where Hezbollah apparently stored long-range missiles, and another on a Hezbollah convoy that was transporting weapons.Israel has not commented on these reports over the weekend, which were by the news networks Al Jazeera and Al Arabiya. Instead it maintained a policy of ambiguity, as it has in at least half a dozen similar cases in the last couple of years, in the hope of avoiding retaliation. Hezbollah has also remained silent.AdvertisementIsrael has repeatedly stated that it has no intention of getting involved in Syria’s civil war. But in a speech earlier Sunday at military headquarters in Tel Aviv, Israel’s defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, reiterated the country’s policy of preventing the transfer of sophisticated weaponry to Hezbollah, a Shiite movement backed by Iran. Israel and Hezbollah fought a monthlong war in Lebanon in 2006.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Iran continues to try to arm Hezbollah, even now, and aspires to equip the Lebanese terrorist organization with advanced and accurate weaponry,” Mr. Yaalon said. “We will not allow the transfer of quality weapons to terrorist organizations, first among them Hezbollah, and we know how to reach it and those behind it anytime, anywhere.”AdvertisementSpecifically, Israel has vowed to prevent the transfer of ground-to-air and shore-to-ship missiles, and of Hezbollah’s longer-range ground-to-ground missiles. Israeli analysts say that the sporadic airstrikes will not halt the flow of weapons.Israel has accused Iran of helping Hezbollah set up a militant network on the Syrian side of the lines in the Golan Heights, with the aim of attacking Israeli targets. In January an Israeli airstrike in the Syrian portion of the strategic plateau killed six Hezbollah fighters, including the son of the group’s military commander, who was himself killed in 2008, and an Iranian general. Days later, in sharp retaliation, Hezbollah antitank missiles killed two Israeli soldiers as they drove in a disputed area along the Lebanese border.Other airstrikes in Syrian territory that were attributed to Israel have gone unanswered, but the once-quiet cease-fire line in the Golan Heights has been increasingly destabilized by the Syrian civil war. There have been exchanges of fire across the line and occasional bomb attacks on Israeli military patrols.Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Israeli Military Says It Killed Armed Men in Strike on Golan Heights Frontier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.