Up a dark stairwell on the sixth floor of a decrepit building near the Workers’ Stadium in Beijing is a door covered with notices. One demands payment for two years of garbage collection fees. Another from the water company says a worker could not enter the apartment to check the meter because no one was home.This is the legal residence of one of the richest women in China: Yang Xin, 33, the owner of more than $600 million in shares of Dalian Wanda Commercial Properties, the real estate division of Wang Jianlin’s Wanda Group.Ms. Yang is one of several relatives of top Chinese leaders and their business associates who own significant stakes in Wanda, according to corporate records filed with the government that were reviewed in a yearlong examination of how Mr. Wang became the richest man in Asia, with an estimated fortune of more than $35 billion.But identifying Ms. Yang and other investors in Mr. Wang’s real estate and entertainment empire was a complicated task. While the Chinese government has improved access to business records in recent years, shareholders often cloak their investments through layers of holding companies. And even when a name is disclosed, it can be meaningless without additional identifying information. Ms. Yang, who acquired the stake in Wanda a few weeks after her 26th birthday in 2008, was included on a list of shareholders in documents filed by Dalian Wanda with the State Administration of Industry and Commerce. But her name is a common one, used by both men and women. There are about 42.7 million people in China with the surname Yang, more than the population of California.It was only after locating a relative in her home village of Shigezhuang in the northern province of Hebei that her relationship with a senior Communist Party official became clear. She is the niece of Wang Zhaoguo, a member of the ruling Politburo and the vice chairman of the Chinese legislature from 2003 to 2013, according to Wang Zhao’an, a tanned and weathered cousin of the Chinese leader who serves as the village’s party chief.Ms. Yang could not be located for comment, and a reporter who visited the Wang family’s home, in an 18th-century prince’s residence in central Beijing, was turned away.The paper trail for another investor led to an aging apartment block in eastern Beijing. A pile of empty, plastic cooking-oil bottles sat outside the 12th-floor home of Pan Yongbin, 63, who emerged one afternoon more than a year ago in an undershirt and pajama bottoms.Mr. Pan was listed as sole owner of a Beijing firm that in 2007 invested about $160,000 in Dalian Hexing Investment, the main company that Wang Jianlin uses to hold shares in his businesses. That investment, which was later converted into a stake in Wanda’s real estate subsidiary, was worth more than $250 million as of Monday.Gesturing toward his left leg, Mr. Pan said he was home from work on sick leave. He acknowledged ownership of the shares but declined to elaborate. “It’s not good for me to talk right now, my health is very bad,” he said. “I can’t answer your questions.”His firm’s records, both filed with the government and in online databases open to the public, show his business address to be on the top floor of the iconic, chocolate-colored Citic International building in downtown Beijing. The elevator opens into the marbled lobby of Beijing Zhaode Investment, whose chairman is Li Botan, the son-in-law of the former Politburo Standing Committee member Jia Qinglin.Mr. Pan sits on Zhaode’s board and is an officer in several of Mr. Li’s other companies. Mr. Li did not respond to interview requests or written questions sent to his office.Some corporate records include copies of the identification cards of shareholders. But the address listed on the card for a mysterious Wanda shareholder named Jin Yi was incomplete.Ms. Jin, 50, was among a limited number of investors who were given the chance to acquire a stake in Wanda in 2009. Those shares are now worth more than $250 million.Her identification card, which included a photo of a young woman with wavy, shoulder-length hair wearing a high-collared blouse, provides an address in Liulin, a coal-mining town in China’s northern Shanxi Province. But no street name is listed, only a neighborhood. And no one with the surname Jin could be found in the official registry of residents in the neighborhood — four thick binders in a local government office with some 4,000 names.But a record search uncovered another company with a shareholder named Jin Yi using the same 18-digit identification number.That firm, a Beijing real estate company, had only two other shareholders. One is Duan Weihong, a prominent businesswoman whose company, Taihong, was the investment vehicle for shares in an insurance company held by the mother and other relatives of former Premier Wen Jiabao.The other shareholder is identified in company records as Lily Chang, the alias used by Mr. Wen’s daughter, Wen Ruchun.Ms. Wen could not be reached for comment, and messages and interview requests submitted at the company’s offices went unanswered.Ms. Duan did not respond to interview requests. Reached by telephone, her husband, Desmond Shum, said he had “no interest” in talking. “Do not call me again,” he said. Jonathan Ansfield contributed reporting and Kiki Zhao contributed research. 