By ROD NORDLANDAPRIL 27, 2015
A group of activists in Kabul staged a re-enactment on Monday of the killing of Farkhunda, a woman who was publicly beaten to death on March 19 after being falsely accused of burning a Quran.KABUL, Afghanistan —  They killed Farkhunda again, but this time there were tears in the crowd rather than cheers.Men pummeled her with rocks and paving stones, knocked her down, kicked her, ripped her head scarf off, all the while shouting religious slogans and denouncing her as a blasphemer. Blood tangled her hair and made a red mask of her bruised face.Since it was a re-enactment of the real crime, the mob of men outside a mosque in central Kabul on Monday skipped some of the specifics — the parts where the actual attackers had dragged Farkhunda behind a car, or tossed her off a bridge, among other acts. But they did douse the actress Leena Alam, who was playing Farkhunda, in a liquid meant to symbolize gasoline, and buried her in a pile of ashes.There were even real policemen present, doing what their colleagues had done on March 19 in the same place: standing aside. Some of them, however, were seen to be teary-eyed this time.AdvertisementThe killing of Farkhunda, a  27-year-old Islamic law  student who was falsely accused of burning a Quran, has sparked numerous protests and galvanized women’s activists more than almost anything that has happened since the days of the Taliban’s public executions of women. In addition, the attorney general’s office announced that formal charges were brought Monday against 49 participants in the killing, 19 of them police officers accused of failing to try to stop it.AdvertisementThe attack, as well as the re-enactment on Monday that was commissioned by a coalition of rights groups, took place at the Shah-do Shamshira Mosque, famous for its flocks of pigeons and legions of pigeon-feeders, and the adjoining shrine of the same name, which means the King of the Two Swords. Both events were documented by hundreds of bystanders with their cellphones; after the real killing, many of those videos were posted on YouTube and social media sites by attackers who were proud of their roles in the crime.That all changed when the authorities admitted that no Quran had been burned, and that Farkhunda had actually been a devout Muslim who got into an argument with a vendor at the shrine because she viewed his sale of good-luck charms to be un-Islamic. That vendor, Zainuddin, started the accusations against her, and he was among the first to be arrested.Since then, Farkhunda herself has been transformed — once a pariah, now a martyr — and many advocates for women’s rights say they have been energized by how many men have been drawn to their cause since her death.KabulRiverSite of Shrineand re-enactmentKabulLogarRiverAFGHANISTAN10 MilesAPRIL 27, 2015
“We don’t want this case to be forgotten,” said Alema, a member of the Justice for Farkhunda Committee, who like many Afghans uses only one name. “We want Farkhunda’s name to stay alive in history,” she added.Mohammad Sajid Arghandaiwal, another activist, said: “Farkhunda has sacrificed her life for the rights of other women. It’s the start of a revolution.”Monday’s re-enactment was conceived by the Justice for Farkhunda Committee as a way to keep up pressure on the government, as activists worried that more than a month after the episode, no formal charges had yet been filed. A few hours after the re-enactment, the authorities announced the charges against 49 suspects.“There are rays of hope in this case,” said Ramin Anwari, one of the organizers. “But why has it taken them this long to start court proceedings?”AdvertisementOn the morning of the re-enactment, Ms. Alam woke up with butterflies in her stomach. Though she is an experienced film actor, she said it was proving a tough role. For one thing, Ms. Alam had been among the mourners at Farkhunda’s burial, and it was the first real dead body she had ever seen, she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then, Ms. Alam prepared for the role by watching as many of the videos of the actual attack as she could, and what really struck her was how Farkhunda had never wept throughout the sustained abuse. “I kept thinking how powerful and brave she was, and she never ever cried, bearing all that pain, with so many attacks,” Ms. Alam said.She and her fellow actors agreed then that there would be no crying during their performance, but in rehearsals, they all kept bursting into tears. “The workers, my director, everyone, we were just mental,” she said. One person would cry, then she did. “I kept saying, ‘Don’t make me weak, I don’t want to cry.’ ”During the re-enactment, some of her fellow actors got a little too into character, she said, and though their rocks and clubs were made of sponge or foam, her face began to sting from all the blows, and she came away a bit bruised. Spectators often gasped because it seemed so real, and even some of the policemen were seen to be weeping.“Honestly, I could not stop my tears myself,” Mr. Anwari said, even though he had already seen rehearsals. “The crowd was really emotional, people around me were crying, they were literally shaking they were so moved.”Like many activists, Mr. Anwari expressed suspicion about the government’s intention in prosecuting Farkhunda’s abusers. “We want the police to reveal the names of those arrested, and they don’t want to,” he said.At the news conference Monday to announce the charges, an emissary from the attorney general suddenly rushed in and was seen writing a quick note to the agency’s spokesman that read, in Dari, “Don’t give out their names.”Asked why not, Baseer Azizi, a spokesman for the attorney general, said the Afghan Constitution prohibited the release of suspects’ names — although that has not deterred the authorities in many previous cases.Some of the names that surface in Farkhunda’s case are likely to be controversial, like that of Sharaf Baghlani, who is said to have taken to Facebook right after the attack to boast of his role in it, and described himself as an official of the National Directorate of Security, the Afghan intelligence service. “I am proud to say I am the one who personally killed Farkhunda,” he reportedly wrote, according to those who saw the posting before it was taken down.AdvertisementThe directorate has disavowed Mr. Baghlani, despite pictures showing him brandishing the agency’s standard-issue handgun under his dark suit jacket. Later, he posted on Facebook that someone had previously hacked his Facebook account and that he had not posted the message.Mr. Baghlani admitted, however, that he had been charged in Farkhunda’s murder.“It would be unjust to give me more than two years in prison, because I only kicked her two times,” he wrote in a post made while he was supposedly in prison.At the end of the re-enactment, Ms. Alam was buried in ashes to symbolize how Farkhunda had died, as a loudspeaker blared out an actual audio recording of the attack. She rose again to shake off the ashes, joining with a group of other women who reduced the men around them to shame.Then Ms. Alam did what she had tried so hard not to do. “I couldn’t help it,” she said. She burst into tears, crying inconsolably as the company helped her down from the stage.Jawad Sukhanyar and Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on April 28, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Tears Replace Cheers in Re-enactment of Afghan Woman’s Killing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.