AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew RothMOSCOW — The government’s plan was simple enough: Rid Moscow of swastikas or any other symbol of Nazism before Victory Day, the celebration of the Soviet Union’s defeat of Germany and the most important political holiday in Russia.But in the frenzy to comply, bookstores aiming to please the censor found an unlikely victim: “Maus,” the Pulitzer Prize-winning graphic novel about a Jewish family during the Holocaust. Muscovites discovered this week that the book, which bears a swastika on its cover, had been quietly stripped from the shelves of the largest bookstores across the Russian capital.The work of the cartoonist Art Spiegelman, the novel portrays Jews as mice and Germans as cats in an anti-fascist narrative about the horrors of Nazism and the concentration camps. But with concern over the dangers of fascism in Russia on the rise, the booksellers appeared to decide it was better to be safe than sorry.“They just got scared that someone would see the swastika on the cover,” said Varvara Gornostaeva, the chief editor of Corpus, the publishing house that released the Russian-language edition of the graphic novel more than a year ago. “But the swastika there is just a caricature. It does not fall afoul of the law banning fascist symbols.”City officials said last week that raids were planned before Victory Day to find objects with swastikas and other symbols that “offend people’s religious feeling or question the national dignity of peoples,” both criminal offenses in Russia.The Respublika bookstore chain confirmed on Monday that it had taken the book off its shelves because it was concerned about the raids and uncertain about the legality of selling the book.Inspectors seeking “book covers with Nazi symbols, in particular drawings of the swastika (the book ‘Maus’) led the company to consult with lawyers about the legitimacy of selling this book in our chain,” Anastasia Maksimenko, a representative for Respublika, said in an email. “After the lawyers conclude, a decision will be made about whether to return (or not to return) this book’s position to our bookshelves.”Ms. Maksimenko did not say when that decision would be made.President Vladimir V. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, responded to the controversy on Monday. He reaffirmed that fascist symbols were unacceptable, but appeared to be trying to stop a witch hunt.“I have no exact position on this, but it’s clear that everything needs to be within measure,” Mr. Peskov said.The controversy drove Boris Kupriyanov, the co-owner of the independent bookstore Falanster, to quote a 19th-century Russian fabulist, Ivan Krylov.“An obliging fool is more dangerous than a foe,” Mr. Kupriyanov said. “If in fact someone made a decision to ban the book for sale, to ask bookstores to put away those books, then he is obviously an idiot. Or he is an enemy of the ruling regime, because he is trying to set them up and make them look like fools.”Advertisement