By EDWARD WONGAPRIL 27, 2015
BEIJING — A women’s rights activist, who was among five female advocates whose detention for over a month led to a global outcry, was harshly interrogated for eight hours by police officers in her hometown, Hangzhou, on Friday, her husband said on Monday.The interrogation showed the continued official pressure on the women despite their release from jail this month.The woman, Wu Rongrong, 30, was “emotionally broken” after returning from the interrogation session, said Mr. Sun, her husband, who agreed to speak on the telephone on the condition that only his surname be used because of hostility from the authorities.He said the police told Ms. Wu after releasing her on Friday that they would interrogate her again, but they have not yet done so.AdvertisementMs. Wu did not answer her telephone on Monday. She posted a message after her interrogation on WeChat, the popular social networking app, saying that “my spirit is on the verge of collapse.”AdvertisementMr. Sun confirmed she had written that and said the police, among other things, had used “foul language” that had upset Ms. Wu during the interrogation.The continuing police pressure on Ms. Wu confirmed what lawyers had said when the five women were released on April 13 — that they are still considered suspects by the authorities and that the police are still continuing their investigations into the civic activities of the women.At the time, the police had released the women on bail, and their lawyers had said the women could be called back at any time to be interrogated.Mr. Sun also said that the police officers holding Ms. Wu and the other four women in a jail in western Beijing had threatened at one point to throw her in a men’s jail cell to have her gang-raped, according to an account from his wife.The Beijing police had also told her that her 4-year-old son’s future would be negatively affected by her detention, Mr. Sun said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A person answering the telephone at the Haidian Detention Center, where the women were held, declined to comment, as did a man at the Beijing Public Security Bureau’s propaganda office.Ms. Wu and her friends and colleagues in a women’s rights movement in China were detained in early March as they prepared to start a nationwide protest campaign against sexual harassment on public transportation.The campaign was supposed to have occurred around March 8, International Women’s Day, but it never took place. The detention of the women was emblematic of a wider crackdown on civic action and forms of civil society that Chinese officials under Xi Jinping, the head of the Communist Party and the country’s president, have been carrying out for more than two years.AdvertisementThe women were first detained in the cities of Beijing, Guangzhou, and Hangzhou, but all of them ended up in a detention center in the Haidian district in Beijing.Political leaders from around the world denounced China for its harsh treatment of the women. In the United States, those figures included Hillary Rodham Clinton; Secretary of State John Kerry; and Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations.The women detained with Ms. Wu were Li Tingting, 25; Zheng Churan, 25; Wei Tingting, 26; and Wang Man, 33. Some people now call them the “Feminist Five.” Their colleagues say they have been leaders in a new generation of women’s rights activists in China.Vanessa Piao contributed research.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.