AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — Prime Minister Lee Wan-koo of South Korea formally stepped down on Monday, apologizing over a scandal in which he was accused of taking an illegal cash gift from a businessman.Mr. Lee is the second prime minister to resign under President Park Geun-hye. In South Korea, the prime minister’s post is largely a ceremonial job, with the administrative power concentrated in the president. But the minister is the No. 2 official in the government hierarchy, and his stepping down in disgrace reflects poorly on the president.“I am deeply sorry to the people for causing trouble over the current situation,” Mr. Lee said in a brief farewell speech to his staff on Monday.Mr. Lee, who took office on Feb. 17, was one of the shortest-serving prime ministers in South Korean history. He now faces a possible summons from prosecutors who want to question him over the bribery allegation.Mr. Lee offered to step down last Tuesday after an allegation emerged that he had taken 30 million won, or almost $28,000, in illegal cash donations from a South Korean businessman in 2013. Mr. Lee denied that he had received the money and that he had ties to the businessman, Sung Wan-jong, but calls for his resignation mounted.Ms. Park accepted his resignation on Monday, shortly after returning from a trip to South America.Mr. Sung, who had faced arrest on corruption charges, hanged himself from a tree on April 9. But hours earlier, he had given a telephone interview to a South Korean newspaper. In the interview and in a handwritten memo found with his body, Mr. Sung detailed illegal cash gifts that he said he had given to Mr. Lee and other important political allies of Ms. Park’s, including both of her former chiefs of staff.Prosecutors began an investigation, even as the rival political parties campaigned in an election Wednesday for four vacant parliamentary seats.Ms. Park’s approval ratings fell after more than 300 people were killed in a ferry sinking last April. Mr. Lee’s predecessor, Chung Hong-won, resigned after the disaster.Advertisement