This June, for the first time, Hong Kong’s largest student organization may not attend an annual candlelight vigil marking the 1989 military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing.The Hong Kong Federation of Students, a founding member of the alliance that has organized the annual vigils in Victoria Park and a prominent force in last year’s street protests for more-democratic elections in Hong Kong, released a statement on Monday saying that the university student unions it represents could not reach a consensus on the group’s participation. “We have decided not to attend the Alliance’s events as the Federation of Students, though individual university student unions may still attend,” it said, referring to the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China.“Many of us dislike the vigil’s underlying notion that we’re all Chinese,” explained Sunny Cheung, a 19-year-old leader of the student union of Hong Kong Baptist University, which had voted against attending the vigil. “We want to build a democratic Hong Kong. It’s not our responsibility to build a democratic China.” Albert Ho, chairman of the Hong Kong Alliance, said the decision would not hurt the vigil. “It’s a shame that the student federation won’t stand alongside us on the stage this year,” he said, “but it’s not hard to find other young people.” He said of student dissenters: “Some of them are facing an identity crisis. They are questioning whether they are Chinese. Some even think Hong Kong’s fight for democracy should be separate from that of the mainland.”Analysts say the federation’s decision to end a quarter century of support for the vigil is the latest sign of a drift of many of Hong Kong’s young democrats away from China.“They now tend to see the Hong Kong democratic movement and Chinese democratic movement as two separate movements,” said Hung Ho-fung, an associate professor of sociology at Johns Hopkins University. Some, he added, fear that “a democratic, populist and nationalist China will be a bigger threat to Hong Kong’s autonomy.”The former British colony of Hong Kong returned to Chinese rule in 1997 under the principle of “one country, two systems” and with the promise of a “high degree of autonomy.” It also enjoys civil liberties not available on the Chinese mainland, including freedom of speech and assembly.Every June 4 since 1989, thousands of people have gathered in Victoria Park, often braving the sweltering heat with a white candle in their hands, to mourn the hundreds, possibly thousands, of civilians who were killed when troops were deployed to end the protests in Beijing.The annual vigil has long been seen as a symbol of a continuity between the democracy protests on Tiananmen Square and those in Hong Kong. Last year, Alex Chow, the secretary general of the Federation of Students, took the stage alongside local and mainland Chinese human rights advocates, vowing to carry forward the spirit of the Tiananmen Square struggle for democracy in Hong Kong.Andrew To, who was a student federation leader in 1989, said he was “really disappointed” to see its departure from the vigil.“June 4 is our collective memory, and it marks the dawn of Hong Kong’s democratic awakening,” he said on Tuesday by telephone from Washington. During the spring of 1989, the federation sent representatives, including Mr. To, to Beijing to deliver money, tents and sleeping bags for the Tiananmen Square protesters.Mr. To said that some young people, by advocating independence for Hong Kong, have “fallen for the Chinese Communist Party’s trap.”“Beijing can have the excuse not to allow democracy in Hong Kong,” he said, “because you’re fighting for independence, not for democracy.”In 2013 and 2014, many of those who ardently defy Beijing’s rule over Hong Kong could be found on June 4 on the other side of Hong Kong’s harbor in Tsim Sha Tsui, at a separate rally that advocated “localism,” a loosely defined idea that seeks to highlight — and preserve — the social and cultural distinctions between mainland Chinese and the people of Hong Kong. Instead of lighting candles and singing songs, participants in this alternative rally burned the flag of the Chinese Communist Party and waved the British colonial flag.Professor Hung said that proponents of localism were opposed to what he called “the Chinese nationalist ideology entrenched in Hong Kong’s democratic movement.”Many young people, he said, “fear that the Chinese nationalist mass will not favor a localist identity and local autonomy of Hong Kong, just like a majority of Chinese public opinion is against Taiwan independence.”There is still a possibility that a reconstituted Federation of Students will reconsider its decision not to attend the vigil.The one “no” vote preventing the consensus within the 57-year-old federation came from the student union of Hong Kong Baptist University. But that university’s student union has now voted to leave the federation, as have the University of Hong Kong and Polytechnic University.They say they were dissatisfied with the federation’s leadership during last year’s Umbrella Movement protests for more popular participation in the selection of Hong Kong’s leader, the chief executive. The student-led protests were troubled by internal divisions over tactics and the level of confrontation with the authorities.Wong Ka-fai, deputy secretary general of the Federation of Students, said the organization would stay away from the June 4 vigil unless the decision is overturned. This is technically a possibility, if a new vote is taken without Hong Kong Baptist University.Mr. Wong, who took part in the vigil last year and would like to again, said he would refrain from going this year to be in line with the federation’s decision, although he does not consider Hong Kong’s democracy campaign as separate from that of mainland China’s.“It’s important to unite with those who are similarly under Chinese Communist Party suppression, like other human rights activists on the mainland,” he said, citing the villagers of Wukan, in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong, whose rebellion against official corruption won them promises of free elections and an investigation of questionable land deals. “We can’t afford to be parochial in our fight against the Chinese Communist Party.”Follow Alan Wong on Twitter at @alanwongw. 