AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld DavisWASHINGTON — When President Obama visited Tokyo last year, a dinner that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan had planned as a bonding session at a legendary sushi restaurant instead became a forum for haggling over tariff rates under a sweeping Pacific Rim trade agreement.In the end, there was no deal.On Tuesday, Mr. Obama and Mr. Abe emerged from an Oval Office meeting similarly empty-handed, with unsettled differences between the United States and Japan over automobiles and agriculture that have hindered negotiations over the broader Trans-Pacific Partnership with 10 other countries. But this time, they reported substantial progress in their negotiations, and in a visit that spotlighted a warmer rapport, made a unified call for a quick resolution to the trade pact that faces steep political opposition in both nations. “The politics around trade can be hard in both our countries, but I know that Prime Minister Abe, like me, is deeply committed to getting this done, and I’m confident we will,” Mr. Obama said during a news conference with Mr. Abe in the Rose Garden. The Trans-Pacific Partnership “will help level the playing field,” Mr. Obama said, defending an agreement many Democrats have condemned as unfair and harmful to American workers. “It will be good for the workers of both our countries. And moreover, T.P.P. will have strong protections for workers and the environment and help us set high standards for trade in the 21st century.”Mr. Abe’s visit was an opportunity for Mr. Obama to spotlight his pivot toward Asia and strengthen military and economic ties between the United States and Japan at a time when both countries are concerned with the rising influence of China.The two leaders cemented new military guidelines that will allow Japan’s military — now limited to defending its own country — to take action when the United States or another nation it is defending is threatened. “We don’t think that a strong U.S.-Japan alliance should be seen as a provocation,” Mr. Obama said. “It should be seen as a continuation of the important work that we’ve done to ensure that you have a stable area.”“As I’ve said before, we welcome China’s peaceful rise,” Mr. Obama continued, but he also said China has been “flexing their muscles” rather than seeking normal resolutions to territorial claims in East Asia and Southeast Asia. “I don’t want to minimize, though, the fact that there are some real tensions that have arisen with China around its approach to maritime issues and its claims,” he said.Both leaders pointed to Mr. Abe’s state visit — the first by a Japanese prime minister in nine years — as a historical milestone that reflected the power of reconciliation decades after a painful era of hostility in a year that marks the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II.Mr. Obama interrupted his day on Monday afternoon to take Mr. Abe on an unscheduled visit to the Lincoln Memorial, and Mr. Abe also went to the Holocaust Museum and Arlington National Cemetery.“Your gesture is a powerful reminder that the past can be overcome, former adversaries can become the closest of allies, and that nations can build a future together,” Mr. Obama told Mr. Abe of his stop at Arlington.The Japanese prime minister called their time at the Lincoln Memorial “an extraordinary memory to be cherished.”“Our alliance is back on track, and it is even stronger,” Mr. Abe said. Later, at a state dinner, Mr. Obama and Mr. Abe stood near tables festooned with elaborate arrangements of orchids and cherry blossoms to toast their alliance with sake from Mr. Abe’s home prefecture, Yamaguchi. The president recited a haiku celebrating the friendship between the United States and Japan, and the prime minister declared himself a die-hard fan of the dark American political drama “House of Cards.”Mr. Obama said that Mr. Abe on Wednesday would “carry our partnership forward” when he becomes the first Japanese prime minister to address a joint meeting of Congress, following in the footsteps of his grandfather Nobusuke Kishi, who addressed the House as prime minister in 1957.“I would like to send out a strong message that both Japan and the U.S., which once fought with each other, now achieved reconciliation,” Mr. Abe said of his speech.At the news conference earlier, Mr. Obama did not ignore the substantial gaps that have divided the United States and Japan on trade, making a reference to American automobile makers’ longstanding complaint that the Japanese market is essentially closed to their products. “There are many Japanese cars in America,” the president said. “I want to see more American cars in Japan as well.”But both men played down their differences, which also include Japan’s refusal to eliminate tariffs on agricultural products including rice, wheat, pork, beef and dairy. Instead, Mr. Obama and Mr. Abe discussed how as the two largest players by far in the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, they could bring the other countries around to a final agreement.“We welcome the fact that significant progress was made,” in United States-Japan negotiations, Mr. Abe said. “We will continue to cooperate to lead the T.P.P. talks to its last phase.”If Mr. Abe’s visit carried powerful historic significance and the promise of closer ties with the United States, it was also plagued by longstanding controversy. Korean-Americans and several members of Congress pressed him to use the occasion to make an official apology for the use of so-called comfort women in wartime military brothels.Mr. Abe did not offer one.“I am deeply pained to think about the comfort women who experienced immeasurable pain and suffering as a result of victimization due to human trafficking,” Mr. Abe said in response to a question about whether he would apologize. “This is a feeling that I share equally with my predecessors.”He said he stood behind previous government apologies for the issue, and noted that Japan had provided $12 million last year for international efforts to eliminate sexual violence during conflicts and would provide $22 million more this year.That fell far short of the personal apology activists have sought. In a statement, Korean American Civic Empowerment, a nonprofit group, called Mr. Abe’s words “gravely offensive to the victims of the Japanese comfort women system.”The group called the previous apologies to which Mr. Abe referred “not clear” and “not acceptable to the victims,” and said it was enraged by the prime minister’s mention of how much money he has devoted to the issue. “The comfort women survivors are only asking sincere acknowledgment and apology, not money,” the statement said.Advertisement