AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneForensics experts have identified remains of 296 of the 298 people killed in the attack that downed a Malaysia Airlines jetliner last July in eastern Ukraine, the foreign minister of the Netherlands said Tuesday.The minister, Bert Koenders, whose country lost the most people among the nationalities on the Amsterdam-to-Kuala Lumpur flight, also said investigators were making good progress on other aspects of the inquiry into the downing of the jetliner, which was designated Flight MH-17 and was apparently was felled by a missile launched from eastern Ukraine.NATO officials have said Russian-backed Ukrainian insurgents firing a Russian-made missile were responsible for downing the jetliner on July 17. Russia has blamed Ukrainian forces and denied responsibility in the disaster, which caused shock around the world and played a role in the worsening of relations between Russia and the West over the past year.Mr. Koenders said the investigators expect to complete their report by October. Even without knowing who was responsible for the disaster, he said, officials from the Netherlands had begun conferring with counterparts in other countries about how any possible suspects could be prosecuted.“For us obviously, and for our colleagues in Malaysia, Ukraine, and in other countries — the grieving nations as they are sometimes called — it’s important that those people who are responsible for this are coming in front of a judge,” Mr. Koenders said in an interview at The New York Times building while attending a Non-Proliferation Treaty conference at the United Nations.A Malaysia Airlines flight with nearly 300 people aboard crashed in eastern Ukraine near the Russian border on July 17.“This is of course a challenge, it depends on the outcome of the investigation and the legal process,” Mr. Koenders said. “But we are now in the process of talking with other countries to ensure that there is a legal process.”A Dutch-led team of investigators was repeatedly blocked in attempts to conduct a methodical inquiry at the crash site, in a bucolic stretch of eastern Ukraine not far from the Russian border, partly because the area was a combat zone.But in recent weeks, the team’s ability to to travel around the area has increased significantly, Mr. Koenders said, and the issue “has more or less been solved.”Mr. Koenders attributed the improved access partly to a shifting in the front in the conflict between the Ukrainian rebels and the government in Kiev. This shift, he said, “added to more possibilities to do the rest of the work.”The discovery and identification of human remains scattered over the crash zone, which investigators initially feared would present big difficulties as time dragged on, has nearly been completed.Mr. Koenders said “we still have two — from all the people who were in the plane — two who are not yet identified in terms of their DNA,” and that both were believed to be Dutch.In a statement posted on the Dutch government website last Thursday, Mr. Koenders said a 20-member repatriation team at the crash site had been able to “work without disruption” and expected to remain on the scene for several weeks.videoAdvertisement