AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick LymanOPATOVAC, Croatia — The migrants coming into Europe through the Western Balkans in recent months have been resourceful and adaptable enough to slip around unfriendly police officers, raging rivers, hostile borders and razor-wire fences. But there is one thing they cannot evade, and that is the looming winter.Perhaps as soon as late October and certainly by the end of November, the season will shift in the Balkans. Finger-numbing rain, a fall fixture, will descend into snow and freezing winds, complicating and even endangering the arduous journeys starting from Syria and other war-torn nations into the heart of Western Europe.An unofficial humanitarian corridor, which had been operating for more than a month with the unacknowledged cooperation of the nations involved, had kept asylum-seekers steadily moving through the region, and the summer’s squalid backups at blocked borders had nearly vanished.But the situation was thrown into flux again with the announcement by Hungary on Friday that it intended to close its border with Croatia.As long as the migrants kept moving, the countries along the route were able to deal with the numbers passing through, refugee officials and aid workers said. And as long as there was a steady flow, the opportunity for tragedy from the impending cold was lessened.But with fall winds carrying the first hints of frost, and the situation along the borders unresolved, the migrants, aid workers and government officials are anxiously looking ahead. If the numbers increase drastically or, worse, if there are more border closings, there would be an almost immediate backup that would quickly repopulate border camps within a week — some of them open-air, others consisting mostly of unheated tents.“For now, it is O.K.,” said Uros Jovanovic, the manager of a new processing center being set up in a former psychiatric hospital near the Serbo-Croatian border. “But in 20 days or so, it is going to be very cold here.”The looming threats have kept migrants on the move, hurrying from border to border to try to reach their destinations — most often Germany and Sweden.In recent months European nations have worked to block the main route taken by migrants fleeing war and upheaval.“I am scared, everybody is scared,” said Ali Lolo, 35, a clothing store manager from Damascus, Syria, who waited with his family last week beneath a weather-rippled tarp at the encampment here, where few tents are heated. “We are worried they will close the border, but we are also worried about winter. We must get where we are going before the snows fall.”In previous years, the flow of migrants into Europe slowed to a trickle as winter approached, largely because the Mediterranean becomes especially treacherous in cold months. But with more migrants avoiding the once-popular sea route from Libya to southern Italy in favor of a shorter, but still potentially dangerous, sea crossing from Turkey to the nearest Greek islands, the numbers flowing into Europe continue in the thousands, with a record 5,800 registered in just one day this month on Serbia’s border with Macedonia.“The fear of borders closing and winter approaching is just making for a rush, rush, rush,” said Mette Petersen, regional spokesman for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.Governments across the region are struggling to find vacant buildings, like military barracks or schools, which can be quickly converted into heated housing for migrants, should the path forward become blocked. And aid workers are also trying to assemble a stockpile of blankets, heavy coats and winterized tents, just in case the worst happens.Hungary completed a 108-mile razor-wire fence along its border with Serbia last month, following a free-for-all this summer that saw squalid encampments sprout across the region. After weeks of tension and at least one violent skirmish, the migrants simply shifted their path through neighboring Croatia.Because Austria and Germany continued to accept the migrants, Hungary agreed to transfer those crossing its border with Croatia directly into Austria by train. But Hungary also finished construction of a razor-wire fence along its border with Croatia, and now has closed that route to migrants, as well.On Sunday, trains were carrying migrants through Croatia and dropping them off at its northwestern border with Slovenia. From there, they were being bused to the Austrian border.An estimated 3,300 migrants have entered Slovenia that way since Hungary closed its border at midnight Friday. About 2,000 had entered Austria by evening on Sunday.Migration officials warned that it might be a matter of days before the system collapses under the strain, as the migrants keep crossing from Turkey into Greece and through the Balkans, many saying they want to get ahead of the winter and the possibility of further border closings. Slovenia has estimated it can manage things if Croatia admits up to 2,500 migrants a day. But Croatia has asked Slovenia to increase its daily admittance and take in at least 5,000 migrants. Austria, Slovenia’s northern neighbor, insists it cannot handle more than 1,500 people entering the country daily.“We are facing huge demands from Croatia and severe limitations from Austria,” said Bostjan Sefic, a senior official at the Slovenian interior ministry.The only way that the human flow will run smoothly through Slovenia is if authorities are able to “balance the number of migrants entering the country with the number of those leaving it,” Mr. Sefic said.In Austria, where thousands are requesting asylum while the majority press on toward Germany, officials at the largest reception camp outside Vienna hope to have all of the tents down by the end of the month and shift migrants into heated containers and other buildings.The latest E.U. proposal addresses just a fraction of a human crisis numbering in the millions.“We were freezing,” said Fadi, 42, a former hair salon owner who arrived at the camp on Oct. 5, and who declined to give his last name to protect his family in Syria. “We didn’t sleep. We did exercises all night long to keep warm.”So far the coldest weather in central Croatia has been 42 degrees Fahrenheit, or nearly 6 degrees Celsius, last Monday night, but the long-range forecast calls for temperatures to fall below freezing this week.With the open borders, the system seemed to be working.“You should have seen it here a few weeks ago,” said Ivana Marisavyevic, the Red Cross coordinator in the camp beside the main train station in Belgrade, Serbia. “There were many, many times more people here than there are now. Now, most just stay for a few hours before catching the next bus.”Indeed, only a few dozen small tents filled the muddy camp.“It used to take two or three days to be registered at the Macedonian border, but now it’s less than a day,” said Jasmina Selmanovic, a volunteer at the Serbian camp.In Principovac, a Serbian border town, workers are rushing to transform a long disused psychiatric hospital in the first of what the country hopes will be several heated facilities.“We got the electricity going, and in a few days we should have water, too, and heat by the end of the week,” said Mr. Jovanovic, the manager of the processing center. “At the moment, things are fine. But nobody knows what might happen.”The biggest unknown of all is how harsh the winter will be.“Maybe it will be a mild winter,” said Aleksandar Vulin, the minister of Labor, Employment, Veterans and Social Policy in Serbia. “Who knows what will happen?”Barbara Surk contributed reporting from Ljubljana, Slovenia, Kimberly Bradley from Traiskirchen, Austria, and Joe Orovic from Cakovec, Croatia.Advertisement