AdvertisementSupported byOur Man in Tehran - Episode 6As told to Thomas ErdbrinkIn the second of two episodes examining the criminal justice system in Iran, Thomas Erdbrink discusses the power of forgiveness with Sharmin Meymandinejad, a social activist, and Safar Angouti, the condemned killer Mr. Meymandinejad helped save from execution.Mr. Meymandinejad answered selected readers’ questions. “I must say that my answers to the following questions are all from the point of view of a social activist who believes his responsibility is to help the people and must avoid any step that might mislead him from his main goal,” he said.To what degree did your Muslim faith play a role in your decision to ask for Angouti’s pardon? —  Mitchell Glixon, New York, N.Y., and Mitchglixon247 on InstagramThis is a complicated issue and one who participates in similar activities might have a combination of different religious, humanitarian, social, and personal motivations. This is how it works for me. What makes me happy now is the fact that Safar is alive. He is alive and breathing somewhere trying to make a life for himself.Since we met Thomas Erdbrink to talk about Safar’s story, my organization has succeeded in saving eight or nine more people from the gallows.If forgiveness from the family of the victim is all that is required to spare the perpetrator from the gallows, how will justice be served to protect the moral integrity of the society? — Jonathan Mom, Singapore, and @thejonegg on Twitter.I cannot explain anything about these laws; I did not write them. It is for the lawyers to comment on. As a social activist, I just try to do my best under the current conditions.Would you prefer that forgiven murderers are set free, as they are now, or are simply given a life sentence in jail rather than a death sentence? — Jason Feifer, Brooklyn, N.Y., and @heyfeifer on Twitter.Based on the current law, everything rests with the victim’s family. I really do not know what justice can be if we want to replace it with anything else. Unfortunately, I am not in a position to answer this question.This sounds a lot like paying/bribing your way out of punishment. Poor victims are easier to buy off while wealthy criminals can afford to pay. How is this not a corruption of justice? P.S. We have the same in America, but it is obscured by “justice.” —  Kevin Oeters, New York, N.Y.Yes, I agree. Based on my experience, I have seen that poor families sitting at the negotiating table become more flexible when the discussion comes to money. As time passes from the day that they have lost their loved ones, the victim’s family start to think that they can get some money. But those families with lots of money usually do not let us in the front door. It is too difficult to start talking with them about forgiveness and to negotiate with them. I accept that this is an inconvenience, but for now we should deal with it.I understand the desire to forgive by the victim’s family. But doesn’t the state have any interest in punishment or protecting the wider community from the perpetrator? What is the average time from trial until conviction? —  Rebecca Gaudet, Coronado, Calif.All I can say is that this is the general outcome of the society, and for now it is working to some extent. It is the society that makes decisions for itself. About the statistic of the convictions and the average time interval, I really have no idea. I am not dealing with judiciary statistics.What changes would Mr. Meymandinejad like to see made to the Iranian criminal justice system, if any? Does he generally approve of the eye-for-an-eye system? What are his thoughts on other criminal justice systems — what does he admire/disapprove of and why? —  Jessica Gonzales, Brooklyn, N.Y.Answering all parts of this question together, I think that one can conclude based on my work and the work of my organization where we stand on the issues and how we think about them. If I want to change anything about the law, I will use the available Islamic rules, like paying so-called blood money, which is based on the law of blood for blood, which is not so strict. I am not a lawyer though.Date of birth: March 31, 1963Hometown: TehranEducation: B.A. in dramatic arts and M.A. in dramatic literature from the University of Tehran.Employment: Theater director, playwright and founder of the Society of Students Against Poverty — the Imam Ali Society.Life experiences: I have written and directed plays and scripts for national television. I have also taught acting courses at the University of Tehran’s college of fine arts, and theater-therapy classes at Alzahra University. In 1999 I founded the first nonpartisan, student N.G.O. in Iran. The organization aims to resolve social problems, especially threats to children like child labor and children’s addiction.How do you describe yourself? I find myself to be too sensitive. I would like it if I were a bit more indifferent to what was happening around me.Are you active on the Internet? The Imam Ali Society has a website. I just have a Facebook page to be connected to friends.What do you hope for the future? As long as I have plans, I think that I can manage the future.What are your hobbies? I like writing and playing computer games. The more stupid the game is, the better. I need these games to distract me from the hell this world can be.Have you ever traveled outside Iran? Where? What did you think? I have traveled to the United Arab Emirates, the U.S., Saudi Arabia and Iraq. I found Iraq to be very similar to Iran. The U.A.E., I will never go back, not even for a visit. I did not like it at all. I think I could live in a place like Saudi Arabia. But I cannot live in a country like America because the people do not seem very interested in solving other people’s problems, and everyone was just busy trying to make money and upgrade their car to a newer model.What is your most important memory? I raised an orphan girl for about 10 years, since 2004. Around her 18th birthday, in 2010, we found out that she had been raped as a child. I learned that she wanted to commit suicide. She wanted to jump from a mountain, so I went to the mountain with her. I told her that if she jumped I would jump, too. She did not.Together, we have established now 30 houses in poor neighborhoods for vulnerable children like she was. This girl, now 22, has a son of her own named Sharmin.What do you love most? My wife. I love her. Without her, I would be just a crazy man with thousands of irrelevant ideas and dreams. She took me seriously. She took my dreams seriously.Why is forgiveness important? Forgiveness is the light in which all the beauties of the world can be seen. No one can justify forgiveness with worldly reasons. It is a spiritual power that leads one from difficulties to a better place.Date of birth: Sept. 19, 1989Hometown: Karaj, Iran, northwest of TehranEducation: I left school after my junior year of high school.Employment: Construction worker.Life experiences: The greatest event of my life was my release from prison and receiving a pardon before I was to be executed.How do you describe yourself? I love working. I love my family. I feel I am in debt to all the people who helped win my release.Are you active on the Internet? No, I am not. I have access to the Internet, but I do not use it.What do you hope for the future? We hold our future in our own hands. We can build it; otherwise everything will be the same. Nothing changes until we change it ourselves.What are your hobbies? After work, I say my prayers and sit beside the window. I try calling my girlfriend and sending her messages, but she does not answer me. This is all I do these days.Have you ever traveled outside Iran? Where? What did you think? I have never left Iran.What is your most important memory? My best memory is from the day that my girlfriend, her mother and I went to a holy shrine together. Our love was divine, and everything was great. But I have not seen her since that day. She stopped seeing me and stopped answering my phone calls.What do you love most? I love my family.What is injustice? Injustice is to steal people’s property and money; to be cruel to the people. I do not think that what happened to me was injustice. At first it was very difficult. I had tough days. But I found God in prison. I had enough time to think about everything there.Why is forgiveness important? Forgiveness leads to forgiveness. If I forgive the people who have not been fair to me today, then there will be another day when someone forgives me for something bad that I have done.Follow Thomas Erdbrink on Facebook and Twitter @ThomasErdbrink, and for new episodes of “Our Man in Tehran,” you can like The New York Times on Facebook and follow @nytimesworld on Twitter.Advertisement