In her debut feature-length documentary, Vanessa Hope has taken on one of the most widely discussed topics of our time: United States-China relations.The result is “All Eyes and Ears,” which examines the shifting dynamics between the countries largely through the experiences of a former ambassador, Jon M. Huntsman Jr., through his posting in Beijing from 2009 to 2011 into his campaign for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination.The documentary had its premiere last week at the Tribeca Film Festival in New York, where Mr. Huntsman spoke of his decision to participate in the film. “I thought bringing a little more transparency to the relationship is probably a good thing,” he said, “because it’s an abstruse relationship that oftentimes falls victim to cheap sound bites and extreme rhetoric.” The documentary’s scenes of high-level diplomacy are grounded in the personal stories of two other characters: Gracie Mei Huntsman, Mr. Huntsman’s adopted daughter who was born in China, and Chen Guangcheng, the Chinese lawyer and rights activist who escaped from house arrest in 2012, took refuge in the American Embassy and now lives in the United States. In an interview, Ms. Hope discussed why she made the film, and the challenges of working in China:What drew you to the topic of United States-China relations?There is a tremendous and robust field of China experts who are constantly debating these issues, but people who are new to China tend either to know the story of its miraculous economic rise or the story of its harsh political repression. I think there is a lack of understanding about how these two stories go together and what America’s fingerprints are in the situation. I wanted to make a film that didn’t exoticize or romanticize either country, but that looked realistically and honestly at what has gone on. Because people are the ones that are making policy and it’s easy to make mistakes and have unintended consequences. The only way to make a difference going forward is to know what is going on right now. How did the documentary project begin? Initially, I was doing shorts with [New York University law professor and China specialist] Jerry Cohen. But to get a film financed you need a subject that enough people think warrants fund-raising. And so while I tried to get a film funded around Jerry, I couldn’t and I thought, well, if I could get an ambassador in the film that would raise the profile a little and I could get some backing.So I was waiting to see who President Obama would appoint [to China] after being elected. When he appointed [Utah] Governor Huntsman, who I didn’t know and hadn’t encountered before, a documentary film producer based in Utah named Geralyn Dreyfous called and said: “Huntsman is my governor and I’ve been doing arts programs with him. I’ve spoken with other news journalism producers who think this subject is great and viable and I can raise money for it. So why don’t you come out here to Salt Lake City and you can pitch this story of U.S.-China relations.”And that’s pretty much what happened. Geralyn said be prepared, so I called a cinematographer I had just worked with, Magela Crosignani from Uruguay. On our very first trip to Utah we were ready to shoot, and after we pitched it to John and Mary Kaye [Huntsman] that it would not be a biopic of Huntsman and his family but rather a larger film about U.S.-China relations, they immediately said, “Great, turn on your cameras.”The United States-China relationship is a very broad topic. How did you decide which issues to focus on?It did need to be circumscribed by the characters and what they were encountering. But within that, you still have a large number of issues that an ambassador faces. We were conscious of showing the positive aspects of the relationship, especially in the beginning of the film, because every ambassador and every new official goes into a new relationship with high expectations and a great sense of hope and a desire to make a positive difference.Then you run up against the limits of those possibilities, when we had what we called the “downturn cycle.” That’s when we latched onto what I had learned from observing the relationship for 20 years: that there are cyclical patterns to this relationship, a period every year where the issues of the Dalai Lama visiting the White House, arms sales to Taiwan, currency or trade, or Google hacking stories come up and you can feel the lack of communication. That is how we knew we were going to dive into security, economic and human rights issues.Chen was not a character I had imagined would land in our story, but he couldn’t have landed in it in a more emphatic or meaningful way. The scene of him landing in the U.S. Embassy in Beijing during the 2012 Strategic and Economic Dialogue is an example of the intertwining between China’s economic rise and its political repression. Security and economics were President Obama’s and [President] Hu Jintao’s stated priorities for the U.S.-China relationship when they initiated [the Strategic and Economic Dialogue] in 2009. Only three years later, Chen’s arrival in Beijing during that conference — which was beneficial for him in that it brought international attention to his plight — raised questions of how and when countries should prioritize human rights, economics or security.Mr. Huntsman’s daughter Gracie Mei features prominently in the documentary, both as a main character and as the film’s narrator. How did that happen?We filmed everyone we could while we were in China, because we were trying to stay open to every possibility even though we were a skeleton crew of two people. It was me doing sound and Magela shooting, which makes it hard to cover more than one person at a time. In the edit we discovered Gracie. Though she had been shy on camera, we found that she emerged as a character that audiences could emotionally connect to more comfortably than with Governor Huntsman. Politicians are tricky subjects, because people tend to look at politicians with a level of baggage that we hadn’t quite expected. And while I found it fascinating to have a politician in the film, [Huntsman] wasn’t a character that everyone could relate to and Gracie was. From there we realized we needed to give her more of a voice, because she was young and shy. When we put her in the recording room with a little bit of a script and a few questions, it was fantastic. She lit up and was very comfortable.How was the film financed?The funds kind of came in like a trickle over time, so that I was shooting and then showing the work. It was good that we had chosen to make it a longitudinal look at the Huntsman’s time in China. So we stretched it out over his time there and we made eight or nine trips to China and then followed the [2012 presidential] campaign and we filmed Gracie in 2013. Geralyn raised mostly soft money from investors, mostly American and a couple of Chinese, and there were grants. So we just kept going. The film is not yet finished and we are in the middle of a crowdfunding campaign on Indiegogo.What were some of the challenges you faced in making this film?
There were problems with access, and the train to Tibet is the best example of that. It was a big deal, because an American ambassador hadn’t been to Tibet in 10 years and it was hard for the State Department to get permission from the Chinese government. We managed to get permits and we were filming and it was going well. We got on the train and it started to go and everyone in the ambassador’s entourage was in one car and they were finding their places and we were sort of standing to the side waiting to film. We had our camera out and a guard came up to us and said you better find your place in the train and we showed him our tickets and he said you are on the wrong train.I think it was largely a tactic to delay us and prevent us from filming. There was nothing that the ambassador and his team could do, because they didn’t want to jeopardize his opportunity and we didn’t want to jeopardize any official business either.Any other challenges you encountered?Besides access, I think the top concern was about hurting people in China by having filmed them. You take into consideration what the consequences will be for them given that the subject involved politics. What would happen if I had an interview with someone and that got them into trouble? Because the way the Chinese government defines the lines you shouldn’t cross is mysterious. And they move it around and you trip it all the time. We were never quite certain whether we were crossing a line or not. Will the film be shown in China?I’ve been following the debate between Peter Hessler and Evan Osnos [on whether foreign writers should comply with censorship in China]. I’m more in the Osnos camp [resisting censorship even if it prevents publication in China] than the Hessler camp. I understand both but I feel like Taiwan and Hong Kong will have no problem with this film, and there are Chinese people in both of those places, but in mainland China it would be better if the film was ultimately just bootlegged so it doesn’t have to be censored. Because I know if it was shown in China it would have to be censored, and I don’t know how much would be left after that process.Jennifer Jett contributed reporting from New York.Follow Amy Qin on Twitter at @amyyqin. 