The police have spent days scouring Hong Kong’s northern reaches and monitoring the border with mainland China in a search for six men suspected of robbing a luxury home and kidnapping one of the residents, a 29-year-old woman.The woman was released unharmed on Tuesday, three days after she was taken from the house in Tseung Kwan O district. The kidnappers, who are believed to be from mainland China, demanded a ransom of nearly $6.5 million, and they were eventually paid $3.6 million by the woman’s family, the South China Morning Post reported. The Hong Kong news media has reported that the victim is the granddaughter of the late Law Ting-pong, called the “Knitwear King,” who founded the Bossini clothing brand.By Thursday, the police had set up roadblocks, and hundreds of officers aided by helicopters had converged on wooded parks in the New Territories of Hong Kong, where the kidnappers were believed to be hiding.Hong Kong is one of the world’s safest cities, but it has experienced a number of high-profile kidnappings, particularly in the 1980s and ’90s, when gangs preyed on some of its ultrarich families. Stay tuned: Hundreds of Hong Kong police descend on park where kidnappers may be hiding out //t.co/p5C7nwwLS8 //t.co/k8ScpGzaEw— SCMP News (@SCMP_News) 30 Apr 15Teddy Wang, the founder of the Chinachem Group, was kidnapped by gangsters in 1983 and held for days in chains, only to be freed more than a week later after his wife, Nina Wang, paid an $11 million ransom. In 1990, he was abducted again in Hong Kong, and his wife paid $34 million as part of the ransom demands, but he was never seen again and was declared dead nine years later.The kidnappings committed by Cheung Tze-keung, a gangster known as Big Spender, riveted Hong Kong around the time of the 1997 handover of the territory from British to Chinese control. He abducted Walter Kwok, whose family made billions in property development, in September 1997. Mr. Kwok was released in exchange for $77 million.He also kidnapped Victor Li, son of the Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing, in 1996.Mr. Li rarely speaks about the incident, but two years ago, he gave an interview to Nanfang Media Group, based in Guangzhou, saying that when Mr. Cheung came to collect the cash, he could pay only one billion Hong Kong dollars (now about $129 million) in cash and would have to go to the bank to get the full ransom demand of two billion Hong Kong dollars. His son was freed after he paid one billion. Mr. Li said he told Mr. Cheung to take the opportunity to “fly high and far away and turn over a new leaf,” it was reported. “If you mess up again, no one will help you.”Mr. Cheung was arrested in Guangdong Province in 1998 and executed for kidnapping and other crimes in a case that prompted concerns about the breakdown in the autonomy of Hong Kong’s legal system.Despite his execution, the Big Spender case inspired other kidnappers who saw the large sums that could be extracted from wealthy families, said Sonny Lo, a social science professor at Hong Kong Institute of Education. That could be a factor in the latest kidnapping case, Mr. Lo said, although he notes the kidnappers appear to have far fewer Hong Kong ties than Mr. Cheung, who was born in mainland China but grew up in Hong Kong.“If the six of them are eventually arrested, then, of course, law and order in Hong Kong will not be affected,” Mr. Lo said. “If six kidnappers are not arrested for a certain period of time, and if any of them escape, then it may be a possibility that more incidents may occur in the future.”Follow Austin Ramzy on Twitter at @austinramzy.