AdvertisementSupported byBy Jennifer SteinhauerWASHINGTON — Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, is demanding a vote on an amendment that would press Iran to recognize the state of Israel, threatening a fragile bipartisan coalition that had already fashioned a compromise bill giving Congress a voice in the Iran nuclear talks.As other Republican senators worked to persuade their colleagues to pass the bill largely unchanged, Mr. Rubio, a candidate for president, seemed determined to press a series of amendments that would significantly toughen the legislation, and if passed, would almost certainly provoke a veto by President Obama, who is already reluctant to give Congress any role in an Iran deal. “This is not a game,” Mr. Rubio said. “This is a very serious matter.” He added, “We have a right to have these issues debated. If you don’t want to vote on things, don’t run for the Senate.” Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has struggled to limit controversial amendments and to speak forcefully against those offered. In a twist of legislative fate, a bill that originally pit Democrats against one another — those supportive of White House wishes and those who favored a Congress that exercised its prerogative — now appears to have created a conflict among Republican senators. Some want to coax Mr. Obama to sign a bill. Others insist on pressing ahead with amendments that could endanger its passage or jeopardize what has been a veto-proof majority of support. “I think we recognize that the president would rather have something he doesn’t have to sign, so it’s better for us to have this bill,” said Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, who is urging colleagues to limit amendments. “I think that argument will win out.”In two test votes this week, a coalition of Republican lawmakers held firm with every Democrat in the Senate to hold off controversial measures, a good harbinger for Mr. Corker and the bill. On Wednesday night, a measure that would have required a certification that Iran has not directly supported or carried out an act of terrorism against Americans failed. Another amendment, one that would have declared any agreement reached on the nuclear program of Iran to be treated as a treaty, which requires ratification by two thirds of the Senate, failed Tuesday, with 12 Republicans voting with Democrats to seal its fate. (Mr. Rubio did not vote on that amendment.) Several amendments that have been filed by Republicans could prove difficult for Democrats to reject, including the one offered by Mr. Rubio that would call on Iran to recognize Israel. However, his passion was met on the floor by that of Senator Benjamin L. Cardin, a Democrat of Maryland, who is the ranking member on the Foreign Relations Committee. “I don’t think there is a member of this body that doesn’t want Israel legitimized by every country in the world,” Mr. Cardin said. Mr. Rubio’s amendment “will defeat this bill,” Mr. Cardin said, his voice rising. “And yes, it will mean it will be almost impossible for the president to negotiate an agreement with Iran.”In addition, the American Israel Political Affairs Committee, while supportive in theory of some amendments, put out a statement this week saying, “We request that senators bear in mind the need to retain the bipartisan consensus this legislation enjoys and that they refrain from supporting provisions that could harm that bipartisan support.”The White House on Wednesday issued a blanket threat to veto any legislation that would “interfere with the ongoing negotiations between the international community and Iran on their nuclear program.” Before Mr. Rubio’s stand, the bill was lurching toward passage, with many amendments that would kill the bill seemingly unable to overcome a 60-vote threshold. “We’re working to try and change some of the language,” Mr. Cardin said. Many senators in both parties were intrigued by an amendment offered by Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, that would allow American oil to compete with Iranian oil in the global marketplace. Alaskans have long sought to lift the ban on the export of American oil, a longstanding policy stemming from the 1970s oil embargo. “It simply does not make sense for us to lift sanctions on Iranian oil while we keep them on American oil,” she said. But Mr. Cardin said he would like to see the issue raised in another form later. Mr. Corker has had a delicate role to play, at once supportive of Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and majority leader, in his pursuit of an open amendment culture on the floor of the Senate — long eschewed by Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, the former majority leader — and his longing to get the bill passed and signed. “I take it one day at a time,” Mr. Corker said on Wednesday as senators went to the floor to vote. There is also the matter of the House, which seemed supportive of the bill as passed by the committee. Speaker John A. Boehner told his conference on Wednesday that they should support the current bill, but amendments might change their thinking.Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reportingAdvertisement