AdvertisementSupported byBy Ceylan YeginsuISTANBUL — The mayor of Ankara, the Turkish capital, fired out a slew of sexist, anti-American remarks on Twitter on Wednesday and promoted a photograph that referred to Marie Harf, the State Department spokeswoman, as a “stupid blonde.”Melih Gokcek, Ankara’s combative mayor and close ally of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, posted a picture of the Baltimore police forcibly subduing a looter during the recent unrest there and criticized Ms. Harf for her “silence” after she had heavily criticized Turkey for its disproportionate use of police force during antigovernment protests in 2013.He lashed out at her on Twitter and shared a picture of Ms. Harf from a pro-government website with the caption: “Where are you, stupid blonde, who accused Turkish police of using disproportionate force?”HADİ SARIŞIN CEVAP VERSENE...COME ON BLONDE ANSWER NOW... pic.twitter.com/gTeftDEWdgAt a press briefing in Washington, Ms. Harf said she would not dignify Mr. Gokcek’s insulting words with a response, but defended the United States’ willingness to confront divisive issues head-on. “I would put our record here in the U.S. of openly, transparently addressing challenges when we have them here at home up against any other country’s on the planet,” she said.Mr. Gokcek’s Twitter posts were an effort to highlight what he saw as hypocrisy shown by the United States government and media in taking other countries to task for their human rights lapses. Turkey came under widespread international criticism for its handling of sweeping antigovernment demonstrations in 2013, which were set off by plans to raze Istanbul’s central Gezi Park and replace it with a shopping mall.Turkish pro-government media outlets on Monday quickly drew parallels between those events and the violent rioting, looting and destruction of property on Monday in Baltimore.“According to the blonde girl, the government’s reaction during the Gezi Park protests were worrisome, but when it comes to your country, is it normal to declare a curfew,” Mr. Gokcek wrote in a separate Twitter post, apparently comparing the brutal response by the Turkish police to Baltimore’s efforts to keep people off the streets. Mr. Gokcek could not be immediately reached for comment on Wednesday.During the 2013 uprising, the Turkish police beat demonstrators and used tear gas and water cannons repeatedly to disperse crowds; hundreds were injured and at least eight people were killed. By contrast, the police response to the rioting in Baltimore has been muted; some residents said the police showed restraint.Mr. Gokcek’s catalog of Twitter posts received thousands of messages of support from his followers, and within a matter of minutes, “Come on blonde, answer now” went viral on Twitter.Advertisement