By CHOE SANG-HUNAPRIL 29, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — Despite a bribery scandal that led to the resignation of South Korea’s prime minister, President Park Geun-hye’s governing Saenuri Party won three of four parliamentary seats filled on Wednesday in by-elections billed as a referendum on her leadership.The main opposition party, the New Politics Alliance for Democracy, suffered a crushing defeat, winning no seats.The election results show how deeply skeptical voters are of the New Politics Alliance, despite popular disappointment over the corruption scandal that has implicated several allies of Ms. Park and over her government’s handling of the ferry disaster that killed more than 300 people a year ago.In the elections on Wednesday, Saenuri candidates won the seats contested in Seoul, the nearby city of Incheon and the surrounding province of Gyeonggi. Chun Jung-bae, a former member of the main opposition party, ran as an independent and won a seat in the southwestern city of Gwangju, beating the opposition’s candidate in its stronghold.AdvertisementThe results were uplifting news for Ms. Park ahead of full parliamentary elections scheduled for next April. Results in Seoul and the surrounding area are often considered a bellwether for national elections.AdvertisementThe Saenuri Party now controls 160 seats in the 300-member Parliament, while the main opposition party has 130.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was no immediate comment from Ms. Park’s office. But Kim Moo-sung, the leader of Saenuri, said the results gave Ms. Park’s government more power to push its economic bills through Parliament. The opposition party issued a statement apologizing for its failure to meet its supporters’ expectations.Prime Minister Lee Wan-koo stepped down on Monday, apologizing for a scandal in which he was accused of taking an illegal cash gift from a businessman, Sung Wan-jong.Mr. Sung hanged himself from a tree on April 9. Hours earlier, he gave a telephone interview to a South Korean newspaper.In the interview and in a handwritten memo found with his body, Mr. Sung described illegal cash gifts that he said he had given Mr. Lee and other political allies of Ms. Park. Those who were named all denied receiving illegal cash from Mr. Sung.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of seats in Parliament held by South Korea’s main opposition party, the New Politics Alliance for Democracy. The party has 130 seats, not 109.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.