By AUSTIN RAMZYOCT. 18, 2015
Australia’s policies regarding asylum seekers, including holding hundreds of people in offshore detention camps, have come under increasing scrutiny in recent months. The Australian authorities say their approach has led to a drastic decline in the number of migrant boats attempting to reach Australian shores. But critics say detainees are living in harsh conditions and face threats of violence, abuse and sexual assault.Greg Barns, a lawyer and a spokesman for the Australian Lawyers Alliance, says that the policy on asylum seekers has also damaged free speech protections in Australia, particularly after the passage this year of the Border Force Act. The government said the rules on disclosure in the act were necessary to prevent corruption and criminal activity and to ensure that intelligence services and foreign governments had confidence in Australia’s immigration and border protection workers.In an interview, edited for length and clarity, Mr. Barns outlined some of the critics’ concerns.Q. Why is migrant policy a free-speech issue?A.The Border Force Act makes it a criminal offense for any person who works in an immigration detention center, whether they be an employee of the government or contractor or subcontractor, to reveal information about what happens in that detention center, including medical issues or, more broadly, health issues and workplace issues. It makes it a criminal offense. There are very limited defenses. The major defense is that a person’s life may be in danger if the information is not revealed.The government and the opposition Labor Party have tried to reassure the public by saying that the Public Interest Disclosure Act, another act, will enable people to have some freedom of speech. That’s not the case, because that act operates on very limited terms. And you’ve got to, in any event, go through internal mechanisms before you go public.AdvertisementSo it is a chilling piece of legislation, the like of which, with the exception of the security services — which have a similar piece of legislation — is unprecedented.AdvertisementQ. Why was the act put into place?A.It was put into place because there have been a number of reports emanating from NGOs such as Human Rights Watch, from the relevant United Nations bodies and by the media both in Australia and overseas, which have reported on the dire conditions in Australian detention centers, both onshore and on the Papua New Guinea island of Manus and on Nauru island. There have been also a number of public statements by NGO workers, in particular workers at Save the Children, and from doctors and other medical professionals protesting the conditions, particularly of women and children.The government determined, with the support of the Labor Party, that it would close down those avenues. It wanted to prevent individuals from speaking to third parties, including the media, about what’s really happening in detention centers. There’s no other reason for the introduction of this legislation.Q. In the months since it was enacted, have you seen any specific concerns you raised play out?My understanding is that Save the Children workers have been raided. I am aware of, without breaching any client confidence, concerns of some medical professionals.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. Does this law raise concerns that it will conflict with other professional obligations that medical personnel or others might have in terms of reporting harm?A.It certainly does. Doctors and other medical professionals have an ethical obligation to report systemic abuse in detention centers, and they have done so on a number of occasions. There have been articles published in Australian medical journals in relation to the matter. Under this legislation, these medical professionals would have those ethics compromised, and that really troubles doctors and other health professionals.It also troubles teachers and those social workers who come to us, who work with children and, again, who have a professional obligation in their view, and an ethical obligation, to report abuse. And if there is systemic abuse, for example, and it’s written about in a learned way, in a scholarly way, in a peer-reviewed medical journal, it’s extraordinary to me that that communication would lead to a criminal charge.Q. We’ve been talking so far about Australia and Australian law. What about the countries that have these offshore camps, Nauru and Papua New Guinea?A. The law in Australia — that Australia has a duty of care to asylum seekers in Papua New Guinea on Manus Island and in Nauru — that’s fundamentally clear. The Nauruan authorities, the Nauruan police, have shown recently their incapacity to investigate criminal activity within detention centers. We had a woman who rang Nauruan police some weeks ago, who had a complaint that she’d been raped — it took four hours to get to her. Then they didn’t take her back to the police station to be examined for some hours. They then came out to say there wasn’t sufficient evidence. So there’s great concern about the lack of investigating capacity.AdvertisementIn relation to Papua New Guinea, this is a country that is less than optimal in terms of its capabilities. I’ll be careful here to say, both in relation to Nauru and Papua New Guinea, these are impoverished countries. Nauru has little by way of resources. Papua New Guinea has little by way of resources. And so the capacity of the Papua New Guinea government and the Nauruan government, even if they had the inclination to stem the abuses that are happening in the detention centers, they’re unlikely to do so and they don’t have the capacity to do so.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.