AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BilefskyLONDON — Finnish officials said on Wednesday that they were still in the dark about the origin of an underwater vessel that a day earlier had prompted the navy to fire depth charges — the first such warning in more than 10 years, according to local news media.The episode generated anxiety in Finland, which shares a long border with Russia and where memories of the Cold War run deep. News of the warning shots stirred speculation in the Finnish news media that the unidentified object, thought to be a submarine, had been sent by Moscow.Max Arhippainen, a spokesman for the Finnish Ministry of Defense, said the country was being vigilant at a time of heightened anxieties in the region. He said that such warning shots were a very rare event and stressed that the nationality of the unidentified vessel was not known. “We don’t know what the object was, but the navy had enough reason to take action and to launch a warning explosive,” he said by phone from Helsinki, the capital.While declining to be drawn on possible Russian involvement, he said, “We have seen more Russian activity in the Baltic area. To some degree, people are more worried than before.”According to Reuters, Defense Minister Carl Haglund told the Finnish news agency STT that the strange activity had prompted the navy to take action. “We strongly suspect that there has been underwater activity that does not belong there,” Mr. Haglund said. “Of course it is always serious if our territorial waters have been violated.”Finland’s action comes at a time of tense East-West relations after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the conflict between government forces and pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine.In Finland, Russia has long cast a shadow. Finland was part of the Russian Empire until it gained independence in 1917. Traditionally a nonaligned country outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Finland pursued a policy of “active neutrality” at the height of the Cold War, a tactic aimed at keeping the Soviet Union at arm’s length. However, since the Ukraine crisis erupted, a debate on whether to join NATO has intensified.An editorial Wednesday in Helsingin Sanomat, a leading Finnish newspaper, said that the detection of the unidentified object was a “serious event” and reflected resurgent activity by Russia in the Baltic Sea. Noting that relations between Russia and the West had been inflamed by events in Ukraine, it said that territorial violations had taken on added importance. “In more tranquil times, these kind of violations would not inspire the kind of concern that they do now,” it said.Mikko Majander, an adjunct professor of political history at the University of Helsinki, said alarm over the event reflected a basic insecurity about Russia in the region that had recently been revived. “We haven’t felt threatened by Russia for a long time,” he said. “But now there is so much more uncertainty about Russia’s intentions compared with before.”In October, an unidentified vessel spotted off the Stockholm archipelago prompted Sweden’s largest mobilization since the end of the Cold War, and finger-pointing at Russia. The mystery, including unsubstantiated reports of a man in black spotted wading near the vessel, captured the nation’s imagination. But the Kremlin issued vehement denials and said the vessel belonged to another country, while Rossiyskaya Gazeta, a Russian government newspaper, accused Sweden of scaremongering about Russia.Last year, Norway intercepted 74 Russian warplanes off its coast, 27 percent more than in 2013, and a substantial jump from the 11 detected a decade earlier.Nicolay Khalip contributed reporting from Moscow.Advertisement