AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew RothMOSCOW — A Finnish media company on Thursday said it would sell its one-third stake in Vedomosti, Russia’s most influential business newspaper, as well as ownership of The Moscow Times, the country’s only English-language daily, to a Russian buyer.The deal, announced Thursday by the Finnish company, Sanoma, is the first in what is expected to be a wave of sales or restructurings in the Russian news media as foreign companies adjust their Russian assets under a new law that limits them to a 20 percent stake. Lawmakers adopted the legislation last year, saying it was needed to ensure Russia’s national security.Vedomosti, which regularly publishes investigations and opinion pieces critical of the government, has been a focus of official ire. Both Pearson, publisher of The Financial Times, and News Corp., which owns Dow Jones, also own 33-percent stakes in the newspaper, which by law they will be required to reduce by 2016.In a statement, Sanoma said it began the process of selling its holdings in Russian news media in 2013, before the law was adopted, in order to focus on its “core markets.”“We are confident that these iconic titles are in good hands and will continue to develop as some of Russia’s leading media titles,” the company’s group president and chief executive, Harri-Pekka Kaukonen, said in a statement. No price was given for the deal, but the company said it booked a capital gain of $8.9 million before currency translation adjustments.The buyer was Demyan Kudryavtsev, a veteran Russian media manager and former business partner of Boris Berezovsky, who died in 2013. Mr. Kudryavtsev served as the general director of the Kommersant publishing house from 2006 until 2012.Acquisitions in Russian news media, particularly those that involve politically sensitive publications, have raised concerns that the Kremlin could be inserting loyal businessmen to help dull critical reporting.Oleg Kashin, a Russian journalist, defended Mr. Kudryavtsev’s record at Kommersant, saying that he had maintained independence at the newspaper under successive oligarch owners despite external pressure.“There were no forbidden topics, there was no censorship,” Mr. Kashin said.Mr. Kudryavtsev left Kommersant in 2012 amid scandal when an editor was fired for a magazine cover with an image of a voting ballot defaced with an offensive message to President Vladimir V. Putin.Yet, Mr. Kudryavtsev’s purchase of Sanoma’s stake also raised a question about where he had found the money to buy all of the Finnish company’s investments.“I know Demyan,” said Leonid Bershidsky, the founding editor of Vedomosti, who now lives in Berlin. “He is a good poet and a smart guy, but he doesn’t have that kind of money, and if he did, he’d think of a better investment than a minority stake in an independent paper in Russia, of all places.”In an interview with the Russian news agency RBC on Thursday, Mr. Kudryavtsev said that the money was his own and that he had not approved his purchase of Vedomosti with the Kremlin.The deal also ended 23 years of uninterrupted foreign ownership of The Moscow Times, which was founded by the Dutch publisher Derk Sauer in 1992.Mr. Sauer, who sold the newspaper to Sanoma in 2008, said by telephone from the Netherlands that Mr. Kudryavtsev’s main challenge would be making the paper profitable.“I urged them to find an owner who supported it from an idealistic point of view because it is important that The Moscow Times stays alive,” he said.At the newspaper, the editor in chief, Nabi Abdullaev, welcomed news of the deal, saying it had put an end to “a certain atmosphere of suspense and lack of certainty about the future.”“I am glad it happened,” Mr. Abdullaev wrote in response to written questions. “With the law on the ownership already adopted, it doesn’t make sense to be concerned that much about the ‘foreign-Russian’ thing, but more about the ‘which Russian’ variant.”Advertisement