

      By SHREEYA SINHA and 
    
FRANCESCA BARBER

UPDATED May 2, 2015

As the May 7 general elections in Britain draw near, the nation's newspapers and newsmagazines are publishing endorsements of various political parties and leaders. Here are some of the most prominent. The Times will to add to this list as more papers weigh in.The Daily Mail, a British tabloid, wrote a scathing commentary on Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister and head of the centrist Liberal Democrats.  Mr. Clegg has taken the brunt of the blame for the spending cuts made by the coalition government he joined with the Conservatives in 2010. Following that election, The Daily Mail dubbed him the Madame Fifi of British politics, “one minute batting his eyelids at David Cameron, the next sneaking off to play footsie with Gordon Brown,” the former Labour prime minister.This time, the tabloid ultimately gave its support to the Conservatives, saying it was the “only sane advice to anyone who wants a healthy economy, immigration curbs and an E.U. referendum.” Our endorsement: Britons should give the Conservative-led coalition another term http://t.co/HTaPLTfTUX #GE2015 pic.twitter.com/v38LGoYViy— The Economist (@TheEconomist) April 30, 2015The Economist endorsed a continuation of the Conservative-led government, despite what it called a "risk on Europe" if Prime Minister David Cameron's warning that Britain could leave the European Union comes to pass."Our decision is based on the economy, where the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition has a stronger record than many realize and where Labour poses a greater risk," the newsmagazine said, adding that if Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, were to win, "he would be the most economically radical premier since Margaret Thatcher.”
The Economist supported the Conservatives in 2010, but the Labour Party of Tony Blair in 2005.
The Economist endorsed a continuation of the Conservative-led government, despite what it called a "risk on Europe" if Prime Minister David Cameron's warning that Britain could leave the European Union comes to pass."Our decision is based on the economy, where the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition has a stronger record than many realize and where Labour poses a greater risk," the newsmagazine said, adding that if Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, were to win, "he would be the most economically radical premier since Margaret Thatcher.”The Economist supported the Conservatives in 2010, but the Labour Party of Tony Blair in 2005.Vote for London: Standard urges readers to think of what's best for the capital & back Tories http://t.co/r72BOW8rey pic.twitter.com/kiJ0kEYlou— Evening Standard (@standardnews) May 5, 2015The Evening Standard, owned by Aleksandr Y. Lebedev, a Russian tycoon and former K.G.B. agent, endorsed the Conservatives in the election. Its endorsement focused on which party would best serve London, where the paper is based. Its editorial called for “more of the same” economic policies. “The Tories’ leadership of the coalition since 2010 has been good for London,” the paper wrote, adding “their policies have helped create jobs, reduce crime and improve schools.” By contrast, it said, the Labour Party’s policies “suggest a hostility to wealth creation, which is not in London’s interests.” The Evening Standard endorsed the Conservatives in 2010 as well.
The Evening Standard, owned by Aleksandr Y. Lebedev, a Russian tycoon and former K.G.B. agent, endorsed the Conservatives in the election. Its endorsement focused on which party would best serve London, where the paper is based. Its editorial called for “more of the same” economic policies. “The Tories’ leadership of the coalition since 2010 has been good for London,” the paper wrote, adding “their policies have helped create jobs, reduce crime and improve schools.” By contrast, it said, the Labour Party’s policies “suggest a hostility to wealth creation, which is not in London’s interests.” The Evening Standard endorsed the Conservatives in 2010 as well.The FT would like to see a Conservative-led administration - our editorial today explains why http://t.co/uyLnzcFoSW pic.twitter.com/YvMuJyEuu2— Financial Times (@FT) April 30, 2015The country’s leading business daily prefers a continuation of the status quo, which it said had shown that “European-style cohabitation can work.” It criticized Mr. Cameron, the Conservatives leader, for running a “campaign of fear” instead of highlighting the coalition government’s achievements, but said Mr. Miliband was “preoccupied with inequality” and had “too often found himself on the wrong side of the argument.”In 2010, The Financial Times called the Conservatives imperfect but nonetheless the best bet for Britain to “navigate its fiscal crisis and punch its weight abroad.”
The country’s leading business daily prefers a continuation of the status quo, which it said had shown that “European-style cohabitation can work.” It criticized Mr. Cameron, the Conservatives leader, for running a “campaign of fear” instead of highlighting the coalition government’s achievements, but said Mr. Miliband was “preoccupied with inequality” and had “too often found himself on the wrong side of the argument.”In 2010, The Financial Times called the Conservatives imperfect but nonetheless the best bet for Britain to “navigate its fiscal crisis and punch its weight abroad.”The Guardian endorses Labour: "It provides the best hope for starting to tackle the turbulent issues facing us" http://t.co/kJfXWlBE6B— Guardian politics (@GdnPolitics) May 1, 2015