

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

OCT. 20, 2015

Justin Trudeau and his Liberal Party won a sweeping victory in Canada’s national election on Monday. Here is a look at how the 43-year-old father of three worked his way to becoming Canada’s second-youngest prime minister.Mr. Trudeau was born in Ottawa on Dec. 25, 1971, to Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, and the former Margaret Sinclair. Justin Trudeau spent his childhood in the public eye. Mr. Trudeau was the oldest of three sons. As a child, he lived at the prime minister’s official residence and took a school bus to a public elementary school in Ottawa. “There were lunch hours where I wouldn’t eat at school because we had to rush home to have lunch with the queen, for example, which actually happened,” he said in an interview in 2013. “At the same time, it was instilled upon us that this was a privilege and a responsibility, and nothing made us better than anyone else — maybe randomly luckier.”Video: Justin Trudeau’s Childhood in the Public EyeAfter his father’s retirement from politics in 1984, Mr. Trudeau remained largely out of public view for several years, studying in Montreal and working as a snowboard instructor, nightclub bouncer and then a high school teacher. He returned to the public’s attention in 1998 after his brother Michel was killed in an avalanche. Pierre Elliott Trudeau died on Sept. 28, 2000, at the age of 80, and two years after his son Michel. Justin Trudeau delivered the eulogy at his father’s state funeral in Montreal, which was broadcast on live television.Mr. Trudeau married Sophie Grégoire, a childhood friend and former television host and model, in 2005. The couple have three young children: two sons and a daughter.Mr. Trudeau sparring at the Ness Martial Academy in Montreal.Video: Trudeau’s Election Night SpeechMr. Trudeau began his political career in 2007 and was elected to Parliament from Montreal a year later. He became the Liberal leader in April 2013. The leader of the Liberal Party campaigned for the 2015 election on the promise of major policy changes from the government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper, including improving relations with the United States, dropping out of the American-led coalition’s bombing campaign against the Islamic State, legalizing marijuana and increasing spending to try to stimulate the economy. Mr. Trudeau watched the results of Monday’s election with his wife and children at his campaign headquarters in Montreal.The Liberal Party had its best showing in 40 years in the 2015 elections. Mr. Trudeau, accompanied by his wife, said in his victory speech in Montreal on Monday night that, “A positive, optimistic, hopeful vision of public life isn’t a naïve dream — it can be a powerful force for change.” He added, “Canadians from all across this great country sent a clear message tonight: It’s time for change in this country, my friends, real change.”Advertisement