By SIMON ROMEROMAY 1, 2015
RIO DE JANEIRO —  Brazil’s political establishment was shaken on Friday by the news that federal prosecutors had opened an influence-peddling inquiry into the business activities of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president who presided over Brazil’s emergence this century as a leading power in the developing world.The report comes at a difficult time for the governing Workers Party, with Mr. da Silva’s protégé and successor, Dilma Rousseff, struggling with calls for her impeachment over a bribery scandal at the national oil company. Mr. da Silva, 69, was among the founders of the party in 1980.The inquiry by a special anticorruption unit of the Public Ministry, a body of independent prosecutors, is reportedly delving into Mr. da Silva’s ties to Odebrecht, one of Brazil’s largest construction companies. That the inquiry, a preliminary step before deciding whether to open a broader investigation, had opened in recent days was first reported by the Brazilian magazine Época.The prosecutors are examining whether Mr. da Silva improperly used his influence as a former president and one of Brazil’s most powerful political figures to obtain loans from Brazil’s national development bank, a state-controlled financial institution with a lending portfolio larger than that of the World Bank, for Odebrecht’s dealings in Cuba and the Dominican Republic.AdvertisementAfter eight years as president, from 2003 to 2010, when Brazil enjoyed robust economic growth and expanded its antipoverty projects, Mr. da Silva leveraged his prominence to attract lucrative speaking engagements outside Brazil. He often traveled abroad on one of Odebrecht’s private jets, Época reported, and he is also facing scrutiny over the company’s activities in Angola, Ghana and Venezuela.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement, a spokeswoman for Odebrecht denied any wrongdoing in connection to the questions raised in the inquiry. Paulo Okamotto, the president of Mr. da Silva’s institute, said there was nothing improper about Mr. da Silva’s speeches.Speaking before supporters in São Paulo on Friday during a commemoration of International Workers’ Day, Mr. da Silva did not specifically address news of the inquiry.AdvertisementBut in a speech, he lashed out at some in the news media, referring specifically to Época and Veja, another magazine that has reported critically on him. “I see in these Brazilian magazines, which are trash, the insinuations,” Mr. da Silva said. “They’re out to get Lula, but that’s what I like if they want a fight.”A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Report of an Inquiry Into a Former President Rattles Brazil.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.