AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy The New York TimesAlmost a week after an earthquake struck Nepal, killing more than 6,250 people and devastating villages, a rescue operation continues, and tens of thousands of people remain displaced in Katmandu alone. Ellen Barry, the South Asia bureau chief for The New York Times, recently spent five days reporting on the damage and loss of life there. She answered readers’ questions on Friday during a Facebook Q. and A. on the situation on the ground and how people can help.The questions and answers below have been edited and condensed.Death tollQ. Ashlee Keane: Will the death toll rise? And will these demolished landmarks affect Nepal’s tourism industry?A. I am afraid the death toll will continue to rise. Even in Katmandu there are many collapsed buildings that have not yet been cleared. The search-and-rescue phase of the operation is still going on, which means that crews will have to be very careful when removing debris, in case someone is alive in a void inside the pile, as in the amazing rescue of Pemba Tamang yesterday.And there are many villages outside the city of Katmandu that are only just now being reached by first responders. It’s a country with a huge number of isolated villages — some of them more than two days’ walk from the nearest road. So I think the death toll will keep rising.Coordinated reliefQ. Edie Spencer: How is housing, food and water being coordinated for the survivors?A. There are many different agencies and nongovernmental organizations distributing food, water, medicine and tarpaulins in Nepal right now. The United Nations estimates that there are 24,000 displaced people living in 13 different camps in Katmandu.Construction and seismic damageQ. Leigh Ann Davison: Are newer buildings in Nepal, specifically Katmandu, being built with earthquake safety in mind? Is there any plan, or even a way, to retrofit some of the older, historic buildings and landmarks to be even marginally safer when another earthquake strikes?A. My colleague Chris Buckley has an article about this exact question. Among his conclusions are that bribery, lax law enforcement and lack of land use controls have left many buildings vulnerable to seismic damage. He reports that Nepal’s building code set admirable standards, but enforcement was perfunctory.Economic impactQ. Akhila Midde: What will the effect be on the country’s economy?A. I think the economy will be badly affected. There has been severe damage to stores of wheat and rice, and the Everest season and the tourist business in general will be adversely affected. The focus has been exclusively on loss of life and injuries up until now, but in the coming days these long-term challenges will come into focus.Decomposing bodiesQ. Irfanul Haque: Do dead bodies in the street pose a health risk? Are earthquakes common in Nepal?A. There are no dead bodies in the street in Katmandu; those that are still being discovered are being found underneath piles of rubble that are being cleared. They are indeed beginning to decompose, and yes, handling them is dangerous.Earthquakes are relatively common in Nepal, but they are rarely of this magnitude.How to helpQ. Camille van Horne: What is the best way for the international community to help people?A. At the moment, I think the best thing to do is to donate money.What worries me is the number of people still living outside, in tents, in weather that is rainy and chilly at night, making it virtually impossible to keep a tent watertight. And in many places there are shortages — or an outright absence — of tents.Relatives strandedQ. Allie Maiorana: My brother-in-law and his wife are stuck in a village in Nepal amid fears of landslides and concerns about shortages of food and water. We have reached out to the embassy. What else can we do to help them?A. I think you’ve done the right thing by reaching out to the embassy. I was there yesterday, and there were a bunch of Americans who had just been airlifted from the mountains. That effort has really gotten underway over the last two to three days, so my guess is they will be down soon if they are not already.When Nepal was hit with a powerful earthquake the tremor shattered lives, landmarks and the very landscape of the country. The scope of the disaster in photographs.Search-and-rescue teamsQ. Muhammet Maruf Yaman: What can you say about the international teams looking for survivors?A. The search teams I saw were very impressive. I think that right now nearly all of the world’s most renowned search-and-rescue teams are in Nepal, trying to save anyone who might be trapped underneath rubble. Since nearly six days have now passed, the likelihood of there being many more is low, but rescues like that of Pemba Tamang on Thursday are a huge morale booster for everyone there.After the last rescue takes place, there is a colossal task ahead, of retrieving dead bodies and providing food, water and shelter for the living.Damage in KatmanduQ. Beth Jones: Is the Tibet Guest House in Katmandu still standing?A. I don’t know. You should write to them directly! But it is remarkable, when you drive around Katmandu, how much of the city remained intact. Footage shown on television can sometimes give you a distorted sense of the damage.International responseQ. Amit Pradhan: The international response has been overwhelming. I thank you on behalf of my people.A. I am also moved by the international support for Nepal over the last week; one reason I like working for newspapers is that, at times like this, you discover how generous your readers are.Please don’t thank me! While reporting last week, I was frequently struck by the kindness of ordinary Nepalis. Tom Fuller, who was hiking through flattened villages in Gorkha, noted that he would often be examining houses that were totally destroyed and that the owners or residents would offer him tea. That is Nepal in a nutshell.Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter (@ellenbarrynyt) for more updates on the Nepal earthquake.The complete Q. and A. can be found at facebook.com/nytimes.Advertisement