AdvertisementSupported byBy Gardiner HarrisKATMANDU, Nepal — After spending eight days living in a tent in this city’s Tudikhel Park, Bikesh Karki and his family decided, like tens of thousands of others, to pack up and go home.“We’re going to have a party tonight,” said Bikesh, 17, who was carrying two trash bags full of belongings. “Nothing too big. Just a nice dinner with family.”A week after the most severe earthquake in more than 80 years, Katmandu returned to a semblance of normalcy Saturday as a growing number of its residents packed up tents, checked out of hospitals and got ready for the workweek, which starts on Sunday. Many shops that survived the quake were open; electricity was largely restored; and with truck traffic moving, hotel restaurants were once again serving fresh fruit. Lines disappeared from gas stations.The weather even got back to normal after rains and chilly temperatures that made life especially miserable for survivors gave way to the season’s usual warmth and brilliant sunshine.While Katmandu has managed a remarkable turnaround over the past week, a full recovery in impoverished Nepal is expected to take billions of dollars and years of efforts, especially in the hard-hit hinterlands. Rather than folding up their tents, Nepalis in those remote villages are still trying to acquire them to temporarily replace tens of thousands of destroyed homes. “We are struggling to provide tents as we have to purchase them from abroad,” said Laxmi Prasad Dhakal, a Home Ministry spokesman.The relatively quick move toward recovery in Katmandu, the capital, was possible in part because the city’s airport was able to mostly stay open throughout the crisis, a huge stroke of luck. Relief supplies poured into the airport from abroad and have been piled in huge pallets around runways and airport buildings. Supplies were quickly ferried into the city, but stormy weather, poor infrastructure and bureaucratic roadblocks prevented them from rapidly reaching rural areas.Even so, the cleanup of many dozens of toppled buildings in Katmandu and the search for new housing will take time. But many residents seemed determined to at least begin to move on. By Saturday, the city’s always unruly traffic seemed to take in stride the various detours around piles of bricks and timber from shattered buildings.A week ago, nearly 150,000 people were living cheek by jowl in hastily constructed tents in Tudikhel Park; that number had dropped to 10,000 by Saturday, according to Dal Bahadur Khatri, the head constable for the area. Teenagers were once again kicking soccer balls around grassy areas now dotted with blackened circles where thousands of families had recently been cooking meals.Bikesh, the 17-year-old heading home, said he was looking forward to watching a bit of TV and trying to find his cat, which had given birth just before the earthquake.“I just want to have my stuff,” he said.The fear of more earthquakes has not left this city, with many admitting that nightly aftershocks — always accompanied by a symphony of howls from thousands of stray dogs — still robbed them of sleep. But Tara Magar, 19, said on Saturday that she was moving home because she could not stand the smell of the park’s toilets anymore.“I’m still scared, and our house still has cracks all over it,” she said, “but we don’t want to stay here any longer.”Maps show the landscape of temporary shelters, the epicenter of the earthquake and its aftershocks.At nearby Bir Hospital, a 660-bed facility that was overrun with hundreds of trauma patients in the hours after the earthquake, doctors said just 40 new patients sought attention Saturday, only 20 of whom had serious medical problems.“We’re almost back to normal operations,” said Dr. Swoyam Pandit, the hospital director. The hospital, a sprawling complex of new and older buildings, suffered some structural damage to its oldest sections. But Dr. Pandit said he expected that to be fixed soon. And the hospital’s 150 administrative staff members, many of whom left the city for their home villages over the past week, are being asked to return to work Sunday, he said.“I expect nearly all of them will be back,” Dr. Pandit said.The nationwide death toll on Saturday stood at more than 6,600, though many fear it will keep rising as more villages are reached.In Thamel, a haven in Katmandu for backpackers, trekking and curio shops were mostly open, although the usual bustling crowd of young and tattooed tourists was largely absent. In their stead, crews of burly, tired-looking rescue workers wandered through after hopes of finding anyone alive in the rubble had largely disappeared.At Hotel Traveler’s Home, a no-star hotel whose 17 rooms were fully occupied when the earthquake struck, only three guests were checked in, said Damodar Dhaka, the co-owner.“This is normally our high season, and before the earthquake, business was fantastic,” Mr. Dhaka said.When Nepal was hit with a powerful earthquake the tremor shattered lives, landmarks and the very landscape of the country. The scope of the disaster in photographs.Eight of his 13 employees returned to their villages shortly after the quake, but Mr. Dhaka said he hoped they would return soon. As for more tourists, he said he expected business would not pick up again for six months.At a massage parlor, two women with bright red lipstick were waiting for customers up four flights of creaky stairs. Chandra Kala Karki, the owner, said she had been negotiating a price with a customer when the earthquake struck, and the man pulled her under a table during the shaking. When the quake stopped, he took her and the rest of the staff to a park nearby for safety.Ms. Karki said she reopened Thursday but had received only four customers since.“Everyone is still scared, but we’re here because we have to be,” she said. “I don’t know how I’m going to afford the rent this month.”At nearby Mohan’s Tattoo Inn, Anca Trandafir, 25, of Romania was getting an elephant tattoo on her right forearm. Ms. Trandafir had been volunteering at an orphanage when the quake struck. Her duties had been to take the orphanage’s 25 children to school and help them with their homework. But the school was badly damaged and probably not open for some time, so Ms. Trandafir left, she said. Saturday was her birthday, so she decided to get a tattoo to memorialize an extraordinary week.“I’m still a little freaked out,” Ms. Trandafir said. “But I survived, so I want a tattoo.”This is the peak of Nepal’s wedding season, but many of the city’s most popular wedding venues remained closed. Several owners said that with so many funerals being held in remote villages, no one wanted to get married. But they said a few ceremonies were expected this week and more by next weekend.Deepti Koirala and Arpan Pokharel had intended to marry on Monday at the Party Palace, a large wedding venue in the city. But the ceremony was canceled after the earthquake, so they got married on Thursday at home with just 75 guests instead of the 500 they had originally planned. The two fell in love four months ago and did not want to wait any longer, Ms. Koirala said.“Obviously, we cannot stop such natural disasters, but we have to dare to overcome them once they happen. We have to move on,” she said. “People are trying to make life normal again.”Bhadra Sharma contributed reporting from Katmandu.Advertisement