By STEVEN ERLANGERMAY 2, 2015
LONDON —  Lo, and it came to pass at last on Saturday morning, unto Kate, who was late, a child was born — a baby girl, who will be fourth in line to the British throne.There was much rejoicing in the land, especially among the many who had placed their bets on her having a girl, while others await a further windfall, if they guess right on what name will be chosen.Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, “was safely delivered of a daughter” at 8:34 a.m. London time, Kensington Palace announced. The birth came less than three hours after she was admitted to the hospital where in July 2013 she gave birth to Prince George, so according to the British media, she will get a 10 percent “loyalty discount” for her expensive hospital suite.The baby weighs 8 pounds 3 ounces, the palace said, adding that mother and daughter were both doing well, and that father William, the Duke of Cambridge, was present for the birth of the child, who will be known as the Princess of Cambridge.AdvertisementPrince Charles, the heir to the throne, had made it clear he was hoping for a granddaughter, and the child is the fifth great-grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II. The statement said senior royals had been informed and were “delighted with the news.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The impending birth has been a boon for Britain’s bookmakers, who say they received thousands of bets on the newborn’s gender and possible name. Even after Saturday’s announcement, bets were still being placed on a name and other characteristics.AdvertisementAlice and Charlotte are the clear favorites, followed by Elizabeth, Victoria and Diana — all names with royal heritage.In 2013, the announcement of George’s name came two days after his birth.According to Ladbrokes, a bookmaker, bookies have paid out £250,000, or about $380,000, on the baby’s gender. But they are also busy with bets on Thursday’s British elections, among the tightest in memory. The birth is likely to draw attention away from the politicians, which may come as a relief in what has been a long campaign.Kate, 33, who wed William, 32, in April 2011, had an April delivery date, she told friends. Royal watchers, fans and television camera operators have been lined up for days outside the Lindo wing at St. Mary’s Hospital.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Day for Duchess of Cambridge, and British Bookies, Too.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.