By SAEED AL-BATATI and KAREEM FAHIMMAY 3, 2015
MUKALLA, Yemen —  Yemeni fighters who are believed to have received training and weapons in the Persian Gulf entered combat around the southern city of Aden on Sunday, joining with militiamen who are battling Houthi rebels, according to local militia fighters in Aden.  The new troops arrived by sea in the last few days, they said. They all appeared to be Yemenis from the south who had trained in Saudi Arabia and possibly other Persian Gulf states, according to a senior local commander, a fighter and an allied resident, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss troop actions.Their claims could not be independently verified. If confirmed, the influx would represent one of the first major deployments of ground troops trained by the Saudi-led coalition, and would shift the makeup of a military operation that has largely relied on airstrikes through its first weeks.The reinforcements, who the commander said had been given equipment including anti-tank weapons, are entering a fight in Aden that has become a deadly stalemate. Hundreds of people have been killed and whole neighborhoods destroyed in fighting over the last few weeks between the local militias, on one side, and the Houthis and their allied security forces on the other.AdvertisementThe deployment also provided a glimpse of Saudi Arabia’s shifting tactics as it tries to right a military campaign that has yet to achieve almost any of its objectives.AdvertisementThe Saudi-led coalition of Arab states began a bombing campaign in late March with the stated goal of driving back the Houthis, a northern Shiite group that began seizing territory in September and has links to Saudi Arabia’s archenemy, Iran.The Saudis say they intervened at the behest of Yemen’s exiled president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, whose government had been driven from power by the Houthis.More than five weeks later, with at least 1,200 people killed and Yemen facing a rapidly escalating humanitarian crisis, Mr. Hadi is still in exile and the Houthis remain in control of large parts of the country. The Saudis have faced intensifying criticism for the airstrikes, including several bombings that have killed dozens of civilians at a time. On Sunday, Human Rights Watch said that it had collected evidence that showed that the Saudis were deploying cluster munitions in Yemen.Though the airstrikes have continued, the Saudis appear to be more aggressively empowering proxy forces on the ground, including tribes with longstanding ties to Saudi Arabia.A Reuters report last week quoted a Yemeni official as saying that hundreds of tribal fighters had been trained by the Saudis to fight the Houthis in the central Marib Province. And local militias fighting the Houthis in Aden and Taiz say they have received weapons shipments from the Saudi-led coalition. A spokesman for the Saudi military could not immediately be reached for comment on the reported deployment in Aden. Earlier Sunday, Brig. Gen. Ahmed al-Asiri, the main spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition, denied several media reports that foreign troops had landed in Aden.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After pictures appeared on Sunday on a local news website showing fighters wearing what looked like new, matching combat gear, Ali al-Ahmedi, a spokesman for local forces in Aden known as the Popular Resistance, said that a group of fighters had been specially selected and trained by local commanders, and then outfitted with equipment provided by Saudi Arabia.But the senior commander and another fighter said that in fact, the new force had been trained abroad, in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere in the Persian Gulf. The force was made up of younger recruits, they said, as well as older military officers who had served in the army of South Yemen when it was an independent state.The commander said that the older officers, who fled into exile after a brief civil war in 1994, had returned to Yemen “because they love the south.”He said that the troops that had arrived were part of a large contingent and that hundreds of more soldiers were still being trained in Saudi Arabia.AdvertisementIn Aden on Sunday, the new troops already appeared to be having an effect. Local fighters said they were slowly gaining ground in their effort to drive the Houthis and their allies from Aden’s international airport.Saeed al-Batati reported from Mukalla, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.A version of this article appears in print on May 4, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Yemeni Fighters Trained in Gulf Are Said to Join Saudi-Led Mission .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.