AdvertisementSupported byBy Floyd WhaleyMANILA — Abdul Basit Usman, a Filipino bomb-making expert wanted by the United States, was killed in a gun battle with rebels, the Philippine military said on Monday.“He’s dead,” Brig. Gen. Joselito Kakilala said. “There was infighting among his men that resulted in Usman and five others being killed.”The United States had offered a $1 million reward for Mr. Usman, who was accused of carrying out multiple bombings in the southern Philippines beginning in 2002. In 2014, he appeared in a video pledging allegiance to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Mr. Usman was killed at 10 a.m. Sunday in the southern town of Guindulungan, on the island of Mindanao, General Kakilala said. The military is investigating whether the reward money had been a factor in the gun battle that killed him, the general said.According to the Philippine military, Mr. Usman was a master bomb builder who operated training camps in the southern Philippines to pass on his skills. He was adept at using mobile phones as detonators, knowledge not widely held in the southern Philippines, according to General Kakilala.Mr. Usman also operated a business in which he would carry out bombings for local politicians, businesspeople and anyone else who would pay, the Philippine authorities said.“We are hoping we will see fewer bombings in Mindanao as the result of his death,” General Kakilala said.Mr. Usman also had links to the regional terrorist group Jemaah Islamiyah and was an important figure in securing international funding and expertise for Islamic rebel groups in the southern Philippines, military officials said.The Philippines signed a peace agreement last year with the largest southern Philippine rebel group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. Some smaller and more violent rebel groups, including Abu Sayyaf and the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, do not support the deal. Mr. Usman had links to both those organizations, as well as other groups opposed to the peace agreement.The Philippine Congress is debating legislation that would put the terms of the peace agreement into law and provide funding that the rebels are insisting on before they will agree to disarm.Several senators said on Monday that the death of Mr. Usman could have a positive influence on the passage of the legislation. If the Moro Islamic Liberation Front were found to have participated or assisted in his killing, that would be a confidence-building measure with the government, the Senate president, Franklin Drilon, and Senator Ferdinand Marcos Jr. said.The military has not said which rebel groups may have been involved in the gunfight that resulted in Mr. Usman’s death.In January, the Philippine National Police conducted a raid intended to capture or kill Zulkifli bin Hir, a Malaysian terrorism suspect also known as Marwan, and Mr. Usman, who the police said were hiding out together in the village of Mamasapano in the central Philippines. The raid resulted in the death of Mr. Zulkifli, but Mr. Usman escaped, the police said.The police had failed to coordinate the raid with the military, and 44 elite officers were killed in the operation, according to multiple investigations. The raid also involved a gun battle between the police and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. The death of the officers at the hands of rebels caused national outrage, with some lawmakers calling for the peace deal to be scrapped.Advertisement