 Three days after suspending  a previous death sentence on Li Yan, a  battered woman who killed her husband in 2010 in a case that attracted attention around the world, Judge Feng  Wei’s work was not yet done. He still had to ensure social stability.So on Monday, April 27, the first working day  after a court in Anyue County, in the southwestern province of Sichuan, announced  the revised sentence, Judge Feng, the  presiding judge in the case, telephoned  Ms. Li’s brother, Li Dehuai, according to  Wan Miaoyan, Ms. Li’s lawyer.Judge Feng’s court, the Sichuan  Higher People’s Court in Chengdu, had  retried Ms. Li last November on the orders of the Supreme People’s Court in  Beijing, the highest court in the land. The Supreme People’s Court was dissatisfied  with decisions by lower courts in 2011  and 2012 to give Ms. Li the death penalty, citing problems with the evidence. Mr. Li’s phone was turned off. So  Judge Feng rang Ms. Wan and asked  her to ‘‘work on’’ Mr.  Li on his behalf. ‘‘Tell  Li Dehuai to go to the  Tan family home and  apologize again for  the killing,’’ the  judge said, according  to Ms. Wan. ‘‘That  way, our work to  maintain stability will be done as best we can,’’ he told her, candidly. The case of Li Yan will enter legal  history in China for how a woman who  killed and dismembered her abuser in  horrific fashion will almost certainly be  allowed to live, despite years of often violent demonstrations for her death by the husband’s family. Aiming to assuage public opinion and avoid social  unrest, Chinese courts often grant families who demand the death penalty  their wish in a phenomenon legal scholars call ‘‘penal populism.’’After hitting Mr. Tan twice on the  head with the barrel of his air gun during a fight, Ms. Li cut up his body,  placed his head in a pressure cooker  and threw other parts into a toilet and  a river. Then she confessed to the police. But Mr. Tan had hit, burned and  raped Ms. Li during their marriage and  done other things that to this day Ms.  Li said she would rather die than see  made public, her lawyers said. She was  not in her right mind, they said.In China, a suspended death sentence is almost always commuted to  life in jail after good behavior, with the  possibility of further sentence reduction after that.The pressure on the judge was intense.Domestic violence in China is ‘‘a  huge, horrible issue,’’ said Susan Finder, a Hong Kong-based legal scholar  and author of the blog Supreme People’s  Court Monitor .Acknowledging that, last March, the  Supreme People’s Court and the Public  Security Bureau issued detailed rules  on handling family violence cases, saying for the first time that self-defense was justifiable and should lead to lesser sentences.There was international pressure,  too. Last June, the United Nations welcomed the highest court’s decision that  the case be retried. International news  media attended the retrial, and observers from the European Union attended  the resentencing. Not just Ms. Li, but  Judge Feng, and China itself, were in  the spotlight.But in China, ‘‘a weak court has to  face powerful public opinion,’’ writes Fu  Hualing, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong, in a forthcoming book,  ‘‘China’s Death Penalty in Transition:  Theory, Policy, Practice and Reform.’’ Often, cash is the answer. Paying a  victim’s family may work to quell calls  for the death penalty. But in Ms. Li’s  case, the Tan family rejected that,  wanting her executed.Supporters of Ms. Li  —  principally  Chinese feminists and human rights  lawyers  —  felt the new sentence was  still too harsh. ‘‘I failed,’’ said Ms. Wan.Many had expected a fixed sentence  of perhaps 15 years, citing the March  rules outlining greater leniency.‘‘Did the message not get through to  the lower court?’’  Ms. Finder said.It almost certainly did. But Judge  Feng was caught in an uncomfortable balancing act between the political  imperative of ensuring social stability  and the law. The issue of family violence may have seemed secondary.As Ren Zhongyuan of the newspaper Southern  Weekly wrote: ‘‘Combating family violence still has a long way to go in the  courts and the justice system.’’