AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneThe sister of Amir Hekmati, the Marine veteran from Michigan who has been imprisoned in Iran more than three and a half years, asked the International Committee of the Red Cross on Tuesday to visit him in Evin Prison in Tehran, one day after she said that Mr. Hekmati had resumed a suspended hunger strike out of despair over the apparent paralysis in his appeal. “We are very worried about him,” the sister, Sarah Hekmati, said in the letter, which was made public by the family. “Due to his living conditions in Evin and the lack of movement in his case, Amir has pledged to starve himself until he is released from Iranian captivity.” It was not immediately clear whether officials at the Red Cross, based in Geneva, had seen the letter. Nor was it clear whether a Red Cross visit would be granted by Iranian officials, who regard Mr. Hekmati, 31, as an Iranian citizen, even though he was born and raised in the United States by his Iranian immigrant parents and holds an American passport.In the letter, Ms. Hekmati also provided further detail on the mistreatment and torture she said her brother had faced in prison, including 17 months of solitary confinement, forced stress positions, Taser strikes to the kidneys and sleep deprivation. She wrote that he had lost 30 pounds when he had first gone on a hunger strike, which he suspended in December after the Iranian penal authorities assured him his appeal was under review. Before he resumed his hunger strike, his sister wrote, he subsisted on a diet of rice and lentils “while living in a ward with hardened criminals, where his food is infested with parasites and he is sleeping among rats.” Mr. Hekmati, a resident of Flint, Mich., who served with the Marines in Iraq and Afghanistan, was seized in August 2011 while visiting relatives in Iran for the first time. He was convicted of espionage and sentenced to death, but that was changed to the less serious conviction of aid to a hostile power, and his punishment was reduced to 10 years in prison. He has denied all wrongdoing, appealed the conviction and called his incarceration a political ploy by Iran to gain concessions from the United States in the multilateral talks over the disputed Iranian nuclear program, which have a June 30 deadline. At least two other Americans of Iranian descent are imprisoned in Iran. Advertisement