By IAN AUSTENOCT. 19, 2015
Justin Trudeau, the leader of the Liberal Party, will become Canada’s second-youngest prime minister and the first to follow a parent into office.Mr. Trudeau was born in Ottawa on Dec. 25, 1971, to Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister at the time, and the former Margaret Sinclair.Raised in Ottawa and Montreal, he married Sophie Grégoire, a childhood friend and former television host and model. The couple have three young children.Mr. Trudeau grew up in the spotlight of his father’s political career, as well as his parents’ intensely publicized marriage and then its equally public disintegration. His childhood, he said in an interview in 2013, was a mix of privilege and the plebeian. He lived at the prime minister’s official residence and took a school bus to a public elementary school in Ottawa.The Liberal Party leader Justin Trudeau delivered his victory speech on Tuesday after winning Canada’s parliamentary election to become the country’s next prime minister.“There were lunch hours where I wouldn’t eat at school because we had to rush home to have lunch with the queen, for example, which actually happened,” he said. “At the same time, it was instilled upon us that this was a privilege and a responsibility, and nothing made us better than anyone else — maybe randomly luckier.”AdvertisementWhile Mr. Trudeau is the product of two political families — his maternal grandfather, James Sinclair, was a cabinet minister — Mr. Trudeau came late to politics. After a childhood spent in the public gaze, Mr. Trudeau disappeared from view for several years, studying English and French literature at McGill University in Montreal and working as a snowboard instructor and nightclub bouncer before becoming a high school teacher in Vancouver, British Columbia.AdvertisementMr. Trudeau returned to the public’s attention in 1998 after his brother Michel was killed in an avalanche. He delivered the eulogy at his father’s funeral, which was broadcast live, two years later.His political career started in 2007, when he began a successful campaign for Parliament in a Montreal electoral district that did not have a recent history of backing the Liberal Party. In April 2013 he became the Liberal leader, 45 years and one week after his father had won the post.He argued during the 2013 campaign that having such a famous name in Canadian politics had been both a blessing and a curse.“I always thought that if politics was going to happen, it was going to happen much later in life,” Mr. Trudeau said. “I knew that the challenge I would be facing all my life would be having people think that I expected anything to be handed to me in politics because of my last name, that I somehow have a right to be in politics because my father was in politics and my grandfather was in politics.”Starting his political career in the Montreal electoral district, which had below-average incomes and traditionally high levels of support for Quebec separatism, was an example of not taking what might have been an easier path to office.He said he wanted to show “that I wasn’t taking anything for granted and that I was willing to work for it.”The Liberal Party’s financial fortunes have improved substantially since Mr. Trudeau became its leader, and he recruited several high-profile candidates for this year’s election.Tall and athletic, Mr. Trudeau boxes once or twice a week.Read a full 2013 profile of Mr. Trudeau. We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.