AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — There was never much suspense about the results of Egypt’s parliamentary elections: President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi had put in place a voting system that seemed designed to virtually eliminate policy debate or ideological competition.And turnout in the first two days was so low that one judge involved in overseeing the polling could not keep a straight face about it in a television interview on Monday. Abdullah Fathy, the president of the association of judges, was asked about procedural violations.“There are no violations because of the weak participation,” he said, struggling not to laugh. “Where are the violations or the fights going to come from?” he asked. “There are no incidences, no violations, no excesses — no voters!”Most of the candidates are local notables without known ideologies or platforms. Many are former members of the ruling party under the previous strongman, Hosni Mubarak, who was ousted in a popular uprising in 2011. Other candidates are military officers who served under Mr. Sisi, the defense minister until he led a military takeover in 2013.“The Egyptian people provided the best response by failing to show up,” said Khaled Dawoud, a former spokesman for a liberal party that boycotted the vote.“It is an embarrassment, and they can’t deny that it is embarrassment,” he added. “This election will not help attempt to build a democracy or to have a true Parliament that can hold the president accountable.”Prime Minister Sherif Ismail said Monday that 15 percent or 16 percent of eligible voters had turned out for the first day of voting the previous day, the state news agency reported. But he did not cite the source of his estimate and the election commission did not disclose its figures.Several polling places in the populous areas near Cairo were almost completely empty, except for a handful of elderly voters. Almost every news account indicated a dearth of voters elsewhere as well.Alarmed by the low turnout on Sunday, Mr. Ismail gave public employees a half-day holiday on Monday to encourage more voting. The governor of Alexandria dropped the fares for public transportation. Pro-government talk show hosts hectored their audiences to get out and vote.Other Egyptians, however, traded jokes about the turnout. “I need to sit alone for a while,” many repeated on Facebook. “I am going to a polling station.”“No one went today either” was trending on Twitter.The low turnout recalled elections for the rubber-stamp parliaments under Mr. Mubarak, although Mr. Mubarak had in fact allowed more competition. In his later years in power, Mr. Mubarak had permitted the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt’s mainstream Islamist movement and the largest opposition group, to win as many as 20 percent of the seats in the Parliament. Then a ruling party sweep eliminated the Brotherhood from Parliament completely in 2010, raising widespread allegations of rigging and setting the stage for the uprising a few months later.Turnout swelled to 55 percent of the voting age population in 2011 for Egypt’s first free parliamentary election in decades. A party list system emphasized policy debate over candidate patronage, and the Brotherhood dominated the vote.Then a year later a court ordered Parliament’s dissolution over a procedural technicality. The army assumed the legislative powers, and a year after that, in 2013, Mr. Sisi led the military ouster of the elected president, Mohamed Morsi of the Brotherhood.Mr. Sisi has ruled without a legislature since 2013. The current election is expected to return lawmakers to the halls of Parliament for the first time in more than three years.Mr. Sisi’s government has also outlawed the Brotherhood, arrested its leaders and shut down its media outlets, and the police have cracked down on more secular opposition as well.For this parliamentary vote, Mr. Sisi put three-quarters of the seats up for competition by individual candidates, favoring the prominent and wealthy. In perhaps the most hotly contested district, in the Dokki neighborhood of Giza across the Nile from Cairo, the son of a famous soccer team manager was running on the slogan “We Score for You,” with a soccer ball as his logo.His chief rival was Abdel Rahim Ali, a pro-Sisi talk show host known for broadcasting leaked telephone surveillance of the private telephone calls of opposition figures. His logo: a mobile phone.An additional 5 percent of the seats will be filled by presidential appointment. The other 20 percent will be awarded to the parties that get the most votes in each of several large districts, favoring the largest parties.Roughly half of Egypt’s provinces voted Sunday and Monday. Runoffs, if necessary, will be held later this month, and the other half of the provinces will vote in November.Merna Thomas contributed reporting.Advertisement