By RICK GLADSTONE and THOMAS ERDBRINKOCT. 19, 2015
An influential Iranian lawmaker delivered inflammatory new accusations on Monday against Jason Rezaian, The Washington Post’s Tehran reporter convicted of espionage this month, asserting that he had plotted with seditionists.In an interview with Iran’s semiofficial Fars News Agency, the lawmaker, Javad Karimi-Qoddusi, also sought to depict Mr. Rezaian as a nefarious spy who had used his credentials as a journalist as a ruse to gain insights that would be valuable to the Iranian government’s enemies.The thrust of the accusations made by Mr. Karimi-Qoddusi, a member of Parliament’s National Security and Foreign Policy Committee, was that Mr. Rezaian had frequently shared information with the State Department and other official arms of the United States, and believed that under an American rapprochement with Iran, the Iranian government would be “toppled within 48 months.”The lawmaker asserted that Mr. Rezaian had also cultivated contacts with Iran’s enemies, including representatives of Israel and members of the National Front — apparently a reference to a liberal, secular party that was suppressed in 1981 and that Mr. Karimi-Qoddusi described as an apostate group.AdvertisementMr. Rezaian grew so close with officials of President Hassan Rouhani’s inner circle, the lawmaker said, that he even knew the type of chewing gum Mr. Rouhani preferred.Advertisement“He was completely familiar with modern espionage methods and sought to gather very important information in social, cultural and political aspects,” Mr. Karimi-Qoddusi said in the interview, published in Persian on the Fars website.Mr. Rezaian has denied all wrongdoing. The precise details of the case against him have never been disclosed.While other Iranian officials and news reports have said Mr. Rezaian was suspected of spying on Iran’s nuclear program and collecting evidence of sanctions violations, the accusation of collaborating with seditionists had not been reported previously in the Iranian news media.Ali Rezaian, Mr. Rezaian’s brother and principal spokesman for the family, described the Fars report as “an effort to justify the injustice done to Jason over the past 15 months — now they have resorted to slander.”Douglas Jehl, The Washington Post’s foreign editor, said the report’s assertions were “simply the latest false and ridiculous claims being circulated by hard-line members of Iran’s Parliament, and they are just as absurd as all the ever-shifting claims that Iranian officials keep putting forward.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawmaker’s remarks seemed to be a warning that others in Iran’s hierarchy who knew Mr. Rezaian, including the president and his foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, could face risk by advocating any prisoner exchange with the United States, as has been suggested in recent weeks.The timing of the interview suggested that hard-liners in Iran, deeply suspicious of President Rouhani’s effort to improve relations with the United States after the nuclear agreement reached in July, may see Mr. Rezaian as an important means of political leverage.Mr. Karimi-Qoddusi said that efforts had been made to swap Mr. Rezaian for Iranian prisoners of the United States two months ago, but that Mr. Karimi-Qoddusi and fellow lawmakers had squelched the idea because Mr. Rezaian’s trial had not even been completed.AdvertisementMr. Karimi-Qoddusi said Parliament’s national security committee had been briefed on the accusations against Mr. Rezaian after his arrest in July 2014.Mr. Rezaian, 39, a dual Iranian-American citizen from California, has a broad range of supporters, including Muhammad Ali and the Committee to Protect Journalists.The case has been shrouded in secrecy. Mr. Rezaian spent months incarcerated before the authorities even disclosed the nature of the charges against him. He learned of his conviction only by seeing it announced last week on television in Iran’s Evin Prison, his brother said.Rick Gladstone reported from New York, and Thomas Erdbrink from Tehran.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Iran Lawmaker Accuses Post Reporter of Sedition .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.