By RAPHAEL MINDEROCT. 19, 2015
Almost 50 years after coming close to possibly provoking a nuclear disaster, the United States on Monday agreed to remove contaminated soil from an area in southern Spain where an American warplane accidentally dropped hydrogen bombs.The deal, announced on a visit to Spain by Secretary of State John Kerry, follows years of wrangling between the two countries over how to clean up the area around the seaside village of Palomares, over which the accident took place in 1966. The bomber collided with a refueling tanker in midair and dropped four hydrogen bombs, two of which released plutonium into the atmosphere. But no warheads detonated, narrowly averting what could have been an explosion more powerful than the atomic strikes against Japan at the end of World War II.Mr. Kerry said at a news conference in Madrid that a statement of intent signed by both countries ensured “that the interests of Spain will be protected and the United States will live up to its responsibilities and do its part.”Spain’s foreign minister, José Manuel García-Margallo, said both countries wanted the cleanup to be completed as soon as possible.AdvertisementBut neither Mr. Kerry nor Mr. García-Margallo said exactly how much contaminated soil would be sent back, where it would be stored in the United States, or who would pay for the cleanup — some of the issues that have held up a deal until now.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About 5,000 barrels of contaminated earth were shipped to South Carolina from Palomares after the 1966 accident. The United States also provided financial compensation to the region.AdvertisementBut in more recent years, Spanish radioactivity studies found that the initial clearance work had been insufficient, and the Spanish government decided to appropriate the land around Palomares to ensure that it would not be used for real estate projects. A main concern has been that the remaining plutonium was being allowed to degenerate into other radioactive components like americium, which emits gamma rays that travel farther and are hard to block. Spain has insisted that any contaminated soil be sent to the United States, because Spain does not have plants to store it.Spain said in 2011 that clearing Palomares properly was a priority. An American scientific delegation visited Palomares that year, but no agreement was reached amid worries over what precedent such a deal could set for other countries pursuing similar claims with the United States.The relationship between the two countries has been bolstered recently as Washington seeks to raise its military presence in Spain, even as it has made cuts at other bases around Europe. The Navy recently sent four destroyers to Rota, in southern Spain, strengthening a hub for operations in the Mediterranean. In May, the two countries also agreed that another military site, at Morón de la Frontera, would become a permanent American Marine base, which could accommodate nearly 3,000 troops as part of a rapid-reaction force that can be deployed primarily in Africa.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 20, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. to Clean Up Site of Bomb Drop in Spain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.