AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenCanadians voted in a federal election on Monday that became something of a referendum on Prime Minister Stephen Harper and the changes he and his Conservatives have wrought over the past decade, analysts said. Justin Trudeau, the leader of the Liberal Party, capitalized on what many Canadians saw as Mr. Harper’s heavy-handed style.The 78-day campaign — twice the usual length — churned through a series of issues with no single one defining it. Here are some of the more crucial ones:The economy: Canada is stagnating economically, largely because prices for natural resources have slumped, particularly oil. Mr. Trudeau said he would spend on infrastructure projects and run modest budget deficits to stimulate the economy. Both Mr. Harper and Tom Mulcair, leader of the New Democratic Party, promised balanced budgets.Refugees: After it emerged that the family of Aylan Kurdi, whose 3-year-old body was photographed on the beaches of Turkey, had hoped to enter Canada, attention turned to the slow processing of claims by Mr. Harper’s government and that political interference added to the delays.The veil: Mr. Harper’s government barred Muslim women from covering their faces during citizenship ceremonies, and when that ruling was struck down in court, he vowed to appeal. The court did allow the government to require that the women show their faces in advance of the ceremony for identification. He also promised to establish a telephone line for reporting “barbaric cultural practices.” The issue resonated with some voters in Quebec, but Mr. Harper’s policy was condemned by both opposition leaders.The Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact: Mr. Harper portrayed it as a way to revitalize the economy. But Mr. Mulcair argued that it threatened 20,000 jobs in the auto parts industry, all in vote-rich Ontario, and said he would not be bound by it. Mr. Trudeau said he would not take a stand on the deal until its full text was made public, but he generally favors free trade.Corruption: Though the amounts of money were small by global standards, revelations of expense-account fiddling by Conservative senators, who are appointed, dominated the early stages of the campaign. One senator whose expenses were repaid by Mr. Harper’s former chief of staff is now on trial, and testimony in the case has been embarrassing for the prime minister.Advertisement