AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan LevinBEIJING — The authorities in a southern Chinese region rocked by a series of deadly explosions this week said on Thursday that they were seeking a quarry worker whom they suspected had carried out the bombings, which killed at least seven people and injured more than 50.As officials sought to calm fears in Liucheng County, in the Guangxi region, a new explosion occurred there on Thursday morning, less than a day after 17 blasts left rubble and twisted rebar across the area.Reports in the state news media said that the bombs, contained in delivered parcels, appeared to have targeted government offices, a prison, a hospital and other places. One was so powerful that it caused a five-story building to partly collapse.Investigators said they were seeking a quarry worker, identified as Wei Yinyong, 33. They also published his phone number and other personal information. Officials did not offer a motive for the attacks, though they said they had ruled out terrorism.A number of previous acts of violence using explosives to target government offices and public places have been linked to men who bore grudges against the authorities, neighbors or doctors for perceived injustices.But there were also questions on Thursday as to whether Mr. Wei had already been captured. Local news outlets, citing a police officer, said that he had been arrested. The official account of the Sina Weibo microblog later contradicted that report, saying the suspect was still at large and ordering the public and the news media not to release any information about the episode.The blast on Thursday damaged a residential building near a local highway administrative bureau, Xinhua, the state-run news agency, reported. It was not immediately clear whether there were any casualties.At a news briefing on Wednesday, the Liucheng government described the attacks as a “criminal case” and said the police had found more than 60 suspicious packages. Officials abruptly ended the news conference without explanation, according to the Guangxi bureau of the China News Service. Residents later received text messages from the Liucheng Work Safety Administration warning them not to open recently delivered packages.On Thursday, the newspaper Southern Metropolis Daily said the parcel bombs had been detonated in two ways. In some cases, people were reportedly hired to deliver the packages, which exploded upon being opened. In other cases, the bombs appeared to have been detonated by remote control, including one that exploded in the dormitory of the Liucheng Animal Husbandry Bureau, which caused the building to partly collapse, killing several people, the newspaper said.Calls to the suspect’s phone number went unanswered. Reached by phone, the Liucheng County Public Security Bureau directed inquiries to the propaganda department of the police in the city of Liuzhou, which includes Liucheng. Repeated calls to the department also went unanswered.Adam Wu contributed research.Advertisement