AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea replaced her top secretary for foreign affairs and national security on Monday after her government was accused of concealing that the United States had refused to transfer crucial technology to the country to help it develop its own fighter jet.To replace the top secretary, Ju Chul-ki, Ms. Park appointed Kim Kyou-hyun, a career diplomat experienced in dealing with Washington and North Korea.Mr. Ju resigned after national legislators criticized the government’s handling of its so-called KF-X project to develop South Korea’s first advanced fighter jet, at a cost of $7.7 billion.Last September, South Korea agreed to buy 40 F-35A fighter jets from Lockheed Martin for an estimated $115 million each. As part of the deal, Seoul’s Defense Acquisition Program Administration announced at the time, Lockheed had agreed to transfer crucial technology to help the KF-X program, which called for developing a fighter similar to Lockheed’s F-16 Fighting Falcon, but with twin engines, improved radar and other sophisticated abilities.Recent parliamentary audits revealed, however, that Washington had refused to transfer four key types of radar, jamming and other technology to South Korea. After learning of the refusal, lawmakers and arms experts cast doubt on the project’s chances of completion.Under the program, the country had planned to spend $8.7 billion, in addition to development costs, to deploy 120 twin-engine fighters by 2032. The first flight was planned for 2025.Lawmakers accused Ms. Park’s government of keeping the public in the dark about Washington’s refusal.The government insisted that it had accounted for that possibility when devising the program.Still, the revelation was embarrassing enough for the defense minister, Han Min-koo, to again ask for American cooperation when he accompanied Ms. Park on a visit to Washington last week. But the Pentagon again turned him down. Opposition lawmakers and local news media accused Mr. Han of engaging in “diplomacy of humiliation.”On Monday, Kim Min-seok, a spokesman for the Defense Ministry, said South Korea would try to develop the missing technology with help from Europe or Israel. During Mr. Han’s visit, the Pentagon also agreed to open a channel of consultation to determine how much aid it could provide for the program, he said.“We know the research and development will be very difficult and uncertain, but this is also a problem we can overcome,” Mr. Kim said.South Korea relies heavily on the United States, a traditional ally, for military planes and other weapons to guard against North Korea. But it has long aspired to build its own fighter aircraft.Advertisement