Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版The opening of the new Museum of War Crime Evidence by Japanese Army Unit 731 on Aug. 15 in Harbin in northeast China was timed to coincide with the 70th anniversary of Japan’s surrender in World War II, part of commemorations across China that included a major Victory Day military parade in Beijing on Sept. 3.The museum in the district of Pingfang enlarges an earlier one on the site where Japanese doctors of Unit 731 carried out medical atrocities on prisoners that rivaled in brutality, or perhaps even surpassed, those committed by Dr. Josef Mengele in Nazi Germany. During a visit last month, workers were still finishing a giant metal canopy that covered the excavated remains of cells where thousands of prisoners lived and died in horrific ways, including by vivisection and by deliberate infection with plague bacteria. According to Gao Yubao, the museum’s head of research, the curators were motivated by a desire to present an accurate picture of history. The museum’s message is clear: Biological warfare was Japanese national policy, and the United States covered it up in exchange for information, without bringing a single perpetrator to justice.Complicating that picture is the fact that the experiments, led by Dr. Shiro Ishii, on Chinese, Korean, Russian and American prisoners is also a focus of China’s highly ideological “patriotic education.” A visitor book at the museum, for instance, records mostly stock patriotic phrases like, “Never forget the national humiliation!”Here’s what two other historians, one American and one Japanese, said of the new museum:“The Chinese state uses history to its own purposes, as do other countries, and it has a level of control that is way up in the stratosphere,” said Mark Selden, a senior research associate in the East Asia Program at Cornell University and co-editor of “Japan’s Wartime Medical Atrocities.” Yet, he added, “We have to respect the historical data in particular situations.”Tsuneishi Keiichi, a contributor to “Japan’s Wartime Medical Atrocities” and author of “Unit 731: The Truth about Biological Weapons and Crimes” said: “I have not met a Chinese researcher who has studied the history of 731 Unit seriously. So I do not expect anything of the new museum. I think there is no really reliable and authentic research material on Shiro Ishii’s biological warfare activities in China. Those are in Japanese libraries and Japanese National Archives, and in the U.S. National Archives and the Library of Congress.”In an interview, Mr. Gao explained the thinking behind the museum:Why build a new museum about Unit 731?Unit 731 committed large-scale, systematic crimes against humanity and ethnicity. Those crimes must be revealed and recorded, so that humanity can remember the price of peace and cherish it.
Some countries in Europe are still suffering from war, which is proof that humanity needs constant reminders of how important peace is.What is the architecture of the new museum saying? The vision for the museum comes from the metaphor of a black box of a plane crash. The point is to say that the site of Unit 731 is the black box that recorded one of the darkest periods of human history.
In showing the contents of the black box, we find out what happened and remember the lessons learned from the disaster. The area round the museum was made to look as if the ground split open to reveal the black box. Who is the architect? A team led by Dr. He Jingtang of South China University of Technology. We talked to many teams in China and Dr. He’s had the best concept.
They did the China pavilion of the Shanghai Expo, which shows that they can handle a large project, and the Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall, which shows they can handle the theme of World War II.When did construction begin?The original building had a small area for displaying artifacts, but the space was too small. Also for the protection of the building, we can’t let in an unlimited number of visitors. We started drawing up blueprints in February 2014. Construction started in November 2014 and finished in August this year.What are the visitor numbers? From the opening up to Sept. 18, on average 7,000 to 10,000 people visited the museum daily.
Before, about 400,000 people came each year to visit the site. Now we have had 270,000 visitors in a little over a month.The end of the exhibition states clearly that the United States did not try the perpetrators of Unit 731 out of its own national interest. Are you concerned this could affect relations between China and the United States?Our motto is: Record history and ignore politics. We are historians, not politicians. Our job is to research and present history to the best of our knowledge and as objectively as we can. As long as historical truth is restored, our job is done. We don’t twist history out of political considerations.What can be done to help set right the burden of the Unit 731 history in relations between China and Japan?We have found other individuals and organizations, including Japanese historians and scholars, who are also interested in revealing and researching this time in history.
We’d like to bring together all who are committed to this. We have extensive cooperation with Japanese historians and artists and dozens of Japanese groups. We just had a 300-member group from Japan visit the museum.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow. 