Relations between Hong Kong residents and their compatriots from the Chinese mainland often are strained, with locals faulting mainlanders for repressive politics, rising property prices and bad manners. Many mainlanders, for their part, complain that Hong Kong people fail to appreciate the benefits of association with a rising political and economic power. This week, tensions worsened, as resentment erupted in China over the death of a mainland tourist in Hong Kong, apparently after a dispute in which his female companion refused to shop in a jewelry store, only to be attacked by people believed to be so-called fake shoppers, the Chinese news media reported. “Forced shopping” is a common practice among operators of low-cost tour groups to Hong Kong, who expect their clients to make up for the cheap transport and accommodations by spending money during prearranged stops in stores where guides make a commission. The pressure to shop can be immense. On Monday, Miao Chunqi, 54, a construction contractor from Heilongjiang Province in northeastern China, intervened in a quarrel between his colleague and traveling companion, Zhang Lixia, 53, and their tour guide, Deng Haiyan, 32, according to The Beijing News, The Paper and other news outlets. The quarrel reportedly broke out after Ms. Zhang declined to buy anything at the jewelry store in the Hung Hom area.Mr. Miao was beaten bloody by men who The Beijing News said may have been “fake shoppers” planted in the tour group to encourage others to buy. On Tuesday, Mr. Miao died in a Hong Kong hospital.Two men wanted over mainland Chinese tourist’s death ‘may have left HK’; suspect stages reconstruction:https://t.co/T4Pf58HYaS— denise tsang (@denise_tsang) 21 Oct 15Tens of thousands of people in China are commenting on the episode, with many saying that Hong Kong, a semiautonomous territory that Britain returned to China in 1997, should change its name, which means “fragrant harbor,” to “stinking harbor.” By Wednesday afternoon, the article in The Beijing News alone had drawn 18,000 comments.“I hate Hong Kong!” and “Don’t go there” were common refrains.“The image of Hong Kong as a shopping paradise is long gone!,” a commenter identified as Rain from Hebei said. “Tourists have a brain and will vote with their feet!”Someone from Shanghai with the handle bf8463@sohu.com wrote, “People not in good health or without strong kungfu should stay away from Hong Kong!”“It’s long been an indisputable fact that Hongkongers hate mainlanders,” a user in Sichuan going by the name Yuerugou wrote. “People with some self-respect will never go there for sightseeing or shopping.”Others directed their anger toward the discount travel agencies, and the Chinese authorities who they said were doing too little to control them.“It is those ‘black groups’ that con tourists to Hong Kong with low prices to do forced shopping,” said someone with the handle Blame Vicky. “Isn’t it amazing that so many people know low-price groups aren’t good but still sign up for them?”“Who is in charge of tourism in China?” and “Who is the head of tourism in China?” were two widespread comments.The Hong Kong police have classified the case as manslaughter. Ms. Zhang and Ms. Deng were arrested on suspicion of fighting in a public place, and a 44-year-old Hong Kong man and a 32-year-old mainland man, both believed to be among the attackers, were arrested Monday night. The police are searching for two additional men, the South China Morning Post reported.In 2010, Chen Youming, 65, a retired national table tennis player from Hunan Province, collapsed after quarreling with a tour guide during a “forced shopping” trip in Hong Kong, and later died of a heart attack.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow and Vanessa Piao @VanessaPiao.