AdvertisementSupported byMan in the NewsBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — When Justin Trudeau moves into the prime minister’s official residence, it will be a homecoming. His parents lived there, in the gray stone house at 24 Sussex Drive in Ottawa, when he was born on Christmas Day in 1971.In a country where political dynasties are rare, Mr. Trudeau will be the first Canadian to follow a parent into the country’s highest political office, thanks to his Liberal Party’s surprisingly sweeping victory in the election on Monday, ending nine years of Conservative government.And there are many easy parallels to draw between him and his father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, who led the country for 15 years beginning in 1968.Start with the superficial: good looks, rugged athleticism, glamorous wife, rapturous fans. More substantially: unusual outspokenness, reputations as agents of change, a sharp upward trajectory in the Liberals’ fortunes on each man’s watch.Without doubt, the good luck to be born with Pierre’s surname was a big help.But Justin Trudeau is no dynast who slipped effortlessly into a family political machine. He did not even enter politics until 18 years after his father gave it up, and seven years after his father’s death. He built his own cadre of advisers, mostly from his own generation. And at key points in his career, he chose more difficult roads — partly, it appears, to show he had not been handed a life in politics on a platter.“I do this not out of a sense of historical ambition or drive: ‘My father did it, so I have to,’ ” Mr. Trudeau said during a lengthy interview in 2013, shortly before he became the Liberal Party leader. “No, I do this because I think I have something to offer. If it turns out that I don’t, that’s just fine, too. But I’m fairly confident that I have something to offer that this country needs more of right now, which is an antidote to the kind of cynicism which is dominating too much of politics around the world.”The novelty of a sitting prime minister with young children made Justin Trudeau and his two brothers celebrities from birth, but Pierre Trudeau and his wife, Margaret, who came from a prominent political family herself, tried to give the boys some semblances of normalcy. The children rode the regular bus to public school (albeit with an unmarked car full of bodyguards right behind), and they mixed in class with children from a poor area of Ottawa as well as their own affluent neighbors.When he was 7 or 8, Mr. Trudeau recalled, he overheard his parents giving away the secret of Santa Claus, and the next morning, he told a group of his friends in the schoolyard.“Most of the kids ran off crying,” he said. “But one turned to me and said: ‘I know. I’ve always known. My mom told me when I was old enough to understand, because she couldn’t afford presents for me.’ ”Mr. Trudeau said he had immediately thought of the “mountain of presents under the tree at 24 Sussex,” many of them sent by ambassadors to Canada. “That was one of those moments when I realized, ‘Man, I’m very, very lucky, and it has nothing to do with the quality of the person I am or what kind of material stuff we have,’ ” he said. “Because this kid, Mark, was one of my best friends.”The media spotlight that fell on his childhood also obsessively documented the breakdown of his parents’ marriage, a product of Margaret Trudeau’s struggles with mental illness. When his father quit public life, the family moved to Montreal, and the retired prime minister led the life of a single parent, though an affluent one.Both father and son came to elective politics relatively late in life, but Pierre Trudeau had already been active on the public stage at several important moments in Quebec’s history. Notably, he supported a 1949 strike by asbestos miners, a turning point in the “quiet revolution” against the province’s entrenched elite of Catholic clerics and Anglophone businessmen.Justin Trudeau and his Liberal Party won a sweeping victory in Canada’s national election on Monday. Here is a look at how the 43-year-old father of three worked his way to becoming Canada’s second-youngest prime minister.Justin Trudeau studied French and English literature at McGill University in Montreal, but after that, as he acknowledged, his path was a slightly aimless one. He went with friends on a backpacking trip around the world. He thought about law school, then returned to McGill to study education, only to drop out and move to British Columbia, his mother’s home province, where he taught snowboarding and worked as a nightclub bouncer — an unlikely job, perhaps, for someone with his slender build.“I was the one they’d send in to defuse a situation and escort someone out, because I was diplomatic,” Mr. Trudeau said. “I’ve never felt physically threatened by anyone. I don’t have a fear gene, I guess — I don’t know.”He returned to education and taught in both a public high school and a private prep school in Vancouver, an experience that he said confirmed his belief in the public system.At the prep school, “there were parents who spent a lot of time intimidating the teachers, because they make so much more money than them, and the kids were catching on to that and not respecting the teachers,” he said. “There’s something, I think, unhealthy about that level of privilege.”Two tragedies returned him to the public gaze. His brother Michel was killed in an avalanche in 1998, prompting a public outpouring of sympathy for the family. Then, when his devastated father died two years later, Mr. Trudeau delivered a eulogy that was broadcast live.Rather than a safe Liberal seat, Mr. Trudeau ran in 2007 for one in downtown Montreal that was known for favoring Quebec-separatist candidates. He won, and has widened his margin of victory in each election since then.Mr. Trudeau showed a penchant for unscripted remarks that could be refreshing or embarrassing. When Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced that Canadian fighter jets would join the American-led campaign against the Islamic State militant group, Mr. Trudeau responded with a vulgar metaphor that many called juvenile. And he raised eyebrows in 2013 when he said, “There’s a level of admiration I actually have for China: Their basic dictatorship is actually allowing them to turn their economy around on a dime.”Opponents have pounced on his miscues and tried to paint him as naïve and ill-prepared. But Bob Rae, the interim leader of the Liberals whom Mr. Trudeau succeeded, said the occasional verbal blunders did not reflect Mr. Trudeau’s true nature. He “doesn’t necessarily come to his conclusions immediately or grammatically,” Mr. Rae said, but he is “a thoughtful, intelligent guy.”Mr. Rae said many people mistook Mr. Trudeau’s consensual approach to politics for weakness or indiscipline. “You don’t become the leader of a major party by just being a nice guy,” he said.Mr. Trudeau will become a prime minister of many firsts, some of them trivial: the first who regularly boxes (at least once a week), the first to have acted in a television mini-series (playing a war hero in a World War I drama) and, as far as anyone knows, the first with tattoos (a globe from his 20s; a raven in a Haida Indian pattern added when he turned 40).The circle of aides around him began as his friends. He met Gerald Butts, now his principal adviser, when they both studied at McGill. He grew up with Dominic LeBlanc, the son of one of Pierre Trudeau’s cabinet ministers and now his closest ally in Parliament. Anna Gainey, the party president, is another old friend.For all that his family connections have done for his political career, though, Mr. Trudeau said it had worked the other way, too.“There have been people out there who love me because of my father; there are people out there who hate me because of my father,” he said. “I’ve had to learn to not entirely disregard that, but understand that either side of those is not based in a reality that I can use as an anchor for who or what I am.”Advertisement