AdvertisementSupported byBy Suliman Ali Zway and Carlotta GallTRIPOLI, Libya — Four years after the fall of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, Libya risks lurching further into chaos after opposing factions ignored warnings from the United States and the United Nations Security Council and refused to sign up to a government of national accord brokered by the international body.The United Nations special representative in Libya, Bernadino León, last week presented the final amendments to a peace agreement and announced names for a new government to meet Tuesday’s deadline, when the mandate of the internationally recognized Libyan Parliament expired.The State Department issued a statement from 40 countries on Monday warning that the failure to reach agreement put Libya at risk of greater instability, worsening a situation that has “led to the loss of lives, allowed terrorism to grow and severely damaged the economy of the country.” The Security Council issued a similar warning over the weekend, threatening sanctions against those who rejected the proposal.Yet both sides in Libya’s conflict — the internationally recognized Parliament based in the eastern Libyan city of Tobruk and the Libya Dawn alliance that heads an alternative government in Tripoli — rebuked Mr. León for forcing decisions upon them.In Tripoli, the political affairs committee of the former Parliament, the General National Congress, announced at a news briefing that legislators were not ready to sign the peace agreement because they wanted further amendments, something Mr. León refused to do.The House of Representatives in Tobruk also refused to ratify the peace plan, breaking up after hours of stormy debate on Monday without passing a resolution, even though its negotiators had initialed the final draft. One legislator, Ibrahim al-Zughaid, told a local television channel that representatives had reached a consensus not to accept the deal.But Fathi Bashagha, a senior negotiator in the peace talks, said that a small group of lawmakers led by the speaker had tried to impose their will on the rest to reject the peace agreement. He said the same had happened in the General National Congress in Tripoli.“The minority hijacked the rights of the majority,” he said. “We should not allow them to derail our efforts to reach an agreement.”The peace agreement would bring in a new unity government backed by a Supreme State Council of senior legislators and a larger body of representatives drawn from the two parliaments. However, legislators in the House of Representatives passed a resolution this month extending their one-year mandate, a sign they were preparing for the next stage.“The international community is not the trustee over the House of Representatives. The House of Representatives was chosen by the Libyan people,” Mr. Zughaid said.Some of the protests were more over form than content. The General National Congress rejected Mr. León’s unilateral announcement of names for the government, even though some of its own members were given senior positions. Abdul Rahman al-Swehli, a senior negotiator for the Congress, reminded Mr. León that it was not his prerogative to decide such a matter.Some divisions would appear intractable, with the leaders and their positions backed by powerful militias. The most critical annex to the peace agreement calls for a cease-fire and disarmament of all militias, which few believe can be achieved.In addition to the two main factions, there are numerous other armed groups in the country, including ones affiliated with Al Qaeda and the Islamic State. In recent days, the Islamic State has been accused of several assassinations in the strategic town of Ajdabiya.One major obstacle is the fate of Gen. Khalifa Hifter, a former Qaddafi officer who leads the eastern faction. He has the backing of the internationally recognized government and Egypt in his fight against Islamist groups in Benghazi but is vehemently opposed by the General National Congress in Tripoli, which is allied with some of the Islamists. It is not clear whether General Hifter would give up his nominal position as commander in chief of Libyan forces, or how he would fit in to a reformed national security force.The European Union said it would start talks on providing a military or civilian mission to help with the disarmament of militias and the guarding of oil and government facilities as soon as the parties agreed on the unity government. The United States has also said it would provide trainers to assist Libyan security forces once a new government was in place.“The world doesn’t want the crisis to accumulate and escalate in Libya,” a Libyan diplomat, Ibrahim al-Dabashi, told a local news outlet.Suliman Ali Zway reported from Tripoli, and Carlotta Gall from Tunis.Advertisement