AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — Days after overrunning a major district in the northwestern Afghan province of Faryab, the Taliban killed at least 22 police officers and captured the district’s security chief along with many of his men after they ran out of ammunition, officials said on Tuesday.The officials said that an Afghan Army base of several hundred soldiers and a road-construction camp housing Afghan police officers remained surrounded in the district, Ghormach, which has long been contested by the Taliban.The fighting there intensified as the insurgents have kept up an intense series of offensives all around the country. Officials describe a clear shift in the tactics of the insurgents, who have been emboldened by their brief capture of the Kunduz provincial capital last month. The Taliban are no longer acting as a mere hit-and-run force, instead assaulting in larger numbers with the intention of holding territory.In recent days, the Taliban have overrun checkpoints near Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital of southern Helmand Province. They have also repeatedly attacked two districts in Herat Province: Ghurian, where fierce fighting continued late into Tuesday, and Shindand, home to an air base in western Afghanistan.In the fighting in Faryab Province, many local officials feared that the two besieged security bases in Ghormach could be overrun, further depleting the Afghan forces and handing the Taliban an infusion of military hardware. But government efforts to reinforce the district were disrupted by insurgents’ roadblocks and improvised bombs.Afghan Army officials acknowledged that their posts in Ghormach were under attack. But Mohammad Reza Rezai, a spokesman for the Afghan military in the north, said the army units were fully equipped to repel the attacks.“The Taliban are trying to take some of the army posts, but we have inflicted major casualties on them,” Mr. Rezai said. “The base has enough food and ammunition.”At least one-fifth of the country is controlled or contested by the Taliban.The fate of the Ghormach District police chief, Abdul Majeed Gilimbafi, and his men, who were detained on Monday, remained unclear. Rahmatullah Turkestani, a member of the Faryab provincial council, said the Taliban had announced that Mr. Gilimbafi would be publicly executed Tuesday morning. But Mr. Turkestani’s latest information suggested that the execution had been postponed.“For four days, the police commander resisted without food and water,” Mr. Turkestani said. Exhausted by the fighting, and with no reinforcements in sight, some of the police officers retreated to the army base, and the police chief, who remained, was wounded in the shoulder.Mr. Turkestani added, “After they ran out of ammunition, 37 police were killed, and poor Commander Majeed was detained along with 17 of his policemen.”Naqibullah Fayeq, a member of Parliament from Faryab, said 22 police officers had been killed, and 19 detained. Faryab police officials could not be reached for comment.After the collapse of the city of Kunduz, the Taliban in early October mobilized most of their forces from the surrounding districts of Faryab to make a run for Maimana, the provincial capital. But they met strong resistance, suffering heavy casualties at the hands of Afghan forces and local militias allied with them. American warplanes also conducted several strikes on Taliban positions. Since then, the fighting has returned to the countryside, with battles in at least 18 areas of the province, Mr. Fayeq said.The prime target of the Taliban in Faryab now seems to be the military bases in Ghormach. At the army base, there are between 450 and 800 soldiers, according to varying official accounts. The Taliban have their eyes on “the 100 Ranger vehicles and the 75 tanks” there, Mr. Fayeq said.Mr. Turkestani, the provincial council member, said the roads to Ghormach remained closed, with reinforcements facing ambushes along the way. The air route also proved difficult, because the Taliban surrounding the bases had heavy machine guns that could easily target aircraft during attempted landings.Faryab’s troubles once again sent the Afghan vice president, Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, toward the battlefield to try to bring some calm to his northern regional stronghold.General Dostum — who, like other former warlords from the country’s civil war era, has been accused of atrocities — on Tuesday donned his military uniform and landed at his palace in the city of Shibarghan, just north of Faryab, to try to coordinate the response to the Taliban offensive.“I will not command you from behind a desk; I will be with you, entering every village,” General Dostum told soldiers gathered in Shibarghan. He promised the struggling forces in Ghormach that he would arrive there soon. And he made a battle cry out of the Ghormach police officers’ fate. “Revenge for the executions of our soldiers!” he shouted.In August, General Dostum spent several weeks leading an operation in Faryab, marching through several districts, including Ghormach, and declaring them clear of the Taliban. But within days, the insurgents made a mockery of the general’s efforts, reclaiming those territories and more.In the southern province of Helmand, where the Taliban have long contested several districts, heavy fighting was reported in areas around the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. Hundreds of Taliban staged assaults on security checkpoints between the district of Nad Ali and Lashkar Gah on Monday, overrunning posts close to the city, according to Abdul Karim Attal, the head of the provincial council.An army base in Marja, one of the districts at the heart of President Obama’s 2010 troop surge, also came under fire, which inflicted grave casualties on Afghan forces.Nabi Jan Mullahkhel, the Helmand police chief, said the Taliban had used “all their force” to overrun the suburbs of Babaji and Toghi, considered important security belts for Lashkar Gah. The attacks were repelled, leaving 35 Taliban dead and 17 wounded, he said. But residents said the Taliban had managed to control a part of Babaji, about five miles from the city center.“The aim of the Taliban is to bring violence to the city of Lashkar Gah and make the peaceful lives troubled for the citizens, but we will not allow them,” Mr. Mullahkhel said.In western Herat Province, officials said Ghurian District was attacked from three directions late in the afternoon. Officials said reinforcements, led by the provincial police chief, had arrived at the scene.The assault on Ghurian came after the district of Shindand was repeatedly assaulted this week. Taliban fighters attacked the district center on Sunday, and then again on Monday, but were pushed back by Afghan forces, according to the district governor, Abdul Ahmad Fazli.Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Jawad Sukhanyar from Kabul.Advertisement