AdvertisementSupported byBy Douglas DalbyDUBLIN — An independent report published on Tuesday about paramilitary activity in Northern Ireland has potentially cleared the way for a resolution of the political crisis there, after it determined that the Irish Republican Army has a “wholly political focus” even though its command structures are still in place.Pro-British unionists and Irish republicans share power by official mandate in Northern Ireland, but the devolved government created under a 1998 peace agreement has been near collapse for more than a month in a dispute over the Sinn Fein party’s insistence that the I.R.A. “has left the stage.”The majority Democratic Unionist Party — which walked out of the government on Sept. 10, saying that it could no longer trust Sinn Fein — said after the publication of the report on Tuesday that it would return.Last month, Theresa Villiers, the British secretary of state for Northern Ireland, ordered the British government assessment of paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland, both with Irish republican allegiances and among loyalist supporters of Britain, and whether the groups had engaged in criminal activities.In an address to the House of Commons on Tuesday, Ms. Villiers said the assessment confirmed that all of the main paramilitary groups operating during the 30-year conflict known as the Troubles had endured and were still organized along military lines. But she added that the groups no longer posed a serious threat to peace and stability.“In the highly unlikely event that the groups were minded to return to terrorism,” she said, “we judge they would be unable to resurrect the capability demonstrated at their peak.”The conclusions, based on information supplied by the police in Northern Ireland and by MI5, Britain’s domestic intelligence agency, largely substantiate comments by Northern Ireland’s top police official, Chief Constable George Hamilton, who said in August that the I.R.A. was now committed to pursuing Irish unity by peaceful means.Chief Hamilton’s remarks came after the killing in Belfast in August of Kevin McGuigan, a former I.R.A. member who spent many years in and out of jail.The police suspected Mr. McGuigan had been killed by I.R.A. operatives who held him responsible for the assassination in May of a former senior commander in that organization, Gerard (Jock) Davison.But Chief Hamilton said he did not believe the organization was to blame. “I accept the bona fides of the Sinn Fein leadership regarding their rejection of violence,” he said at the time.Specifically, the report backed the police’s belief that the murder of Mr. McGuigan had not been sanctioned by the I.R.A. leadership.“The investigation into the murder of Kevin McGuigan is still ongoing: however, we judge that the assessment put forward by the chief constable on 22 August remains accurate,” it said.After the release of the report, the Democratic Unionists wasted little time in expressing their intent to return to the government.The party said in a statement that it had withdrawn from the government in September in response to the arrest and questioning of a senior Sinn Fein leader, Bobby Storey, in connection with Mr. McGuigan’s death. Mr. Storey was released without charge and has said he will file a civil suit for wrongful arrest.“It confirms the chief constable’s August statement rather than the contradictory implications that flowed from the arrest of Bobby Storey,” the party said of Tuesday’s report. “On that basis, ministers will be appointed to office later today.”In a statement, Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein, the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, rejected the report’s assertion of a belief among I.R.A. members that an unelected Provisional Army Council was also responsible for directing Sinn Fein strategy.“Sinn Fein is the only republican organization involved in the peace process, in democratic politics and in political activism,” he said. “We take no instructions from no one else.”The report said that dissident Irish republicans who rejected the 1998 peace agreement were the biggest danger to the state, and it noted that various groups had staged 15 to 40 attacks a year since 2000.“Their activities pose a severe threat to Northern Ireland’s security and stability,” the report said, “and at any given time, a terrorist attack is highly likely.”The independent assessment was compiled by Alex Carlile, who has acted as an independent reviewer of national security arrangements in Northern Ireland since 2007; Rosalie Flanagan, a former senior Northern Ireland civil servant; and Stephen Shaw, a Northern Ireland-based lawyer. It also said that members of all of the paramilitary groups had been involved in serious criminal activities, including murder, drug dealing, extortion and smuggling, and that some had access to firearms that had not been decommissioned in accordance with the peace deal.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement