AdvertisementSupported byBy Russell GoldmanJustin Trudeau and the Liberal Party swept to electoral victory in Canada on Monday, ending nine years of Conservative rule and promising a number of major policy shifts. Here are some of the changes Mr. Trudeau called for during the campaign.Ottawa’s ties with Washington were often strained while Stephen Harper was prime minister over issues like the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal and the proposed Keystone XL pipeline to carry Canadian oil to the United States, which President Obama opposed on environmental grounds. Though Mr. Trudeau supports the pipeline, he has said improving relations with the United States should take priority.Justin Trudeau and his Liberal Party won a sweeping victory in Canada’s national election on Monday. Here is a look at how the 43-year-old father of three worked his way to becoming Canada’s second-youngest prime minister.Mr. Trudeau pledged to end Canada’s involvement in the American-led coalition’s bombing campaign against the Islamic State militant group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and to turn instead to supporting the Syrian rebel forces who are fighting the militants. He and the Liberals opposed the Conservative government’s plans for extending Canadian operations in Iraq and Syria.Mr. Harper is a global-warming skeptic, and his government promoted the mining of Canada’s carbon-rich oil sands and pledged only limited cuts to greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Trudeau accepts the scientific consensus that human activity is altering the world climate, and has said that he, unlike Mr. Harper, would personally lead Canada’s delegation to a global summit on the issue in Paris.Canada is stagnating economically, in part because prices for many commodities it produces have slumped, oil in particular. Mr. Trudeau said he would step up public spending on infrastructure projects and run budget deficits for three years to stimulate the economy.Mr. Trudeau promised to begin working to legalize marijuana “right away.” Current laws criminalize and imprison too many people for carrying small amounts of the drug, he argued. But he has yet to detail how legal marijuana would be regulated and taxed.slide showAdvertisement