By AUSTIN RAMZYOCT. 20, 2015
HONG KONG — If Tony Abbott’s ouster as Australia’s prime minister was a shock to his supporters, few felt it more sharply than whoever was dancing on the Italian marble table at a party in Mr. Abbott’s offices that night.The marble, like Mr. Abbott’s support, collapsed dramatically. The tale of the table has been the talk of Australian political circles since Monday, when it officially emerged before a Senate committee. Department of Parliamentary Services staff members explained how the government-owned table was found in pieces on the morning of Sept. 15, the day after Malcolm Turnbull defeated Mr. Abbott to become leader of the Liberal Party and Australia’s prime minister.Mr. Abbott said later Monday that he had hosted drinks that night in his cabinet offices and would pay for the damage. “It was my event so I take responsibility for it,” he said in a written statement. The bronze-framed coffee table cost 590 Australian dollars when it was purchased in the late 1980s, but its replacement or repair would cost several times that today, Australian news reports said.
            Ministers 'took pieces of broken table' during wild party in Tony Abbott's office suite http://t.co/E2eJZrcnHZ pic.twitter.com/mvVxMHmQ0p “Quite a party,” Senator Penny Wong, the head of the opposition in the Senate, said during the committee meeting. Ms. Wong, a member of the Labor Party, later questioned why the offer to pay had only come once the destruction of the table had been made public.Advertisement“I think the reality is no Australian accepts it’s appropriate to smash furniture at work, no matter who you are,” she told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. “We had this happening in the cabinet suite in the nation’s Parliament.”The culprit has not been named, but the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported that according to descriptions of the party, “A consistent theme is that a large gentleman climbed on to the marble table and shimmied until it was reduced to rubble.”AdvertisementJamie Briggs, the minister for cities, appeared in Parliament in a wheelchair the morning after the party, prompting speculation that he had a role. He said on Twitter that the speculation was incorrect and that he had in fact injured a knee ligament while running.A version of this article appears in print on October 21, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Democracy in Australia Takes a Toll on the Décor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.