AdvertisementSupported byBy Douglas DalbyDUBLIN — The chief public prosecutor in Northern Ireland demanded investigations on Wednesday into accusations of government collusion in the killing of at least 24 people during the province’s sectarian conflict, committed by a man believed to have been Britain’s top spy inside the Irish Republican Army.Barra McGrory, director of public prosecutions, said in a statement, “I have requested that the chief constable investigate a range of potential offenses, which relate to the alleged activities of an agent commonly known as Stakeknife.”The man under suspicion, Freddie Scappaticci, who is in his late 60s, has always denied that he was the British Army spy code-named Stakeknife, even though officials have indirectly confirmed his identity. When the accusations against him surfaced in 2003, he received the support of the leaders of Sinn Fein, then the I.R.A.’s political wing, but he subsequently fled his native Belfast. His current whereabouts is unknown.Investigations are generally handled by the Police Service of Northern Ireland after referrals from the Public Prosecution Service, but given that the provincial police are accused of being involved in the collusion, an external investigator, perhaps a foreigner, is likely to be appointed.In a recorded conversation with a whistle-blower that was posted on the Internet in 2012, Gen. John Wilsey, who commanded the British Army in Northern Ireland from 1990 to 1993, described Mr. Scappaticci as “the golden egg.”“He was our most important secret,” he said.Mr. Scappaticci, a descendant of Italian immigrants and a former bricklayer, is said to have been an important member of the I.R.A.’s internal security unit. The counterintelligence team investigated security leaks and debriefed members after they had been released from police custody. The unit was widely known as the “nutting squad,” a reference to its propensity for executing informers.Crucially, the unit was also responsible for vetting potential I.R.A. recruits, so Stakeknife would have known most if not every new member of the organization. British Army officials insist that he was responsible for saving countless lives by helping to thwart many high-profile terror attacks. However, there is little doubt that his identity was protected at the cost of numerous lives.Mr. McGrory said three government inquiries had been conducted by a British former police officer, John Stevens, into collusion by British security forces with loyalist paramilitaries in the murder of nationalists, many of them I.R.A. suspects. The investigations concluded that at least 24 murders warranted further investigation.Mr. Scappaticci is believed to have started working for the I.R.A. security forces in 1978. As he rose through the ranks during the 1980s, he became the most valuable asset in an organization that was subsequently found to be riddled with informers.He had been caught up in the early days of the Northern Ireland conflict, and in 1971 he was among the thousands of young nationalist men interned in the Long Kesh prison camp. Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, was a fellow internee, and Mr. Scappaticci would later become one of his bodyguards.In 2003, media outlets in Ireland and the United Kingdom identified Mr. Scappaticci as Stakeknife after he had been moved to safety by the British authorities. Rumors had been circulating for months that his secret identity was about to be revealed.Mr. McGrory has demanded two investigations: The first would concentrate on the range of potential offenses that Stakeknife might have committed, while the second would include “any potential criminal activity that may have been carried out by security service agents.”“I have outlined today extremely serious matters,” he said. “I have not taken the steps to commence investigations lightly but, rather, consider they must be taken to ensure that public confidence can be maintained in the office of the D.P.P. and in the wider criminal justice system.” D.P.P. refers to the Director of Public Prosecutions.Will Kerr, Northern Ireland’s assistant chief constable, said the police had received the referral from Mr. McGrory but declined to comment further.Advertisement