
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
OCT. 21, 2015
An appeals court in Bahrain upheld the conviction of a prominent opposition activist on Wednesday, sentencing her to one year in prison for insulting the nation’s king by tearing up a photograph of him last year in front of a judge while on trial for the very same act.The activist, Zainab al-Khawaja, who turned 32 on Wednesday, ripped up a picture of King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa during a court hearing related to charges that she insulted the monarch in exactly the same way in 2012.
            After 2ًmonths of imprisonment activist zainab alkhawaja join sanabis protesters N tearing pic of hamad
#KingsTornPics pic.twitter.com/YuetC2IA Writing on her popular @AngryArabiya Twitter feed that year, Ms. Khawaja defended the act of ripping up the picture as a legitimate form of peaceful protest against the monarchy.
            I believe tearing up pictures of a criminal dictator is a legitimate method of peaceful resistance #Bahrain #KingsTornPics According to her sister, Maryam al-Khawaja, the court also imposed a fine of $8,000 on Wednesday. If the fine is not paid, she must serve an additional year and a half in prison.Advertisement“It is ludicrous that Zainab al-Khawaja is facing a year in prison simply for tearing up a photo of the head of state,” James Lynch of Amnesty International said in a statement. He called the decision of the appeals court to uphold the conviction, even while reducing the original sentence from three years to one, “a vindictive assault on freedom of expression” and “yet another example of the Bahraini authorities’ use of oppressive tactics to silence peaceful activists.”
            US-ally #Bahrain sentences activist #ZainabAlKhawaja @angryarabiya to 3 years in prison for tearing up king's photo pic.twitter.com/N4umWvhCIu Although Bahrain’s Sunni Muslim monarch is an American ally in the aerial campaign against the Islamic State, and the Persian Gulf state is home to the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, its crackdown on dissent has been criticized by the State Department.AdvertisementLast year, Bahrain appeared to retaliate by expelling the senior United States official on human rights after he met with the nation’s main opposition group, which represents the Shiite Muslim majority.Ms. Khawaja is free on bail, as she appeals three other convictions for acts of civil disobedience. She faces an additional two years in prison for destroying public property, by ripping up the king’s picture at a police station in 2012; insulting a public officer by arguing with a prison guard in 2013; and entering a restricted area last year when she tried to force her way into a prison to visit her father, Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, an opposition leader sentenced to life in prison for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in 2011.Ms. Khawaja has already spent more than a year in prison since the wave of protests reached Bahrain in 2011 and was suppressed with deadly force. If she is jailed again, Ms. Khawaja intends to keep her 11-month-old son, Abdulhadi, with her, according to her sister.
            The reduction of Zainab’s sentence changes things in the long term - less time in prison (unless she gets sentenced to more years) #Bahrain 
#PT but in the short term it changes nothing, she’s at risk of arrest at any time, and will have to take her baby w her to prison #Bahrain In an interview with The Times in 2011, Ms. Khawaja mentioned her older child as an inspiration for her activism.“If they silence me, and they silence everyone, by targeting our families, we’re never going to move forward, we’re never going to get freedom in this country, and we’ll live for the rest of our lives under dictators,” she said. “And my daughter, who is 2 years old now, will grow up like we did, you know, in fear, living under dictators and accepting it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »