By RAPHAEL MINDEROCT. 21, 2015
MADRID — The Spanish police on Wednesday raided the headquarters of the governing party of Catalonia, arresting the party’s treasurer as part of an investigation into whether companies paid bribes in return for public works contracts.The arrest came amid a tense standoff between the central government in Madrid and the regional Catalan government led by Artur Mas, who has been pushing for Catalonia to secede. Separatist parties won Catalonia’s regional elections last month, but did not win a majority of the votes.Mr. Mas, who is also leader of the Convergence party, suggested that the Spanish police intervention was politically motivated.“Convergence and I are targets for big-game hunters,” Mr. Mas told reporters on Wednesday. Mr. Mas said he had “full confidence” in the officials who have been handling his party’s accounts, as well as in the way Catalonia has awarded contracts for public works.AdvertisementThe fraud investigation centering on the Convergence party, however, could further complicate the formation of a coalition government in Catalonia. One far-left separatist party, known by the Catalan acronym CUP, said it would support a new Catalan government only if Mr. Mas were removed, because of his longstanding leadership of a party tainted by corruption scandals.AdvertisementThe police intervention started early Wednesday morning and involved raids of some Catalan town halls and the offices of private companies. Altogether a dozen people were arrested, including the treasurer of Convergence, Andreu Viloca, the director of the company that awards the region’s infrastructure contracts, as well as some executives of building companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since Spain’s construction bubble burst in 2008, the country has initiated about 200 corruption cases against politicians at nearly all levels of government. But few of them have reached the sentencing stage, highlighting the slow pace of prosecutions by overburdened judges.Responding to the suggestion made by Mr. Mas that the timing of the investigation into his party’s finances was linked to the “political moment” in Catalonia, Spain’s minister of justice, Rafael Catalá, said that politicians should not tarnish the image of Spain’s judiciary by questioning its independence. He said that the kind of investigation that resulted in the arrest of the Catalan party treasurer “happens every day.”The investigation into the finances of the Convergence party echoes another larger inquiry into allegations that Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy’s Popular Party used a slush fund to channel corporate kickbacks to senior party officials.While Mr. Rajoy has denied any wrongdoing, the Popular Party’s former treasurer, Luis Bárcenas, has accused Mr. Rajoy of knowing about such illegal payments. Mr. Bárcenas, who is awaiting trial, has been at the heart of the scandal since 2013, when the Swiss authorities revealed that he had amassed millions in Swiss banks and other offshore accounts.Spain’s main opposition Socialist party has also been caught up in a major scandal involving fraudulent unemployment compensation payments in Andalusia, the southern region that has long been run by the Socialists.A version of this article appears in print on October 22, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; Spain: Official of Catalan Party Arrested.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.