As suicide attempts go, mine was of the halfhearted variety. In fact, some might even argue that it was no attempt at all. The police arrived at my Austin home following a fight I’d had in the driveway with my friend Bill, who’s also a veteran. Bill had been called over to the house by my then girlfriend because she was worried about the way I was acting.I was wired on a cocktail of Adderall and Trazodone, and had a few drinks the night before as well. When the police arrived the following morning, a man and a woman, I asked the woman if her pistol was loaded.“Of course it is. Why would you ask a thing like that?”“Because I want you to shoot me in the head.”To this day, I’m not sure why I said that. In retrospect I think it was less about wanting to die and more about expressing to another human being that I was in pain. But they were police officers, and a solicitation for suicide-by-cop, however unconvincing, was something they took very seriously.“Right,” the male officer interjected. “We’re gonna have to bring you to the hospital.”A minor struggle ensued outside, to the entertainment of my neighbors who observed the scene from a comfortable distance. I learned later from Bill and my now ex-girlfriend that the police entered my home and grabbed all the pharmacy bottles they could find (which numbered in the teens) and brought them to the hospital so the emergency room staff would know what I was on. They even stuck a catheter up my urethra.   They held me in observation for a day and a half, until I could get a friend to pick me up and drive me to the Austin Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic to speak to a mental health specialist. She wanted me to come in every week through the summer, but I told her I had plans to study abroad in France, so she made me promise to check back in when I returned or she would have me brought in. I came for a follow-up at the end of the summer, just because I didn’t want the police to come back to my house. I had no interest in engaging with the V.A. mental health specialists. They were way too quick to prescribe medication, and drugs were something I was trying to get away from.  In Afghanistan, I served as a Navy corpsman (combat medic). I never fired a weapon in combat, but I did treat gunshot and fragmentation wounds. The heat, the sweat, the smell of filth, the fear and danger, the long hours on the road, the mutual distrust of the local populace, the belief that the next time we left the wire would be the time we’d get hit, the four or five instances of absolute terror spread out over a yearlong deployment – these were the things that gave me pause and caused me to desire and seek numbness. I had also suffered an injury in a car accident a year before I got out of the Navy. The accident was caused by an adverse reaction to a sleep medication, which led me to sleepwalk to my car, get in and drive. As a result, there was no shortage of pain medications in my possession.For a person in free fall, it’s difficult to see the bottom. Certain programs of recovery describe a “white light” experience; a moment of divine clarity in which the user finally gets it. This was not true for me. I’d tried in vain to get clean for the better part of four years following my return from Afghanistan. Eventually, the effort paid off, and I got better. There was no white light. It requires great discipline to get sober and stay sober. But sobriety also requires community. It’s necessary to be able to say to another addict or alcoholic, “I have this problem, too; I’m like you. If I can beat this, you can beat this.” Veterans with drinking and drug problems experience an additional layer of isolation. The feeling that we can’t relate to non-veteran addicts and alcoholics is pervasive among the veterans in recovery whom I know personally. But I’ve come to learn that addiction is indiscriminate, and we have more in common with civilian addicts than we’re perhaps inclined to believe. We can’t talk sensibly about veteran suicide without first talking seriously about veteran addiction. Drug and alcohol abuse are major indicators of suicide. This is especially true in the veterans community. There’s no doubt that we’re facing a mental health crisis. Our mental health professionals in the V.A. and in the civilian world have a tendency to over prescribe mood stabilizers, tranquilizers and anti-depressants. These drugs all have legitimate uses, and many patients absolutely need them. But if our focus is on using drugs to treat post-traumatic stress disorder or other combat related problems, we might, in fact, be making things worse. It’s possible that I’m wrong; I speak entirely from my own experience. But for me, I could not come down off the ledge until the drugs and alcohol were off the table. To read more about veteran suicides, see a recent New York Times story about suicide in one Marine Corps battalion, and a follow-up Q. and A. on Facebook.
