AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil MacFarquharMOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin on Thursday made his strongest pitch yet for cooperation between Washington and Moscow in Syria and beyond, calling it a crucial moment in East-West relations not unlike the end of the Cold War.Speaking before a gathering of global experts on Russia, Mr. Putin also released a few details from his surprise meeting here with the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, on Tuesday, saying Mr. Assad said Damascus was willing to make common cause with the armed opponents as long as they were willing to fight the Islamic State.Mr. Putin shared the stage in the southern resort town of Sochi with Ali Larijani, the speaker of the Parliament in Iran, which is allied with Russia in fighting in Syria. Both men rejected proposals for Syria’s partition, calling those a formula for endless warfare and dangerous gains by the militants.The Russian leader seemed at times to be doubling down on his charm offensive toward Washington and the West, a critical part of his strategy of intervening in Syria in the first place, analysts have said. By changing the subject from the Ukraine crisis and playing peacemaker in Syria, many say, he aims to break out of the Western sanctions imposed over Ukraine at a time when low oil prices have walloped the Russian economy.The Russian president revealed that the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State was close to sharing intelligence on the positions and movements of the militants. Russia and the United States have already reached an agreement on sharing the airspace over Syria, he noted.What started as a popular uprising against the Syrian government four years ago has become a proto-world war with nearly a dozen countries embroiled in two overlapping conflicts.“Syria, despite the dramatic situation there now, might become a model for partnership for the sake of our joint interests, for the resolution of our problems, which concern everyone, for working out an effective system of risk management,” Mr. Putin said, seemingly laying out a broader plan for global cooperation with the United States and the West in general.“We had this chance once after the end of the Cold War; unfortunately, we didn’t use it,” Mr. Putin told the annual gathering of academics and other Russia experts known as the Valdai Discussion Club. Another chance was missed during the terrorist upsurge in the early 2000s, he said.He said he hoped the beginning of such cooperation would emerge from talks scheduled in Vienna on Friday between the foreign ministers of Russia, Turkey and Saudi Arabia as well as the American secretary of state, John Kerry. Iran should be included, he said.Mr. Putin unleashed some of his standard criticism of the United States, too, accusing it of seeking to dominate the world alone. Some Americans in the audience pushed back. A former ambassador, Jack F. Matlock Jr., suggested that Russia should stop blaming the West for conspiring to cause the collapse of the Soviet Union, given its internal weaknesses and the Kremlin’s own decisions at the time.Yet even when compared with the comparatively restrained tone of Mr. Putin’s address to the United Nations at the end of September, some audience members said they could not remember him making such an ardent appeal for a different relationship with Washington.“Those are the most hopeful words I have heard from Putin on U.S.-Russia relations in years,” said Clifford Kupchan, the chairman of the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy organization, who was in the audience. “I think he wants at least peaceful coexistence with the U.S.” in hopes that the European Union will lift sanctions next year, he said.A drastic escalation of fighting in Aleppo has shattered a partial truce.Mr. Kupchan said he doubted that the White House would be very receptive, as the Obama administration and the American public both find the idea of cooperating with Mr. Putin distasteful. “He might have five letters in his name but he is still a four-letter word in Washington,” Mr. Kupchan said.Mr. Putin said he believed it was time to strengthen Syria, not further destabilize it.Asked if Russia had a plan for Syria and was confident that it could avoid creating the kind of chaos that has followed other foreign interventions, Mr. Putin said there was no “insurance.” Calling himself a big fan of cockpit videos, he said he believed the Russian Air Force was effective and indicated that he had discussed various scenarios with Mr. Assad.“I will pull back the curtain a little on my talks with President Assad,” Mr. Putin said, adding that he had proposed providing Russian support to armed opposition groups in Syria that are willing to fight the Islamic State.“What would be your view if we were to support their efforts in fighting the Islamic State in the same way we are supporting the Syrian Army?” Mr. Putin said he asked, and Mr. Assad answered, “I would view that positively.”The Russian president said that Moscow is now trying to organize the practical side of that. He criticized the United States for providing antitank missiles to the rebels and said he hoped it would be wise enough not to provide hand-held antiaircraft weapons, in that both were likely to fall into the hands of militant organizations.Mr. Putin reiterated that any political transition in Syria would have to be carried out by the current government, but that it should be a transparent process with international monitoring.Mr. Larijani used the opportunity to make a dig at Iran’s regional rival, Saudi Arabia, for demanding that Mr. Assad step down in favor of a more democratic Syria. “Those who do not allow their women to drive cars, they talk about democracy in Syria,” he said.videoAdvertisement