AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Portugal’s president decided Thursday that the country’s incumbent prime minister should lead a new center-right minority government, despite opposition from left-wing parties that recently closed ranks in order to form an alternative administration.The decision by President Aníbal Cavaco Silva to allow Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho to start a second term in office follows more than two weeks of tense political impasse since the general election on Oct. 4. Mr. Passos Coelho’s coalition won, but without gaining an absolute parliamentary majority.Still, his administration could be short-lived. His coalition won 107 of the 230 seats in Parliament and could soon face a vote of no confidence, if requested by the three left-wing parties that together have a majority share of the seats. On the night of the election, the leader of Portugal’s main Socialist opposition party, Antonio Costa, initially appeared to have conceded defeat. But in the weeks after the vote, Mr. Costa managed to persuade two radical left-wing parties to back the formation of an alternative government, which would have the support of a combined 122 parliamentary seats.Still, the president announced on Thursday evening in a televised speech that Mr. Passos Coelho should continue in office. Mr. Cavaco Silva, a conservative whose powers as president are mostly ceremonial, also said that he was “sorry” that left-wing parties had tried to put their political ambitions ahead of the country’s economic interests. Mr. Passos Coelho won the general election after a campaign in which he warned that a government switch could derail Portugal’s recent recovery. The country completed an international bailout program last year that included controversial privatizations and public spending cuts. After the election, Mr. Passos Coelho again sought to persuade his Socialist opponents to back his minority government for the sake of economic stability, to no avail.While Mr. Passos Coelho’s government could face rejection in Parliament when it presents its government program in the coming days, analysts are also warning about Mr. Costa’s own fragile party leadership. Though he was able to overcome differences with the more radical left-wing parties, the Left Bloc and the Communists, the move heightened tensions within his own party. Mr. Costa has been pursuing “a high-risk strategy” that could result in the Socialists losing even more votes if another election is called soon, according to Federico Santi, an analyst at Eurasia Group, a think tank with offices in London. Within the Socialist Party, “more moderate cadres are increasingly uneasy with the direction Costa has taken, seen as self-defeating and reckless,” Mr. Santi said in a report issued Thursday before the president’s announcement. Advertisement