AdvertisementSupported byBy Laurie Goodstein and Gaia PianigianiVATICAN CITY — The Vatican newspaper on Thursday called the report “unfounded” and “completely irresponsible,” suggesting a conspiracy was behind it. Italian newspapers had a feast, running a barrage of headlines further fueling suspicion. The center-right daily Il Giornale declared, “Church in chaos: Who wants the pope dead?”That was the response to an article on Wednesday in an Italian daily newspaper, Quotidiano Nazionale, that reported that Pope Francis had a tiny, treatable brain tumor that posed no immediate threat to his health.The article was so thinly sourced as to be dismissed by most news outlets here, though the editor of the newspaper that published the article strongly defended the reporting. Yet even for a country accustomed to yawning at dubious headlines, the timing of the report set off speculation that something less than healthy was afoot at the Vatican.“The timing of this reveals an intent to manipulate and create unnecessary uproar,” the Vatican newspaper, L’Osservatore Romano, said.Indeed, the report landed as Francis and 270 bishops from around the world were in the final days of a three-week, closed-door debate of the Roman Catholic Church’s approach to issues including divorce, homosexuality and the role of women.Synods are usually ignored by the news media, and even by the faithful. But this one has offered both substance and whiffs of intrigue, something familiar to a Vatican where financial scandals and leaked documents were blamed for precipitating the resignation of Benedict XVI.Francis, who has appeared determined to shake up the church, has faced resistance from some bishops, 13 of whom signed a letter to him, leaked last week, saying that he was trying to manipulate the synod’s outcome in his favor. The timing of the report, on the heels of the leaked letter, has given rise to theories that opponents of Francis’ agenda are working to undermine his papacy by sowing doubt about his health.Archbishop Victor Manuel Fernández told the Italian newspaper La Repubblica on Thursday that he feared that the article was part of a well-planned “apocalyptic strategy” against Francis by conservatives who want to “discredit the one who holds the power” and “destabilize him.” Archbishop Fernández, a close friend of Francis’ from Argentina, was among the bishops chosen by Francis to attend the synod.The Rev. Federico Lombardi, the Vatican spokesman, has issued three rebuttals since the tumor article was published, calling the reports “gravely irresponsible and unworthy of attention.”But attention is what the report has gotten, even as parts of the story seemed to grow stranger.According to the report, some months ago, residents in the area around a private clinic near the Tuscan city of Pisa noted a helicopter with yellow and white banners on the side flying over the area. The helicopter landed at the clinic’s helipad, the report said. A few minutes later, some unnamed witnesses told the paper, a Japanese neurologist and brain cancer specialist, Dr. Takanori Fukushima, and his team left the clinic and got on board.Dr. Fukushima works in Japan and the United States and periodically consults in clinics in Italy. A blog on his personal website featured photographs of him alone with Francis, shaking hands. But an Italian news outlet on Thursday published photographs showing that the doctor was among a crowd, and that the photos on his website had been manipulated to appear as if it were a one-on-one encounter.Late Wednesday, Dr. Fukushima issued a statement through the Carolina Neuroscience Institute in Raleigh, N.C., where he is director: “I have never medically examined the pope. These stories are completely false.”Father Lombardi, the Vatican spokesman, said he had spoken to Francis about the reports. “No Japanese doctor has visited the pope in the Vatican, and there have been no examinations of the type indicated in the article,” Father Lombardi said, though he did not exclude any medical examination at all. He also said no outsiders had arrived in the Vatican by helicopter.He noted that Francis spent the morning on Wednesday greeting thousands in St. Peter’s Square at his usual outdoor Wednesday audience and is “carrying out his very intense activity in a totally normal way.” Quotidiano Nazionale, the newspaper that published the article, dedicated eight pages on Thursday under the banner, “Exclusive: Francis’ Health,” which included a profile of Dr. Fukushima and a review of other public figures whose illnesses were kept secret, including Pope John Paul II’s Parkinson’s disease.The editor of Quotidiano Nazionale, Andrea Cangini, said Thursday that the original report was based on members of the medical team and “documentary proof.” Mr. Cangini said that it took months to verify the story and that conspiracy theories in the newspapers were “ridiculous.”He said that his paper had no interest in participating in “wars inside and outside the Vatican.”“As a journalist, you find out the news, and you publish it. That’s all we did,” he said. “We don’t have the slightest doubt.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement