By MATTHEW ROSENBERG and ALISON SMALEOCT. 22, 2015
Meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, Secretary of State John Kerry said he hopes talks will take steps “beyond the rhetoric” to end the recent Israeli-Palestinian violence.BERLIN —  With Israelis and Palestinians caught in another widening cycle of bloodshed, Secretary of State John Kerry met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel in Berlin on Thursday and urged him to tone down the harsh language that American and European officials assert is helping to fuel the violence.The message delivered to Mr. Netanyahu, who claimed this week that a Muslim cleric had inspired the Holocaust, will be repeated in the coming days when Mr. Kerry meets the president of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, whose own comments have been blamed by Mr. Netanyahu and others for provoking attacks.Mr. Kerry sounded a positive note after his meeting with Mr. Netanyahu, saying that their conversation gave him “a cautious measure of optimism.”At the center of the crisis is a long-running dispute over Israel’s management of an Old City holy site, known as the Temple Mount to Jews and the Noble Sanctuary to Muslims, and Israel’s recent efforts to limit access to the area by young men who it says are instigating violence. The Palestinians say the Israelis are seeking to expand their presence at the site, despite the Israeli government’s denials, and have accused Mr. Netanyahu of instigating the violence.Advertisement“If parties want to try, and I believe they do, want to move to a de-escalation, there are a set of choices that are available,” Mr. Kerry said at a news conference with the German foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier.AdvertisementIn a statement, John Kirby, a State Department spokesman, described the meeting between Mr. Kerry and Mr. Netanyahu as “lengthy and constructive,” adding that the two had discussed the security situation in the region and that a number of proposals had been suggested.In particular, the statement noted that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Netanyahu had discussed measures that Israel could take to maintain the status quo at the holy site, which let Israel maintain overall security but includes a prohibition on non-Muslim prayer.Mr. Kerry said before the talks that he had spoken by phone with King Abdullah II of Jordan and with Mr. Abbas in the past 24 hours, and that he was planning to travel to Amman, Jordan, on Saturday to meet both.Palestinian officials at the United Nations signaled Thursday that Mr. Abbas would not be in a compromising mood at that meeting. The Palestinian foreign minister, Riyad Maliki, who attended a Security Council session on the Middle East, told reporters he believed that Mr. Netanyahu harbored a “personal obsessive hatred” of Palestinians and of Mr. Abbas in particular.While Mr. Maliki did not rule out a possible meeting between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders at some point, he accused Mr. Netanyahu of establishing his own rules for access to Jerusalem’s holy site and not what are considered the protocols established in 1967 after the Arab-Israeli war.
            Seven Israeli Jews have been killed and dozens injured in more than 20 violent attacks by Palestinian assailants since the beginning of the month.        Circles are sized to represent the number of reported attacks on Israeli Jews in October 20 milesISRAELSea ofGalileeAfulaMediterraneanSea2Raanana2WEST BANKTel AvivJerusalem16attacksGAZASTRIPDeadSea3Kiryat ArbaJORDAN37At least 37 Palestinians have died in the violence, with more than a dozen killed by Israeli security forces and citizens in connection to reported attacks on Israelis.Palestinians killed by Israelis774433222Jan.Feb.MarchAprilMayJuneJulyAug.Sept.Oct.OCT. 16, 2015
“Right now Netanyahu is saying to everybody, including to Secretary Kerry, that he is respecting the status quo,” Mr. Maliki said. “Which status quo he’s respecting? He is respecting his own status quo that he has imposed recently on Palestinians.”Mr. Maliki also repeated Palestinian demands for international protection of the holy site, a position that Israel has rejected.AdvertisementAmerican officials appeared to position themselves for limited expectations at the Amman meeting, and Mr. Kerry did not seem to have detailed proposals to prevent an escalation of violence or clarify the status of the holy site.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since last month, Israeli forces have killed about 20 Palestinians involved in attacks and about 30 more in clashes with security forces. Eight Israeli Jews have been killed in stabbings by Palestinian assailants and other violence.Before meeting with Mr. Kerry, Mr. Netanyahu returned to a familiar theme in blaming Palestinians for the violence. He urged other countries to press Mr. Abbas to stop maligning Israel and its management of the holy site.While Mr. Netanyahu appeared to have softened his tone compared with recent days, his comments on Thursday were far from conciliatory, portraying Israelis as victims who sought only to defend themselves.“There is no question that this wave of attacks was driven directly by incitement, the incitement of Hamas, the incitement of the Islamist movement in Israel and the incitement, I am sorry to say, from President Abbas and the Palestinian Authority,” Mr. Netanyahu said. “I think it is time for the international community to state clearly to President Abbas: Stop spreading lies about the state of Israel.”Mr. Netanyahu was in Berlin for regular consultations between Israel and Germany, a relationship that the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, has worked hard to maintain. After meeting with Mr. Netanyahu on Wednesday, Ms. Merkel reiterated that support for Israel is among the basic tenets of German foreign policy.Germany is grappling with the realization that the problems in the Middle East have reached its doorstep, as hundreds of thousands of migrants have sought refuge within its borders.Mr. Steinmeier has just returned from a four-day trip to the Middle East. Mr. Steinmeier gave no evidence of any concrete results as far as progress toward peace, however.He began the trip with his first visit to Iran in his two terms as foreign minister. But the friendship Mr. Steinmeier forged with the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, during talks for an accord on Iran’s nuclear program did not appear to yield any dividends when it came to enlisting Tehran’s support for ending the violence in Syria. Iran has provided crucial support to President Bashar al-Assad there.Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from the United Nations.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerry Sounds a Cautious Note of Optimism After a Meeting With Netanyahu.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.