By DAN BILEFSKYOCT. 22, 2015
A witness and a police spokesman described the response to a knife-wielding man who killed a student and a teacher in a heavily immigrant and working-class neighborhood of Sweden.LONDON —  A 21-year-old man armed with a sword or a large knife entered a school in southwest Sweden on Thursday morning, killed a teacher and a student, and wounded two other people before he was fatally shot by the police, the authorities said.The attack occurred in the cafe area of a school in Kronogarden, a working-class and heavily immigrant neighborhood in the struggling industrial city of Trollhattan, which is about 45 miles north of Sweden’s second-largest city, Goteborg. The suspect was taken to a hospital and died there, the police said.The attack stunned a nation where violent crime is relatively rare.“Sweden is in shock,” King Carl XVI Gustaf said in a statement. “It’s with great dismay and sorrow that I and my family have been informed of the events in Trollhattan.”Prime Minister Stefan Lofven, on his way to the school, said in a statement, “This is a dark day for Sweden.”AdvertisementHe continued: “My thoughts go out to the victims and their families, pupils and staff, and the entire community that has been affected. There are no words to describe what they are going through right now.”AdvertisementStefan Gustafsson, a spokesman for the regional police, said in a telephone interview that officers had shot the suspect after arriving at the scene shortly after 10 a.m. “This has been a very traumatic experience,” he said. “When police entered the school, the man was shot.”According to the police, the suspect used the blade to chop or slash his victims: The teacher, 20, and a student, 17, who both died, along with another teacher in her early 40s and a 15-year-old student, who were severely injured. Maria Randsalu, another police spokeswoman, said the man had been living in Trollhattan. She added the police did not yet know the motive. He had no criminal record.200 MilesNorwegianSeaFINLANDSWEDENGulf ofBothniaNORWAYStockholmTrollhattanGoteborgBalticSeaDENMARKNorthSeaPOLANDGERMANYOCT. 22, 2015
The school was built in 2009 and has more than 400 students from preschool through ninth grade, the newspaper Svenska Dagbladet reported.The newspaper Expressen quoted a news photographer at the scene, Stefan Bennhage, describing “complete chaos” and saying that one ambulance had failed to stop and crashed into a school wall.The Local, an English-language news network, quoted a student as saying: “I was in a classroom with my class when one of my classmates’ sisters called her to warn her that there was a murderer at the school. So we locked the door to the classroom, but our teacher was still outside in the corridor. We wanted to warn him, so a few of us went outside and then I saw the murderer, he was wearing a mask and had a sword. Our teacher got stabbed. The murderer started chasing me. I ran into another classroom. If I had not run, I would have been murdered.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Swedish news media reported that the suspect was wearing a mask, and that some of the students initially thought someone was pulling a Halloween prank.Unlike in the United States, which has been shaken by a series of deadly shootings at schools and universities, violent attacks at schools are very rare in Sweden, which is known for its generous welfare state and social cohesion. As of 2009, according to a report that year by the Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention, there had not been a school shooting in Sweden with multiple victims.Felipe Estrada, a criminologist at Stockholm University, said that the country had been convulsed by the event.Advertisement“Lethal or aggravated violence in Swedish schools is extremely rare, and schools are seen as places where our kids are safe,” Professor Estrada said. “It is shocking, and it is very, very rare to see lethal violence between people who don’t know each other or against children.”Alluding to Sweden’s gun-control laws, he added, “If the attacker had had an automatic machine gun, the consequences would have been much worse.”Trollhattan is known in Sweden as the home of the main production plant for the carmaker Saab. Production at the factory was suspended from 2011 until 2013, while the troubled carmaker was taken over by a holding company, which announced plans to reinvent Saab as a manufacturer of electric vehicles.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 23, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sweden Stunned as Man Kills 2 and Wounds Others at a School .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.