AdvertisementSupported byBy Austin RamzyHONG KONG — What, exactly, does that scowling, red-faced emoji mean? I’m mad? Frustrated? Sunburned?The question, which has plagued more than a few text-message exchanges, became a topic of debate in the Australian Senate on Thursday, when Foreign Minister Julie Bishop’s liberal use of emojis came under question during a committee meeting.Ms. Bishop is an avowed fan of the small digital images. In February, BuzzFeed conducted an interview with the foreign minister in which she replied entirely in that format. The site called it the “world’s first political emoji interview.”Asked to describe Tony Abbott, who was Australia’s prime minister at the time, she used a running man emoji (presumably a reference to Mr. Abbott’s interest in jogging). Malcolm Turnbull, then the communications minister, who succeeded Mr. Abbott last month, was rendered as a smartphone.But perhaps the subtleties of diplomatic language are not yet ready for the subtleties of emoji language. Asked by BuzzFeed to describe President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, she used a crimson face with a frown and downward-squinting eyebrows — the “pouting face,” as it is known.Opposition politicians have mocked Ms. Bishop’s fondness for emojis before, but Thursday may have been the first time the subject was raised in so elevated a forum.Senator Penny Wong of the opposition Labor Party asked Ms. Bishop’s subordinate Peter Varghese, the secretary of the Foreign Affairs and Trade Department, whether the red-faced emoji had been intended to express Ms. Bishop’s displeasure with Mr. Putin, or some other sentiment.“It may be that the foreign minister is saying she’s angry with him,” Ms. Wong said, according to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. “It may be that she thinks he’s a red-faced angry man. I don’t know.”Mr. Varghese said he had just learned of the situation and would have to ask the foreign minister.Ms. Wong also asked whether the department ever used emojis for diplomatic communications. Mr. Varghese said that he was “not aware of any such usage” and that he himself did not use emojis.The line of questioning prompted some confusion among the senators present. “They’re those little smiley faces you have on your text messages,” an official said when asked to describe emoji.Ms. Bishop later offered to give her own definition. “Happy to provide @SenatorWong with a translation of emoji to a language Labor understands,” she wrote on Twitter, punctuating Ms. Wong’s name with a flushed face and closing with a face wearing sunglasses — emojis that may need explanation at another hearing.videovideoAdvertisement