By JONATHAN GILBERTOCT. 23, 2015
BUENOS AIRES —  Some voters received sacks stuffed with bottles of cooking oil, pasta and flour. Others were ferried to the polls in convoys of cars. There were even reports of a raffle in which the grand prize was a Chevrolet.In return, the voters promised to cast their ballots for particular candidates during recent municipal elections in Tucumán, in the north of Argentina. The rampant vote buying was branded a “scourge” last month by judges looking into the validity of the polls, although the results were allowed to stand since the practice, which experts say is widespread in Argentina, is not actually illegal.The vote buying, documented by election observers from the National University of La Plata and highlighted in the news media, has ignited debates about the frailty of the country’s democracy as it prepares for presidential and parliamentary elections on Sunday.“The problem is poverty and that there are people willing to lose their voting freedom for a bag of food,” Margarita Stolbizer, a candidate for the Progressive Front, said in an interview with the newspaper Perfil.AdvertisementVote buying strategies will probably sway 5 to 12 percent of Argentine voters on Sunday, according to estimates by Rodrigo Zarazaga, the director of the Center for Research and Social Action, a Jesuit institute. Mr. Zarazaga is an expert on clientelism, the term used when politicians turn the electorate into clients over a long period of time, offering services and goods in exchange for support, a common practice in the region that has been closely scrutinized here in recent weeks.AdvertisementMany voters fear that such practices could skew the results of the national elections. “They won’t vote according to their convictions,” said Héctor del Bianco, 61, who works at a car showroom. “They’ll vote because of the money.”In Tucumán, while all parties engaged in vote buying, the majority was attributed to the Front for Victory, an arm of the Peronist political movement that has dominated Argentine politics for decades, and which is led by President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. The party has been in power since 2003, and is well placed to secure a fourth consecutive term in Sunday’s elections, led by Mrs. Kirchner’s successor, Daniel Scioli.Some party officials conceded that there was vote buying in Tucumán, where the party’s candidate for governor, Juan Luis Manzur, won easily.But Mr. Scioli, the governor of Buenos Aires Province, denounced the opposition’s efforts to annul his victory. “It’s the impotence of the opposition,” he told reporters. “They didn’t get the result they hoped for, so they looked to delegitimize the elections.”Under Mrs. Kirchner, supporters say, the Front for Victory has modernized Argentina’s democracy, which is enjoying its longest unbroken run — 32 years — since a suffrage law was passed a century ago. They underscore Mrs. Kirchner’s liberal social agenda and her expansion of welfare benefits. She has also pushed for the prosecutions of former military leaders on human rights crimes charges and moved to restrict the size of news media empires.But this progress has been undermined by a resilient culture of vote buying that is most rife within the Peronist movement, according to experts, explaining that clientelism has long been practiced by Argentina’s incumbent parties.“If you’re buying the votes of the poor, you are silencing their preferences, and that is tragic,” said Mariela Szwarcberg, a politics professor at Reed College in Portland, Ore.AdvertisementEvidence of vote buying in Tucumán includes a video posted online of two men who were candidates for a town council. They had filmed themselves driving to the town, Tafí Viejo, to hand out packs of herbal tea. “Let’s make a trade,” says one, before adding, “Vote for me.”The men, who later claimed they had been joking, were candidates for Kolina, an organization that is part of the Front for Victory’s grass-roots support network.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sacks containing staples like flour, cooking oil and sugar, worth a total of $15 to $20, were systematically distributed by several parties to voters statewide, said Sebastián López Calendino, one of the election observers.Other practices condemned by the judges were the use of convoys, reported by election observers, to transport voters to polling places and raffles organized in the days before the elections.One Front for Victory official raffled off a Chevrolet hatchback car, according to the local news media.There is no provision in Argentina’s electoral code that explicitly criminalizes vote buying. Julia Pomares, a specialist on election issues and director at Cippec, an Argentine public policy research center, noted that the validity of the elections in Tucumán was challenged on constitutional grounds. Because polling booths ensure secrecy, the judges decided, vote buying does not actually suppress the constitutional right to freely choose candidates.Politicians often use networks of go-betweens, known as “punteros,” to whom they give public funds and resources. They supply poor voters with basic items, like food, medicine and construction materials, experts say.Often, these campaign workers — who were the subject of a fictional hit TV series in 2011 called “The Puntero” — also hand out welfare benefits and jobs.In Argentina, the punteros are largely concentrated in the sprawling outskirts of Buenos Aires, the capital city that is home to nearly a third of the country. In these outlying neighborhoods, Peronists have the most extensive networks, Mr. Zarazaga said. But other parties, like Republican Proposal, led by Mauricio Macri, the mayor of Buenos Aires and Mr. Scioli’s chief rival in the elections, also rely on punteros.Advertisement“It’s a historic and commonplace practice; Peronism gets stigmatized, but there’s no party that hasn’t used it,” said Mario Gómez, 58, who works at a cultural center in Villa 21-24, a slum on the city’s south side.“People are used to it,” said Yessica Ibáñez, 32, a self-described “full-time mom” from Villa 21-24, explaining how friends and family had been offered jobs as janitors, or goods like mattresses and corrugated iron, a useful roofing material. “If you ask for somebody’s vote, they ask you what you’re offering in exchange.”Experts say that the punteros are often allowed to administer access to some of the welfare benefits and social programs expanded by the Front for Victory. Some argue that by doing this they are performing a vital role, spanning the gap between the state and marginalized corners of the country that policy makers might ignore.“People don’t get the social ambivalence,” said Javier Auyero, a sociology professor at the University of Texas at Austin who researched clientelism here in the 1990s when, he said, it surged under a Peronist government. “It’s a strategy of control, but it’s also how poor people solve their most pressing needs,” he added.But Sergio Massa, a congressman who is third in the polls, has promised to “sweep away the go-betweens who extort people with welfare benefits.”“That breaks the circle of clientelism,” he told reporters.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Argentine Vote-Buying Practice Under New Scrutiny as Presidential Elections Near.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.