AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick LymanMAKOW MAZOWIECKI, Poland — Poland appears poised on Sunday to join the region’s rightward drift toward nationalism and toss out the center-right party that has governed the European Union’s sixth-largest economy for eight years. The favored party in the parliamentary election is an even more conservative one that vows to be less obsequious to richer European partners like Germany, especially over migrants.Beata Szydlo, the candidate for prime minister of the leading party, called Law and Justice, has campaigned, among other issues, against being forced by the European Union to accept a set number of the refugees who have been flooding into Europe.“I just hope the prime minister will not cave in to the more powerful in the E.U.,” she said last week. “We are not ready to take in migrants, though we are ready to offer humanitarian assistance. But first and foremost, we need to think about our citizens’ safety.”Ms. Szydlo, a veteran lawmaker, was speaking to a room of supporters at the Amor Wedding House, a banquet hall in this financially struggling town 90 minutes north of Warsaw. Nearly all of the 200 or so supporters in the hall were middle-aged, and their questions bristled of anger over low pensions, lack of jobs and the sense that Poland’s economic growth, while robust compared with other former Communist nations in Eastern Europe, had passed them by.“Look at our ridiculous salaries and miserable pensions,” said Tadeusz Szacka, 69, a mechanic. “People are poor. They can’t find work. My colleague has to go all the way to Warsaw when he works as a security guard. He leaves for work at 4 a.m. every day!”Mr. Szacka leaned forward sadly, scanning one of several dozen platters of pastries local party officials had provided.“If the government finally changes, everything else also should change for the better,” he said, hopefully.Every pre-election poll has shown the Law and Justice party well ahead of the governing Civic Platform party, whose candidate for prime minister is the incumbent, Ewa Kopacz, though perhaps not far enough ahead to win a parliamentary majority on its own. As a result, it may need to form a coalition with one or more of the smaller parties.Law and Justice has campaigned on a “Poland first” message, arguing that the country has become too beholden to the European Union and promising to build a more robust regional alliance with neighbors like the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia.“We are happy to be part of the European Union,” Ms. Szydlo said. “We just want to be treated as equals.”But there are doubts about how far the new government would go in defying Brussels.“I would definitely predict that the new government will have closer relations to the United States, as there are quite a few very pro-American politicians within Law and Justice,” said Sergiusz Trzeciak, a political marketing specialist at Collegium Civitas in Warsaw and an independent political consultant. “At the same time, I expect it to try to maintain good relations with the E.U. in the end. I think it will be more a question of rhetoric than changing policy.”One issue likely to be given a higher profile by a Law and Justice government — given the party’s aggressive attitude toward Russia, which is even more strident than that of the current governing party — is the presence of more American troops and armaments in Poland.“It will be a very, very important topic,” said Bartlomiej Biskup, a political scientist at the Institute of Political Sciences in Warsaw. “The new government will insist on the presence of more U.S. troops, and for the building of a defensive missile shield. I would definitely say that their election would make it much more likely there are more American soldiers in Poland five years from now.”At the same time, political opponents continue to warn in the prelude to Sunday’s voting that Law and Justice would be inclined to follow the example of Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, and build a more authoritarian state that mixes nationalist language with socialistic economic policies.“Law and Justice is going to go very much in the Orban way,” said Ryszard Petru, leader of a new pro-business party called Nowoczesna, or Modern. “And that means more state intervention in the economy, a more nationalistic approach and a harder line towards the European Union.”Law and Justice has been out of power since the 2010 crash of a plane carrying President Lech Kaczynski and dozens of the country’s top political and military leaders. The party’s current leader, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, is the former president’s twin and is a former prime minister. The two brothers were socially conservative and had strong ties to Poland’s powerful Roman Catholic Church.“We certainly expect that the influence of the Catholic Church will become larger,” said Barbara Nowacka, leader of the Left Alliance, a coalition of small left-wing parties that is scrambling to win enough votes to qualify for seats in the new Parliament. “And Law and Justice has already said it is willing to change the Constitution, if it can get enough votes, to increase the powers of the president and take away crucial mechanisms from Parliament.”If Law and Justice does win the most seats on Sunday, it would reinforce the results of voting in May for the largely ceremonial post of president. In that election, Andrzej Duda of Law and Justice stunned the incumbent, Bronislaw Komorowski of Civic Platform.At the time, the result was seen as a sign of widespread disaffection among Polish voters for traditional parties and the entire political class, largely because of the surprisingly strong third-place showing by a new party headed by the rock singer Pawel Kukiz, whose populist coalition drew angry retirees as well as young graduates in search of jobs.In this round of voting, for the much more powerful posts in Parliament, Mr. Kukiz’s coalition appears to have less support, but Mr. Petru’s new party has found success with a message that includes upending the power of the country’s traditional political classes.A month ago, when the European Union voted to require most member nations, including Poland, to accept some of the refugees who had been flooding into Europe, the crisis appeared set to dominate the parliamentary elections. Instead, as the election campaign enters its final days, the focus has moved to the more bread-and-butter issues that usually dominate Polish voting.Law and Justice has promised to raise the minimum wage, lower the retirement age and cut some taxes, prompting opponents to charge that such measures would hurt Poland’s public finances.“Basically, the business community has some reservations about Law and Justice based on their populist policies,” said Witold Orlowski, director of the Warsaw University of Technology Business School. “We are not talking about the Greek story, obviously, not something to make the country go bankrupt, but perhaps an increase in the deficit of, say, 2 percent of G.D.P.”What Law and Justice will need to do to gain the trust of the business community, he added, is to convince them that the party will keep its campaign promises but that it is not, at heart, anti-business.“I’m 55-years-old, and I’ve lost my job and can’t find another one,” a weeping woman told Ms. Szydlo at the Amor Wedding House. “What can you offer me?”Ms. Szydlo did not address the woman’s specific concerns, but she instead used the opportunity to take a swipe at the governing party.“Those in power keep telling us that unemployment has been dropping,” she said. “So what? People in small towns don’t have jobs. People over 50 can’t find work. We are not going to feed our children with statistics.”Joanna Berendt contributed reporting from Warsaw.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement