By SOMINI SENGUPTAOCT. 23, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, is not known for scolding the envoys of the most powerful nations on Earth.But at a recent lunch, as salad was served in a private dining room across the street from the United Nations headquarters, Mr. Ban gave the members of the Security Council an earful about their inaction in the face of spreading unrest and violence in Jerusalem. “You’re not doing much at all,” one diplomat recalled hearing him say. “You need to fix the way you operate.”He is not the only one who is frustrated.The United Nations Security Council, which commemorated its 70th anniversary on Friday, is under mounting pressure from the broader membership of the United Nations, civil society groups, former United Nations officials, and even some members of the Council itself to do what it is supposed to do: maintain global peace and security.There are calls for members of the Security Council to refrain from casting vetoes in the face of mass atrocities. There are calls for the Council to do more to prevent conflict, rather than dispatch peacekeepers to places where there is no peace to keep. And there is growing anger about the way the permanent members make back-room deals in choosing a secretary general to lead the organization; earlier this year the General Assembly for the first time adopted a resolution demanding that the Council make that process more open.AdvertisementThe frustration is aimed at the five permanent members of the Security Council, the P5, as they are called: Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States, all victors of World War II. It is aimed not just at making the Council more reflective of the world today — Brazil, Germany, India and Japan have agitated unsuccessfully for veto-wielding permanent seats for years — but also at making its members live up to their mandate.AdvertisementThe United Nations system as a whole has come under scrutiny this year, over widening sexual abuse allegations against peacekeepers in the field and charges of a brazen graft scheme involving diplomats at the headquarters of the world body. But it is the Council, the system’s most powerful branch, that has come in for unusually sharp criticism.David M. Malone, a veteran Canadian diplomat and now rector of United Nations University, calls it “a crisis of relevance.” The Security Council has been unable to end the conflict in Syria for five years and it has been adrift in the face of a civil war in South Sudan. It has remained largely silent on what could amount to crimes against humanity in Yemen as a Saudi-led coalition backed by the United States conducts a  campaign against Houthi rebels that has also killed hundreds of civilians. And it has been unable to stop the Russian seizure of Ukrainian territory; even a move to set up a tribunal to prosecute those who downed a Malaysian civilian aircraft over eastern Ukraine was vetoed — by Russia.Several Council diplomats — and Mr. Ban — are increasingly exasperated by the inability of the Security Council to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. The United States has repeatedly vetoed measures dealing with the conflict. It helped defeat a French-led effort to set a deadline for the creation of a Palestinian state.On Thursday, as a measure of its frustration with the Council’s lack of action, New Zealand, which has long steered clear of the morass in the Middle East, said it intended to advance a draft resolution that would call for an end to the latest violence and spur the two sides to return to direct talks within a set time frame.New Zealand is one of the 10 nonpermanent members. “This Council must take responsibility for the failure of a diplomatic and political process,” the foreign minister of New Zealand, Murray McCully, said Thursday, “and move to resolve it.”Gro Harlem Brundtland, the former Norwegian prime minister, speaking recently about proposals to overhaul the Security Council, coined a new term for what the Security Council spends most of its time doing: “pontificalia.”“There’s more pressure on the Council to perform better,” said Christian Wenaweser, the United Nations ambassador from Liechtenstein, which is advancing a voluntary code of conduct for all countries, including those that might one day join the Council. “The Council has not been able to address the crisis situations that we have had for a while now.”AdvertisementThe pledges to the code of conduct, which were announced Friday, include agreeing not to veto or vote against a measure if it would prevent or stop crimes against humanity. It has the support just over 100 of the 193 in the General Assembly. The United States is not among them; at a recent event sponsored by the group, a United States diplomat said it did not, in practice, use the veto in the case of serious crimes, diplomats present at the meeting said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.France has sought to persuade its fellow P5 members to voluntarily refrain from using the veto in situations where mass atrocities are committed. Only Britain has given a nod to that proposal. China, Russia and the United States have not.From 1946 to 2013, Russia and the United States were neck in neck in their veto counts: 81 by Russia and before that the Soviet Union, and 77 by the United States, according to an analysis by Security Council Report. China has used it only nine times, though the threat of a Chinese veto, diplomats say, has kept the Council from demanding accountability for human rights abuses that North Korea, a staunch ally of China, is accused of committing.The Security Council remains singularly powerful. It can authorize military action, refer countries to the war crimes court, and impose sanctions on countries and individuals. And compared with its early decades, most of its resolutions are under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which means they are enforceable. Whether the Council is effective is another matter.Mr. Malone said the Council had grown “increasingly sclerotic” in the way it conducts business.In a new book of essays that he helped edit, Mr. Malone said the permanent members “are criticized ever more loudly by the membership at large and circle the wagons around their own privileges, some enshrined in the U.N. Charter, others invented through practice over the years.”What especially riles the members of the United Nations is the way the Council’s permanent members make secret deals over the choice of the secretary general. Their selection is often based on the unspoken premise that they are palatable to the world powers.Now, with a new secretary general due to be chosen next year, the P5 faces pressure to open up the process. It has also faced growing calls to name a woman to the post, with a General Assembly resolution that urges the Council to invite countries to formally nominate candidates and for those candidates to say how they will lead the organization.“The onus is now on the Council to act soon,” Ambassador Gillian Bird of Australia told the Council at a session devoted to its working methods this week.India went further, suggesting that the Council submit at least two potential candidates to the General Assembly instead of the customary single name to be rubber-stamped.AdvertisementRussia made it clear that it was in no rush to change the nominations process. “I don’t think there’s any practical value in this except point-scoring,” said its envoy, Vitaly I. Churkin. He cautioned against “getting swept away by populism.”At the lunch in mid-October, Mr. Ban confronted the Council members for a second time, as coffee was served.A second diplomat at the lunch said Mr. Ban’s challenge reflected a frustration with the Council’s growing paralysis. “I think the secretary general is right to push us to uphold our responsibility,” the diplomat said. “I don’t think we can cover ourselves in glory.” Both diplomats at the lunch requested anonymity for disclosing the discussion at a closed meeting.Both said there was not much of a response.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Sclerotic’ U.N. Security Council Is Under Fire for Failing to Maintain Peace .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.