

      Compiled by KAREN ZRAICK

OCT. 25, 2015

Argentina, Poland, Tanzania, Guatemala, Haiti and Ivory Coast held elections on Sunday. Here is a rundown of major issues and candidates in each country.
National elections bring an official end to 12 years of “Kirchnerismo,” the political movement named for President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and her late husband, Néstor Kirchner. The Kirchners expanded social benefits, nationalized companies, taxed agricultural exports, feuded with American hedge funds and tried to curb media conglomerates. After winning four-year terms in 2007 and 2011, Mrs. Kirchner was constitutionally barred from seeking a third consecutive term.But it remains unclear who will succeed her. The mayor of Buenos Aires, Mauricio Macri, made a surprisingly strong showing, and will face the front-runner, Daniel Scioli, in a runoff on Nov. 22. Mr. Scioli, a former vice president who was endorsed by Mrs. Kirchner, took 35.7 percent of the vote with 84 percent of balloting stations tallied, against 35.3 percent for Mr. Macri.Mr. Macri appeals to voters who believe Mrs. Kirchner’s economic policies have isolated the country and who see her as imperious. He could take the election if he aligns with a third candidate, Sergio Massa, a centrist who leads a party called the Renewal Front and took 21 percent of the vote. Latest Story: In Argentina Elections, Tight Vote Yields Presidential RunoffPoland joined the region’s rightward drift toward nationalism on Sunday, tossing out the center-right party that had governed the country for eight years. The Law and Justice Party, with Beata Szydlo as candidate for prime minister, won 37.6 percent of the votes, according to the election authority. It is further to the right than the governing party, Civic Platform, which conceded defeat on Sunday. Ms. Szydlo had campaigned against being forced by the European Union to accept a set number of the refugees who have been flocking to Europe, as well as for higher wages and traditional Catholic values. Polish election rules state that a party can take control of the government without the need for a coalition partner even if it draws less than 40 percent of the vote, depending on how many of the smaller parties earn seats in the new Parliament.Latest Story: Right-Wing Party Roars Back in Polish ElectionsTanzania faced a grave political test on Sunday: the most heavily contested and unpredictable presidential election in the nation’s 50-plus years. Security forces were deployed in the commercial capital, Dar es Salaam, in response to fears of unrest. By Wednesday, the mood was growing increasingly tense as votes were slowly counted. With more than half tabulated, the governing party’s presidential candidate, John Magufuli, was comfortably ahead of his closest rival, Edward Lowassa, a wealthy former prime minister.The governing Party of the Revolution is one of Africa’s strongest political machines and is determined to hold onto power. The opposition, against a backdrop of a rapidly growing population and election-related clashes, is convinced it has the numbers to take over. Meanwhile, on the semiautonomous island of Zanzibar, officials annulled results from local elections also held on Sunday, citing voter fraud, improper interference and fistfights between election commissioners.Latest Stories: Tanzania Is Wary as Election Results Trickle In Unrest Feared as Zanzibar Local Elections Are AnnulledGuatemala has been in the grip of stunning change after a corruption scandal set off widespread protests and forced the resignation of President Otto Pérez Molina in September.Days later, Mr. Pérez Molina went to jail to await trial on fraud and bribery charges and Guatemalans rejected the corruption-tainted front-runner in the elections to replace him.Jimmy Morales, a comedian with no political experience, won the first round of voting, campaigning under the slogan, “Not corrupt, not a thief.” On Sunday, that message again resonated with voters, as he won about 70 percent of the vote over Sandra Torres, a former first lady, with 95 percent of the vote counted. But almost half of eligible voters did not cast ballots, a strong message of disgust with the country’s politics. Mr. Morales’s campaign capitalized on the energy of a popular movement against corruption and for reform. But his platform was short on specifics.“I have no magic wands,” Mr. Morales said last week at the campaign’s end. “I have nothing but a big heart swollen with love for this country.”Latest Story: Jimmy Morales Is Elected New President in GuatemalaThere was no clear front-runner among the 54 candidates vying to replace President Michel Martelly, a former musician who was elected in 2011 and cannot run again. And there will be no quick results – election officials said final tallies would not be ready until late November. Analysts expect the vote to go to a runoff on Dec. 27.Haitians also cast ballots for legislative and municipal candidates, and observers from the Organization of American States said voting was largely orderly and peaceful. In contrast to the crowded candidate field, there are few sitting elected officials in Haiti: Mr. Martelly is one of 12. Parliament was dissolved in January amid disagreements over new elections. The vacuum allowed Mr. Martelly, of the Haitian Tèt Kale Party, to amass power without checks and balances.Last month, a leading political party, Vérité, pulled out of the legislative elections, saying it was the victim of violence in the first round of voting in August.President Alassane Ouattara of the Ivory Coast was re-elected to a second term with 83.7 percent of the vote, election officials announced on Wednesday. After a decade of civil war, the country appears to be in the middle of an economic comeback. Mr. Ouattara, an economist by training and a former top official at the International Monetary Fund, has overseen that growth as president since 2010.But the economic gains were not spread evenly throughout the country, which remains deeply divided. There were months of violence after Mr. Ouattara’s predecessor, Laurent Gbagbo, refused to cede power in the the last election. Mr. Gbagbo is currently imprisoned in The Hague and faces trial next month on charges of crimes against humanity linked to that period, in which at least 3,000 people died. But he retains significant support in the country, and loyalists say he was railroaded.A security force of 34,000 soldiers, including 6,000 United Nations peacekeepers, had been deployed across the country this month amid fears of election-related violence. But the election proceeded peacefully and turnout was around 54 percent, according to election officials.Latest Story: Alassane Outtara Is Re-elected President of Ivory CoastAdvertisement