AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — With an initial military assessment confirming civilian casualties in the bombing of a Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz by an American warplane, Gen. John F. Campbell, the American commander in Afghanistan, has appointed a two-star general from another command to conduct an independent investigation, his office said in a statement on Saturday.The announcement came as the death toll in the bombing, one of the worst episodes of civilian casualties in the Afghan war, rose once again, three weeks after the AC-130 gunship repeatedly bombed the trauma center in Kunduz after fighting the Taliban, who had overrun the city. Doctors Without Borders, also known by its French name, Médecins Sans Frontières, said the casualty figures now stood at 23 staff members and patients killed and three others missing who are presumed dead.Officials are trying to determine the identities of seven unrecognizable bodies found in the wreck of the hospital, all of whom have now been buried, the organization said in a statement on Saturday. The three missing people could be among them.A spokesman for General Campbell, Brig. Gen. Wilson Shoffner, said an assessment team had “determined that the reports of civilian casualties were credible.” The investigation, which will be conducted by three senior officers outside General Campbell’s command, will be led by Maj. Gen. William B. Hickman and supported by two brigadier generals.General Campbell, also the commander of NATO forces in Afghanistan, said: “My intent is to disclose the findings of the investigation once it is complete. We will be forthright and transparent and we will hold ourselves accountable for any mistakes made.”But Doctors Without Borders sees the episode as a possible war crime, and neither the Pentagon’s announcement that it would investigate nor an earlier apology from President Obama seems to have deterred the group’s insistence on an international inquiry under the Geneva Conventions. Such an investigation, which requires the consent of the governments of the United States and Afghanistan, would be conducted by the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, a body formed in 1991 but never used. Neither government is likely to approve such an inquiry.Jason Cone, the United States executive director of Doctors Without Borders, said that while the organization would cooperate with any investigation by the United States military or the NATO coalition, those would be “rooted in the context of military doctrine and practice, not international humanitarian law.”“If international humanitarian law is flouted, if violations on this scale can be dismissed as a ‘mistake,’ ‘the fog of war’ or even just ‘a terrible tragedy,’ then all of our medical staff, projects and patients in conflict zones could be jeopardized,” Mr. Cone wrote in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times on Saturday.As fighting intensified in northern Afghanistan this year, the group’s 94-bed trauma center in Kunduz provided valuable medical services. Last year, the hospital treated more than 22,000 patients and conducted 5,900 operations, the statement said; what remains now are “collapsed roofs, blackened walls, floors thick with dust and twisted pieces of metal that were once beds or trolleys.” The burden of providing medical assistance amid intense fighting has fallen to two Afghan health centers, low on staff, medicine and surgical capacity.“Until M.S.F. understands what happened on the night of the attack and has strong assurances that it cannot happen again, the Kunduz trauma center cannot be reopened,” the statement added.Before he acknowledged that the United States military broke its own rules in calling in the airstrike, General Campbell and his staff shifted their response several times on why such a major hospital, which had repeatedly shared its exact coordinates as a humanitarian center with his forces, was struck so brutally. Doctors Without Borders has said the bombing continued for over an hour, despite desperate calls by employees to military offices in Kabul and Washington. The military’s initial reaction to the airstrike said it was carried out against those “threatening the force,” a reference to a  Special Operations unit deployed in the area to assist the Afghan forces. Later, General Campbell acknowledged that the strikes were called for by Afghan forces who had come under fire.Afghan officials, on the other hand, have continued to stick to the narrative that the Taliban were firing at their forces from the hospital grounds. As recently as last week, the acting minister of defense, Mohammad Masoom Stanekzai, said the hospital was used as a “safe place” by the insurgents.The comments from Afghan officials came without a clear investigation on their side. While they have said a nongovernmental fact-finding mission set up to investigate the fall of Kunduz to the Taliban on Sept. 28 would also look into the hospital bombing, it is now clear that the mandate does not extend that far.“The mandate of the Kunduz fact-finding mission doesn’t cover events beyond Sept. 28,” said Amrullah Saleh, a former intelligence chief who is a leader of the mission. “The team focuses on finding reasons for failure in leadership, structures and resources management.”Doctors Without Borders has expressed “disgust” at the claims that the hospital was used by the Taliban to fire on Afghan forces, saying such a narrative suggested “that Afghan and U.S. forces working together decided to raze to the ground a fully functioning hospital.”Advertisement