AdvertisementSupported by9 PhotosView Slide Show ›.Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York TimesBy Azam Ahmed and Paulina VillegasCIHUATLÁN, Mexico — A day after Hurricane Patricia all but destroyed his home, Roberto García López took the unusual step of going to work.He left the wreck of shattered doors and windows, broken columns and splintered trees, filled a cooler with shrimp and began selling his wares on the street on Saturday afternoon. A short while later, Sabina Montes, a fruit vendor, joined him to peddle cut pineapple, papaya and slaw. Carlos Agustín Manzo, the owner of a store selling bootleg videos and cellphone accessories, also declared himself open for business.“Yesterday there was so much fear, people thought they were going to die,” said Mr. García, cracking a broad smile as he eased the cooler’s lid over the seafood to keep it from the blistering heat. “We’re all just relieved that nothing happened. I can’t tell you how happy I am.” It might seem odd for a man like Mr. García to call himself blessed the day after a hurricane swept away most of his earthly possessions, items he cannot afford to replace or repair. But throughout some of the hardest-hit areas of Mexico’s Pacific coast, the refrain was the same: feelings of euphoria outweigh whatever grim work lies ahead.Having weathered the worst storm to strike the Western Hemisphere, many Mexicans felt relieved that they suffered only financial damage. For now, there have been no reports of deaths.“I’m just so grateful,” said Mr. Manzo, 47, holding his infant son, as a rush of people passed on the street, ducking in and out of the stores that opened their doors the morning after the storm. “People are getting on with their lives.”In the end, Hurricane Patricia left as suddenly as it came. After roaring to life in the warm waters over the Pacific, transforming practically overnight into a Category 5 storm with winds of 200 miles per hour, it had all but dissipated by Saturday morning, little more than 12 hours after touching land. By 4 p.m., it no longer ranked as a tropical storm.That is not to say the damage is not severe. While the hurricane spared the densely populated centers of Puerto Vallarta and Manzanillo, it appears to have done the most damage to villages between the two cities. For many in these impoverished communities, it could take much time to recover from even moderate damage.The government has not come up with a total for how much the recovery will cost, but a drive through the affected areas paints a clear enough picture: mangled telephone wires; shards of trees and brush and palm blanketing the street; all manner of street signs, from 30-foot-tall billboards to traffic signs, upended.It was a scene repeated up and down the coast, as nervous residents and frazzled tourists awoke to flooded roads and widespread power failures. Rescue workers were sent up and down the western coast to assess the damage.Luis Felipe Puente, the director of Mexico’s civil protection agency, confirmed Saturday that there were no reports of deaths. In a phone interview as he was traveling to Manzanillo to begin a tour of the hardest-hit areas along the coast, he said his reports included some from remote mountain villages where there had been fears of mudslides.One reason there were apparently no fatalities was that people paid attention to warnings. Schools shut down, stores and businesses closed and people heeded the advisories to stay indoors or move to shelters. When trees and lampposts fell, there was nobody outside who could be hurt. “The final result is a recognition that everybody paid attention,” Mr. Puente said.He also noted that the storm lost much of its force when it made landfall and changed its path away from heavily populated areas.“This isn’t in the hands of man, it’s in the hands of nature,” Mr. Puente said.Still, the authorities warned that heavy rains could still cause landslides and flash flooding as far away as Texas, where the National Weather Service office in Brownsville issued flood warnings for South Texas communities.Maps showing the extent and wind speeds of the strongest hurricane ever known to assault the Western Hemisphere.“Many hillsides can weaken and collapse with Hurricane Patricia’s rain. Watch out!” warned Mexico’s civil protection agency.The roads were blocked in many areas by downed trees and other debris, making it hard to assess the damage.“We still need to be alert,” said Aristóteles Sandoval, the governor of Jalisco, speaking at a news conference in Puerto Vallarta. Experts had originally likened the storm to the deadly Typhoon Haiyan that hit the Philippines in 2013. But such was the anxiety associated with Hurricane Patricia that there was a great sense of relief when the worst failed to materialize. Diego Camacho, a 19-year-old living in the community of Chavarin, said the waters had swept away nine of his horses. But he shrugged when asked about the damage.“We have survived worse things,” he said.People offered all manner of explanations for why Mexico was spared. Many of those explanations centered on God, even among officials.Consider one of the hardest-hit towns: Barra de Navidad. The streets of the small village are lacerated with the remnants of Hurricane Patricia: shorn tops of trees, mounds of broken palm fronds, battered rooftops, deposits of thick mud lacquering the streets.But in Barra de Navidad, the patron saint is a deity known as Cristo de Ciclón, or, roughly translated, the Christ of the Hurricane. This is, after all, a place quite used to forces of nature, frequently weathering storms over the years. And they are looking for all the help they can get.“The church was full this morning, everyone went and thanked him,” said Amada Abraham, a street vendor. Like other areas in the storm’s path, Barra de Navidad on Saturday was an active work zone. Shopkeepers and homeowners collected the debris from the streets in tidy mounds, placing them on corners or stacking them in the beds of pickup trucks. The swish of brooms could be heard over the dull thud of the ocean, as brackish waves pounded the coastline.A short drive away, in the town of Melaque, a similar effort was underway. Police officers were out in force as homeowners cleaned out layers of mud and silt from the floors of their homes. But despite the heavy damage, life was slowly transforming back to normal.Shops were open, children played in the streets, teenagers strutted around in flocks and old men sat in the park passing the time in the speckled shade. Manuel Montes, 83, said the storm ranked among the worst in the 78 years that he had lived in Melaque. He rode out the storm in his apartment in town, but his real fear was what he would find in the aftermath.Mr. Montes denounced the lack of electricity and fresh food and the disproportionate toll of the damage that would be borne by the poor. To assess the recovery, he said, he decided to station himself in the park so he could better see the goings-on of his small town. The experience had left him melancholic.“I guess being alive is better than being dead,” he said. “But I just feel so sad for those whose homes were destroyed.”Closer to the beach, residents suffered more.Anna Jáuregui, 23, rocked her daughter to sleep as the rest of her family purged their home of mud and water. Tree branches were banked against the side of the home, where the family weathered the storm Friday night.Mrs. Jáuregui said that for all the damage, she was simply glad that everyone in her family was fine. And already things appeared to be changing for the better, as the sun bore down on the coastline, less than 100 yards from her front door.“Yesterday, there was lots of water and wind,” she said. “Today, all you see is sun.”Azam Ahmed reported from Cihuatlán, and Paulina Villegas from Barra de Navidad, Mexico. Reporting was contributed by Laura Tillman from Manzanillo, Mexico; Elisabeth Malkin and William Neuman from Mexico City; and Frances Robles from Miami.Advertisement