Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版One organizer of the Confucius Peace Prize had said he hoped that President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe would come to China to accept the prize, which he was awarded this year over finalists including Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft, and Ban Ki-moon, secretary general of the United Nations.The organizer, Qiao Wei, said last week that the prize committee, which is registered in Hong Kong, would arrange a lavish reception in the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse in Beijing if Mr. Mugabe came to receive the prize in person. Mr. Mugabe, 91, has been president for 28 years and has been criticized by Western governments for widespread human rights abuses.But a Zimbabwean news organization, NewsDay, has reported that Mr. Mugabe decided to reject the prize after learning that it had nothing to do with the Chinese government. “The Chinese government informed the Zimbabwean government that it was not associated with the conferring organization,” George Charamba, a spokesman for Mr. Mugabe, told a reporter. “The matter ended there, as far as the government and the president were concerned.”Mr. Charamba said the organizers of the prize had contacted the Zimbabwean Embassy in Beijing to inform officials of Mr. Mugabe’s selection. The prize includes 500,000 renminbi, or nearly $80,000.He added that it was right for the spokesman of Mr. Mugabe’s party, ZANU-PF, to have praised the prize organizers earlier for their “gesture of respect and good will towards the president.”“What the government did not, and should not do, is to stop an organization wishing to show respect and good will from doing so, as best it knows how,” Mr. Charamba said in the interview. “The president receives many prizes without even knowing, approving or receiving them. What is dramatic in this case is that oppositional interests drew a revolver at the mentioning of an honor or prize to Robert Mugabe.”News of the selection of Mr. Mugabe for the Confucius Peace Prize spread quickly last week. It drew condemnation by opposition politicians in Zimbabwe and ridicule by many others across the globe.Previous recipients of the prize include Fidel Castro, the former Cuban leader, and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. The first winner, in 2010, was Lien Chan, a former chairman of the Kuomintang in Taiwan, who learned of the prize after being contacted by journalists for comment. He did not attend the award ceremony in Beijing, and the organizers instead made a symbolic presentation in which a young girl accepted a bundle of money.The prize was started in 2010 as a rejoinder to the Nobel Peace Prize, whose committee that year honored Liu Xiaobo, a jailed dissident Chinese writer. Mr. Liu is serving an 11-year prison sentence for subversion and his wife, Liu Xia, is under house arrest. China has imposed economic and diplomatic punishments on Norway, where the Nobel committee is based.The first committee to give out the Confucius Peace Prize had tenuous ties to the Ministry of Culture, and a feud resulted in the splitting of the group and the ministry trying to distance itself from the prize.A Zimbabwean opinion writer who uses the pen name Nathaniel Manheru, widely believed to be Mr. Charamba, has belittled the award in his regular column.“The wires are awash with reports that some Chinese outfit — Confucius something — decided to award him a peace prize,” Mr. Manheru wrote. “He is not involved; he is not there to received the rumored prize.”Mr. Manheru added that “not even his system takes note of the so-called award.”“The supposed recipient is mum, here even, not a whit Confucian,” he wrote. “Just what is the story? Even some little institution, so far away from us, seeking to raise its own profile by forcing an association with Robert Mugabe, creates a threatening factor for the opposition!”