Xie Zuoshi, the economist who has proposed that China’s surfeit of bachelors could be solved by allowing a woman to marry more than one man, says he doesn’t think the arrangement has much chance of actually becoming legal, but he does have a few words for his online critics, who have included feminists and gay rights advocates.The controversy is described in an earlier Sinosphere post.While a rich, high-status man usually can attract a wife, Mr. Xie argues, poor men, especially in isolated rural areas, face a shortage of willing women. Thus the suggestion that such men share a wife. China’s extra men, estimated to number about 30 million by 2020, stem from a cultural preference for boys, combined with family-planning policies that have limited many couples to one child, making sex-selective abortion common. The sex ratio at birth is around 117 boys for every 100 girls. In China, men who cannot find a wife are known as guanggun, or bare branches. There was much outrage from people who believe marriage should only be between two people, one male and one female. (Mr. Xie had also suggested that men be allowed to marry each other.) Feminists accused him of “commodifying women.” Gay rights advocates said he had substituted shallow, utilitarian thinking for the true reasons that same-sex marriage should be made legal: sexual orientation and equal rights. Mr. Xie could not be reached for comment in time for the first Sinosphere post, but he subsequently sent an emailed response. Here are his reactions to some of the criticisms:1. On respecting individual rights: “I think I am precisely respecting women’s rights. I didn’t say that all women should have more than one husband. It should be based on willingness. Those who want a ‘one man, one woman’ arrangement should have that. But for poor women who are willing to have a second husband, so they can live together and jointly overcome life’s difficulties, we shouldn’t take that right away from them. That is respecting women’s rights, and men’s rights.”(Mr. Xie has said he believes that a main advantage of polyandry is that it conserves resources and provides more income for a struggling household.)2. On same-sex marriage: “Legalizing same-sex marriage would not solve the problem of guanggun’’ because it would allow women to marry each other.3. On the prospects for legalization: “In the final analysis, there isn’t much chance this will be legalized. But in economically underdeveloped regions, polyandry is in fact happening even if the law doesn’t permit it. So these de facto marriages are deprived of legal protection.”