By JULFIKAR ALI MANIKOCT. 26, 2015
Bangladeshi police arrested four people on Monday in connection with the killing of an Italian aid worker who was shot dead last month.DHAKA, Bangladesh —  The authorities on Monday said that they had arrested four men linked to the fatal shooting of an Italian aid worker in Dhaka’s diplomatic district last month but dismissed claims that the Islamic State was behind the killing.Three of the men were given instructions to kill a white foreigner at random, according to Asaduzzaman Mia, commissioner of the Dhaka metropolitan police. A fourth man gave the three men his motorcycle, which was used to carry out the killing on Sept. 28, the commissioner said.Though investigators have yet to arrest anyone suspected of ordering the killing, Mr. Mia said he was certain that the motive was to “keep the government under pressure.”“We did not get any evidence and information of militants’ involvement with this murder,” he said.AdvertisementThat suggested that the police were focusing on opponents of the ruling Awami League and Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The killing of the foreigner was planned to create anarchy in the country, to damage the good image of the country in the eyes of the international community,” Mr. Mia said.AdvertisementSo far, though, the authorities have not identified any political affiliations among the suspects.Hours after the aid worker, Cesare Tavella, 50, was shot as he was jogging, social media accounts linked to the Islamic State announced that its “security detachment” had carried out the killing, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors radical Islamic groups online. If true, the murder of Mr. Tavella would have been the first Islamic State attack in Bangladesh.The same social media accounts claimed responsibility for the killing of a Japanese man five days later, and for a bomb that detonated during a procession of Shiite Muslims in Dhaka on Sunday. One person was killed.Several foreign governments, including the United States, have issued warnings to their citizens in Bangladesh, saying foreigners may be under threat there. Much is at stake for Bangladesh, whose economy is largely driven by exports of garments to the West, and buyers typically visit in November to place orders.But Mr. Mia said the Bangladeshi police had established that the claim of Islamic State responsibility was “stage-managed publicity” intended to protect “the real culprits.”“We have already confirmed, using technology and other means, that the publicity was made saying I.S. did it was not authentic,” he said.The four suspects were taken into custody in different parts of the capital, the police said. A motorcycle believed to have been used in the escape was recovered.An article last Tuesday about the arrests of four men linked to the fatal shooting of an Italian aid worker in Dhaka, Bangladesh, misspelled the given name of the commissioner of the Dhaka metropolitan police in some editions. He is Asaduzzaman Mia, not Asaduzzmana. Because of an editing error, the article also misspelled the given name of the aid worker in some editions. He was Cesare Tavella, not Cesere.Ellen Barry contributed reporting from New Delhi.A version of this article appears in print on October 27, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Bangladeshi Officials Say 4 Arrested in Killing of Italian Aid Worker Were Not With ISIS .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.