AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — In Britain’s general election in May, Prime Minister David Cameron emerged with a majority in the House of Commons and his opponents diminished and in disarray. But on Monday, he suddenly faced a new and unexpected challenge — when the House of Lords delayed his government’s latest round of spending cuts.The proposal that alarmed many of the Lords, who are unelected, involves scaling back a cash benefit available to people in low-paying jobs.The Anglican bishop of Portsmouth, Christopher Foster, described the proposal as “morally indefensible.” A former Conservative chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, also expressed concern about the consequences for the poorest citizens.Though Britain has been spared the kind of austerity that unfolded in Ireland, Greece and Spain, public spending has been constrained in recent years, and the squeeze is expected to continue for several more.Monday’s vote focused attention on the scale and effect of those spending cuts, on the government’s broader vision of a shrinking state, and on the question of who would be affected.By convention, the House of Lords does not reject finance measures that, like the welfare proposal, have been agreed upon by elected lawmakers.After a highly charged debate, the Lords averted a constitutional crisis by rejecting calls to remove the welfare cuts entirely. Instead, they voted for two motions to delay them, including one to protect existing claimants for three years — something that could create a fissure in the government’s plans to eliminate Britain’s budget deficit.Mr. Cameron’s office had appealed to the Lords to not contradict elected lawmakers. It remains unclear how the government would respond to the defeat, and whether it would seek to reverse the vote or to revise its spending plans.Tina Stowell, leader of the House of Lords, said that George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, would “listen very carefully” if her colleagues voiced their concerns without blocking the legislation — a hint that concessions could be made next month.It was Mr. Osborne who proposed reductions in the benefits, a kind of tax credit, that were designed to supplement incomes of workers in low-paying jobs and people with children, whether or not they are employed.Such cuts have been fiercely opposed by the main opposition parties, but have also unnerved some of Mr. Cameron’s Conservative lawmakers, who are fearful of angry reactions from voters. Coming soon after the annual convention, where the Conservatives presented themselves as a party for working people, the issue has struck an awkward note.Critics argued that up to three million people could be worse off if the proposal passed, and that the House of Lords was entitled to oppose it on technical grounds, because it came in the form of a regulation, rather than a full piece of legislation. The critics also said that, while the government made clear before the election that it wanted to reduce welfare costs, it had suggested that tax credits would be safe.The dispute also was affected by the internal politics of the Conservative Party, and in the positioning to succeed Mr. Cameron, who announced before the general election in May that he would not lead the Tories in the next general election, which is set to be held by 2020.Mr. Osborne, the public face of Mr. Cameron’s austerity policies, is a leading contender to succeed him. A potential rival, Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, has expressed reservations about cutting the tax credit. Mr. Osborne has been seen as the favorite to become the next leader because his stewardship of the economy was credited by many with helping Mr. Cameron win in May.That victory allowed Mr. Cameron to abandon the centrist Liberal Democrats, who had served as his coalition partners since 2010 and whose parliamentary presence was decimated in the election. Last month, the opposition Labour Party elected a new leader, Jeremy Corbyn, a left-winger who is at odds with many of his own lawmakers over crucial policies.By then, Mr. Osborne had outlined his plans to balance the public finances by the end of the decade. Tax credits were a target, the government said, because, since being introduced by a previous Labour government, the cost of the policy has increased from 4 billion pounds, or about $6.1 billion, to £30 billion a year. Some employers pay workers low wages, knowing that the state will supplement them.Mr. Osborne argues that he would help many low-paid workers through other changes in the tax system, and by forcing employers to pay a higher minimum wage. But, while the impact of the changes is disputed, almost everyone agrees that some workers will be hit.One possible government response might be to nominate dozens more Conservatives to the Lords to give it a majority there and drive the measures through. Yet among Mr. Cameron’s campaign promises was one to reduce the cost of politics — and the House of Lords is already the world’s largest legislative assembly outside China.Advertisement