AdvertisementSupported byBy James KanterNAMUR, Belgium — A masked man who rammed his car into an army commando barracks set off panic here on Monday, but the authorities said the episode appeared to have no links to the terrorist networks that have taken root in Belgium.Troops at the army base in Flawinne, on the outskirts of the city of Namur in southern Belgium, fired warning shots before the driver left his car and went on the run for three hours. No one was injured, and no weapons or explosives were found on the driver or in his car.Vincent Macq, the local prosecutor, said the man might have been mentally unstable. At a news conference Mr. Macq said the man was in his mid-30s, had been driving his own car and was arrested without resistance. Mr. Macq did not identify him further.“There are no reasons at this point to assume that there is terrorism involved,” Defense Minister Steven Vandeput said in an interview.Col. Marc Brevers, the military commander for Namur Province, said at the news conference that the base had no direct links to military operations in the Middle East.Belgium is on edge over the extent of terrorism cells. In January, police officers in the eastern town of Verviers shot dead two men suspected of links to a terrorist network plotting an attack. Last year, four people at the Jewish Museum in Brussels died after a gun attack linked to a French suspect who had traveled to Syria to join radical Islamist fighters.Anne Barzin, the interim mayor of Namur, described “huge anxiety” in Namur after the episode on Monday morning. It began when a guard at the barracks refused to permit the man to enter, according to Mr. Vandeput, the defense minister. The man then backed up his car and used it to batter down a gate and a barrier before driving across the parade ground, the minister said.Troops at the barracks fired several warning shots before the car plowed through a fence at the back of the base and came to a halt in a muddy field, from where the man went on the run, the minister said.Advertisement