By JOE COCHRANEOCT. 2, 2015
JAKARTA, Indonesia — A small passenger plane carrying 10 people disappeared in eastern Indonesia shortly after takeoff on Friday, officials said, in the country’s latest aviation mishap.The DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft, operated by Aviastar, a regional carrier, vanished from radar within minutes of taking off at 2:25 p.m. from Masamba, a town in South Sulawesi Province. It was en route to Makassar, the provincial capital, said Petrus Budi, the commercial general manager for the airline.Mr. Petrus said the last contact the authorities had with the aircraft was 11 minutes after takeoff, when the pilots radioed to controllers in Makassar to advise them that they had reached an altitude of 8,000 feet.“They said they would check in again about 40 minutes outside of Makassar but never did,” Mr. Petrus said, adding that the flight was supposed to arrive around 3:40 p.m.AdvertisementA. J. Barata, a spokesman for Indonesia’s Ministry of Transportation, said on Friday evening that the authorities did not know whether the plane had crashed.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s missing, and we’re giving notice to other aircraft that may be flying that route” in case they spotted the plane, Mr. Barata told a news conference in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital.AdvertisementThe plane was carrying seven passengers and three crew members, he said.According to Aviastar’s website, the regional carrier has been operating since 2003 and has commercial and charter routes in the Indonesian islands of Java, Sumatra, Borneo, Sulawesi and Bali.Indonesia has had numerous commercial and military air disasters in recent years, including three deadly crashes alone since last December that killed a total of 359 people.Indonesia’s national search and rescue agency will began an aerial search along the aircraft’s last known flight path at dawn on Saturday, said Setiono, a duty officer at the agency’s command center in Jakarta.He said 30 personnel had been deployed to the region in preparation for a ground search once the plane is spotted.Mr. Petrus, the official from the airline, said that the missing aircraft was in good operating condition and that there had been no distress call from the pilots.“We don’t have any clue what happened,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on October 3, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Indonesia: A Plane Carrying 10 People Disappears.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.