Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版In the United States and Europe, people are wondering if they’ll have to give up their favorite bacon, bratwurst or prosciutto after the World Health Organization reported on Monday that processed meats were “carcinogenic to humans” and unprocessed red meat “probably carcinogenic to humans.”In China, where the food company Shuanghui International bought Smithfield Foods, the meat-producing giant, for nearly $5 billion in 2013, people are wondering: Will I have to give up Harbin red sausage, the salty cured meat from the country’s northeast? The luncheon meat in my hot pot? The plastic-wrapped sausage sticks, made by Shuanghui, that are popular with children?“Goodness, I can no longer enjoy sausages and ham,” one user wrote, affixing two weeping emoticons, part of the surge of social media commentary. The Chinese diet is not typically heavy in red meats, but that is changing as growing wealth and Western habits stoke demand. A recent report by PricewaterhouseCoopers said that per capita consumption of meat, chiefly pork, has risen to an estimated 60 kilograms, or 132 pounds, this year, from 46 kilograms, or 101 pounds, in 2003.  On Wednesday, China’s meat industry, like others around the world, hit back at the W.H.O. report, saying that it was “unscientific” and did not represent a global consensus. “This report is reckless and unscientific and its conclusions cannot represent scientific opinion of the entire world,” the China News Service quoted an unnamed representative of the China Meat Association as saying. “The risk of meat causing cancer needs to be studied more thoroughly and objectively before reaching a conclusion.” As of Wednesday, Chinese government health officials had not spoken publicly on the issue. Officials of the National Health and Family Planning Commission and the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention did not immediately respond to requests for comment. In China, public trust in the authorities over food standards is low, after many scandals, including tainted infant formula that sickened tens of thousands of babies and “gutter oil”  — recycled waste oil sold for cooking.  Even economically disadvantaged Chinese stretch their purses to buy imported milk, meat and other foreign foods that are presumed to be safer. Perhaps as a result, many online commenters have targeted their scorn not at the report that may deprive them of their favorite foods, but at the domestic food industry.The World Health Organization reminds people that processed meat “is harmful, but then China’s self-proclaimed experts come forward to refute that,” wrote a person with the username xingzhe cc on an article circulating on Weibo that drew thousands of readers. “I’ll leave it to you all to judge. What’s that smell in the air? The stink of money.”  The most popular comment on the China News Service article also took aim at the meat industry instead of the findings.“Look at the association, it’s furious. If it’s not scientific, then give us the proof!” wrote a user with an address in the southern province of Guangdong, where cured meats like siu mei, a sticky, sweet barbecued pork, are treasured. On Weibo, one person wrote: “Is there anything left that we can eat?”Another replied, “It’s O.K. After a while there will be new evidence against it,” referring to the report. “Things like this go back and forth. We’ve seen it before. Eat it [processed meat] occasionally. Many people who do still live to be 80 or or 90 years old.”Vanessa Piao contributed research. Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow. 