AdvertisementSupported byBy Elisabeth MalkinMEXICO CITY — Soft drinks are so deeply embedded in the diet here that they have become part of the dining tradition, from the taco stand to the white- linen restaurant. Whether lunch consists of corn tortillas and beans, or meat in sauces infused with cacao and fragrant spices of Aztec origin, it usually goes with something fizzy. And sugary. The seemingly unquenchable thirst for soda in Mexico has made the soft drinks industry economically and politically powerful; a former president, Vicente Fox, rose to prominence as a Coca-Cola executive.But that thirst has also contributed to an obesity epidemic. Looking for a way to attack the problem two years ago, the Mexican government consulted public health experts and imposed a national tax of about 10 percent on sugary drinks. The tax turned Mexico, where more than 70 percent of adults and a third of elementary school children are overweight, into an international experiment. The idea was to see whether raising the price of soft drinks would encourage consumers to switch to healthier beverages. Now, just as the evidence suggests that the tax is beginning to work, a proposal to lower it has popped up in Congress.Last week, Mexico’s lower legislative house, the Chamber of Deputies, voted to cut the tax in half for drinks that contain less than five grams of sugar per 100 milliliters. That, legislators said, would prompt soda producers to put less sugar in their drinks.Those who pushed successfully for the tax in the first place are furious, pointing out that the reduction would chiefly benefit beverage brands that are marketed to children. They accuse the companies of maneuvering behind the scenes to reverse settled policy.“Our legislators care more about the industry than they care about people’s health,” said Dr. Juan A. Rivera Dommarco, a nutrition researcher at Mexico’s National Institute of Public Health. “The industry always gets its way.” To block the tax-cut effort in Mexico’s Senate, activists rushed advertisements into newspapers and onto the radio, urging legislators to reverse the Chamber of Deputies vote. International organizations, including the American Heart Association, added their pleas in an ad published Tuesday, saying the “pioneering” tax “already shows the positive benefits to reducing consumption and serves as an example to the entire world.” It is an example that global public health agencies want to see play out. While researchers say it is too early to determine whether the tax will affect obesity rates, the initial evidence suggests that people are at least thinking more about their drinking habits.A preliminary study by the national health institute and the University of North Carolina found that Mexicans over all cut back on soft drinks by 6 percent last year. Purchases fell even faster among poorer households.But the trade association that represents Mexico’s $15 billion soft drink industry, Anprac, has disputed those findings, arguing that sales of soft drinks have fallen only 2 percent since the tax was imposed and that it has hurt poorer people disproportionately.The uproar may be shifting the debate. Under questioning in the Senate on Monday, the finance undersecretary, Miguel Messmacher, agreed that the tax had reduced soda consumption and said he had no idea whether scaling it back would prompt companies to lower sugar content.The conservative National Action Party, from which Mr. Fox emerged as a political force, supported the tax cut in the lower house but said it was reconsidering.“I don’t think there’s any scientific evidence that rolling back the tax will have a positive public health effect on obesity,” said Dr. Kelly Henning, a public health expert at Bloomberg Philanthropies, which helped pay for the health institute study and financed the groups that lobbied for the tax. Advertisement