By RAPHAEL MINDEROCT. 27, 2015
Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain vowed to block secession proceedings started by a pro-independence coalition in Catalan.MADRID —  As the secessionist drive by Catalonia has heated up, it has followed a familiar tit-for-tat pattern: Catalan separatist politicians announce a new way to circumvent fierce opposition from Madrid, and Madrid immediately denounces the move as illegal.But the strategies and threats employed by both sides — as well as the stakes — are ratcheted up in every round.That was the case again on Tuesday when Catalonia’s main separatist parties announced that they had agreed on a declaration to create an independent Catalan republic, which they expected to be rubber-stamped by Catalonia’s newly elected regional Parliament by Nov. 9.Their plan was swiftly denounced by Mariano Rajoy, Spain’s prime minister, as “an act of provocation.”Advertisement“Those who want to separate and divide Catalonia from the rest of Spain must know that they won’t achieve that,” Mr. Rajoy said during a televised news conference on Tuesday. “They face the law and a government ready to enforce it.”AdvertisementMr. Rajoy’s government has already threatened to prosecute Artur Mas, leader of Catalonia’s regional government, for his past actions in the independence drive. The government is now moving to empower Spain’s Constitutional Court to suspend Catalan politicians who violate Spanish law.But while the standoff could have profound implications for Spain — Catalonia is Spain’s most economically powerful region — and affect other separatist movements in the European Union, it has also become a tool for its main participants to elevate their own standing ahead of national parliamentary elections on Dec. 20.The dispute has allowed Mr. Rajoy, who faces a fragmentation of Spain’s political landscape as the vote approaches, to present himself as the guardian of Spain’s integrity.The independence declaration announced Tuesday is designed to allow Catalonia to set up its own institutions and eventually adopt its own constitution. It also includes a defiant claim that the Catalan march toward nationhood should not be subject to approval by Spanish institutions, not even the country’s Constitutional Court.“As long as I’m president of the government, Spain will continue to be a nation of people free and equal,” Mr. Rajoy said in response. “Everybody will be subject to the law and the decision of the courts.”But each step taken by Mr. Rajoy against Mr. Mas has also allowed the Catalonia leader to enhance his own stature, in a dynamic that has added further momentum to the dispute.This month, Mr. Mas made a court appearance related to an independence vote in Catalonia — which was declared illegal by the Constitutional Court — using it as a platform to amplify his ambitions and calling the prosecution, in effect, nonsensical.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Tuesday, the Spanish national police raided the home of the founder of Mr. Mas’s Convergence party, Jordi Pujol, and those of some of Mr. Pujol’s sons, as part of an investigation into political corruption.AdvertisementThe Spanish police raids have also become part of the political feuding between the separatists and Madrid. After a separate raid last week of the Convergence headquarters, Mr. Mas said that he and his party were “targets for big game hunters.”Predictably, Madrid’s explanation is exactly the opposite. “The whole process of separatism has been an attempt to cover up the corruption in Catalonia,” said Pablo Casado, a spokesman for Mr. Rajoy’s Popular Party.The latest separatist agreement was announced after Mr. Mas called a regional election in Catalonia last month, which he billed as a de facto vote on secession. Separatist parties won the most parliamentary seats, but fell short of a majority of the votes.The standoff has created “an unprecedented political and constitutional dispute,” said Manuel Muñiz, a Spanish teaching fellow at Oxford University’s Blavatnik School of Government.In the medium term, he said, “it’s more worrying evidence of a conservative government that hasn’t really understood the cultural diversity of Spain and believes that reducing the issue to a purely legal one can be a substitute for much-needed political dialogue.”However, he added, in the longer term, “I think Catalonia could turn into something even more dramatic: a dispute that hurts the whole concept of a united and cosmopolitan Europe.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 28, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Catalans Try Another Path, Vexing Spain .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.