By JODI RUDORENOCT. 27, 2015
JERUSALEM — Fuad Abu Hamed, a middle-aged, middle-class Palestinian from the East Jerusalem neighborhood of Sur Baher, summed the situation up succinctly when he said, “The story of Shorouq here is not the same story the Israelis tell.”Mr. Abu Hamed, interviewed for a recent article about Arab East Jerusalem, was talking about Shorouq Dweiyat, the 18-year-old from Sur Baher who was shot and wounded in Jerusalem’s Old City on Oct. 7 by an Israeli Jew she had stabbed in the back. But he could have been describing the violence that has swept across the Holy Land this month — or the entire Israeli-Palestinian conflict.The conflict is one of dueling narratives that can obscure concrete debates over dividing territory or determining the fate of the contested Old City compound at the center of the current crisis. These narratives have devolved further in the latest uprising, fueled by incendiary material swirling around social networks and harsh rhetoric from leaders on both sides.“The story of Shorouq” in Sur Baher is of a devout girl harassed by Jews after praying at the compound’s Al Aqsa Mosque; many people told me they watched with outrage footage that showed men tearing at her veil and long cloak, though the video has disappeared from public sites. The story Israelis tell is of a student who skipped class, sent a Facebook message to her mother saying she planned to become a martyr and went stalking Jewish prey with a sharp blade.AdvertisementTo most Israeli Jews, what has been happening is a spate of random attacks against innocents. Palestinians see it as excessive force against not only attackers but anyone who looks like them.AdvertisementThe videos Israelis share include a film of a Palestinian employee of the Israeli phone company who rammed a car into an Orthodox Jew and then hacked him with a meat cleaver. Palestinians pass around clips not of the attacks but their aftermath, like a boy bleeding on the street as Jews curse him and Israeli officers stand idle.After yet another attack at the Damascus Gate to the Old City the other day, a crowd of angry men and boys gathered behind the police barricades, eager to tell what they had seen: a Palestinian teenager, wearing fatigues, who fled from his father after a fight only to be felled in a hail of 20 bullets, or 40.Many people said they heard the loud argument, but none could say what it was about. “The father was yelling at him big time, ‘Go home, stop, go home,’  ” one said. Maybe the youth had said he was going to stab an Israeli, and the father tried to prevent him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He was not carrying a knife, I saw everything,” a witness insisted. “If they show a knife, they planted it.”The Israeli police soon published a photo of a pocketknife next to the slain young man.At a news conference a few days later, Hanan Ashrawi, a leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, twice raised the possibility that the police had planted knives. Asked whether she believed officers were actually doing this — or had any evidence — Ms. Ashrawi ignored the first question and said: “I don’t have any evidence as to what’s happening because we have no access to the scene of any event.”Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel was quick to call out President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority for saying in a recent speech that Israeli forces had “executed” a 13-year-old Palestinian, when he was in fact being treated in an Israeli hospital. Palestinians — and many others — were equally quick to pounce when Mr. Netanyahu told a whopper of his own, saying it was a Palestinian cleric, not Hitler, who came up with the idea of exterminating Europe’s Jews.Now, Jordan, the custodian of Jerusalem’s holy sites, and Israel have agreed to install cameras at the Aqsa compound, which is also revered by Jews as the site of their two ancient temples, to help enforce the status quo barring non-Muslim prayer.Palestinians accuse Israel of trying to divide the site, citing increasing visits by religious Jews and aggressive police behavior. Israel says it is Palestinian harassment of Jewish visitors and the hurling of projectiles at officers that have changed things.Unless there is a 24-hour live stream the public can view, the new cameras may only produce more conflicting clips.An earlier version of this article referred imprecisely to the knife in the Israeli police photo. It is a butterfly knife, which is traditionally used as a weapon. The Boy Scouts of America does not explicitly ban such knives; it endorses pocketknives for general use, and does not sell butterfly knives in its official Scout shop. Butterfly knives are legal in some states, and knife policies are set by individual troops, so it is possible, though unlikely, that some troops approve them. But the knife pictured is not typically “the kind Boy Scouts use."We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.