

      By RUSSELL GOLDMAN and 
    
PATRICK BOEHLER

OCT. 29, 2015

China ended its decades-old “one-child” policy on Thursday, announcing that all married couples would be allowed to have two children in a bid to reverse the rapid aging of the labor force.Here’s a look back at the policy as covered over the decades by The New York Times. Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版Chinese government departments issue a plan calling for slower population growth.In the years after the Cultural Revolution, local government offices across China set up family-planning programs.Family Planning in ChinaThe central government approves a proposal to slow population growth, and family planning offices encourage couples to have one child, or at most two. Some areas go further and begin to enforce a “one-child” rule. A national conference of family planning officials pushes forward proposals for couples to have only one child, and state media promote the idea. Chinese provinces experiment with measures to curb population growth, including providing additional food rations for couples pledging to have only one child in Sichuan Province. As Population Nears a Billion, China Stresses CurbsThe Communist Party ordered its 38 million members to have only one child. It was one of a series of measures that were gradually expanded and aimed at curbing population growth to zero by the year 2000. In the New China, 1 + 1 Can = 4 — No MoreThe National People’s Congress endorses a new Constitution that for the first time enshrines birth control as every Chinese citizen’s duty. Chinese Parliament Approves a New ConstitutionIn Guangxi Province, where family-planning regulations are strictly enforced, parents trying for sons sell their baby girls on the black market. At the time, 80 percent of trafficked babies were girls, according to a Chinese academic.Bias for Boys Leads to Sale of Baby Girls in ChinaChinese officials say they will begin studying how to move away from the country’s one-child restriction, but caution that any changes would come gradually and would not mean an elimination of family-planning policies.China to Reconsider One-Child LimitThe Chinese government eases the one-child policy, permitting couples nationwide to have two children if one of the spouses is a single child.China to Ease Longtime Policy of 1-Child LimitDespite those changes to the law, many only-child couples say they will not take advantage of the new rule because of the rising costs of child-rearing. Many in China Can Now Have a Second Child, but Say NoChina ends the one-child policy, announcing that all married couples would be allowed to have two children, in a bid to reverse the rapid aging of the labor force.China to End One-Child Policy, Allowing Families Two ChildrenThough Chinese couples can finally legally have a second child, the decision to have another for most families comes down to math.AdvertisementThough Chinese couples can finally legally have a second child, the decision to have another for most families comes down to math.