AdvertisementSupported byBy Austin RamzyHONG KONG — The head of a United States anti-abortion group who tried to enter Australia on a canceled visa lost a court appeal on Friday and was expected to be deported shortly afterward.Troy Newman, the president of Operation Rescue, had been scheduled to begin a speaking tour in Australia on Friday. But immigration officials canceled his visa before he left the United States after Australian politicians raised concerns that he might encourage violence against abortion providers or women seeking the procedure.He managed to board a flight from Los Angeles despite not having a valid visa but was detained by immigration officers at Melbourne Airport while trying to enter the country on Thursday.During a hearing on Friday at the High Court of Australia, Justice Geoffrey Nettle faulted Mr. Newman’s decision to take the flight despite the revocation of his visa. “Acting as he did means he does not come to this court with clean hands,” Justice Nettle said, according to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.Peter Dutton, the immigration minister, said in a statement issued after the court ruling that he had told immigration officers to “expedite his removal.”“His detention and removal is entirely related to his decision to openly flout Australian law and travel to Australia without a valid visa,” the statement said.Terri Butler, a Labor member of the Australian Parliament, had called for the government to revoke Mr. Newman’s visa this week. In a letter to Mr. Dutton, she cited passages from a book that Mr. Newman co-wrote that called for abortion doctors to be executed.On Friday, Ms. Butler praised the court’s decision.“Here in Australia, we are a very open democracy,” she told reporters. “We have a lot of discussion, frank discussion, vehement discussion, about issues on which we disagree. And abortion is one of those things. But we don’t welcome extremists into our country.”Operation Rescue had said that Mr. Newman was the victim of a smear campaign and that he had called not for violence but for the criminalization of abortion.OpinionThe Editorial BoardAdvertisement