By WILLIAM NEUMANOCT. 28, 2015
CARACAS, Venezuela —  A Venezuelan prosecutor who fled to the United States said this week that an official told him that President Nicolás Maduro had personally ordered the arrest of Leopoldo López, a prominent opposition politician who was detained for his role in antigovernment protests and later sentenced to more than 13 years in prison.The prosecutor, Franklin Nieves, made further allegations against the Maduro government during an interview on Tuesday night on CNN en Español, the network’s Spanish language station.Mr. Nieves had helped prosecute Mr. López but fled with his family to the United States last week. He then posted a video online calling the case a farce, saying that he was pressured by higher-ups to use false evidence. He also promised to make other revelations.On Monday the national prosecutor of Venezuela, Luisa Ortega, said she had not pressured Mr. Nieves. She added that Mr. Nieves never complained of any irregularities while he handled the López case.Advertisement“The prosecutor’s office never put pressure on him,” Ms. Ortega said in a television interview. “If he was pressured, it was undoubtedly by foreign elements.”AdvertisementAsked about reports that she had sent instructions to Mr. Nieves about how to strengthen the evidence against Mr. López, she said: “That is not true. No prosecutor, not him nor any other, is called in to be told what he has to do.”And in a variation on the classic line “You can’t fire me, I quit,” Ms. Ortega said that, after his flight to the United States, she was firing Mr. Nieves for not showing up for work.Mr. López, a former mayor of a district of Caracas, was arrested in February 2014, in the early stages of a nationwide wave of protests against Mr. Maduro’s leftist government. He was charged with inciting violence, and a judge convicted him last month. Mr. López’s lawyers were not allowed to present evidence or witnesses at the trial, and the proceeding was widely criticized for being politically motivated and for lacking in basic guarantees of due process.In the interview on Tuesday on CNN en Español, Mr. Nieves said that in February 2014 he was called to a meeting with Brig. Gen. Manuel Bernal, then the head of the intelligence police.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said General Bernal had told him that he had orders from Mr. Maduro to arrest several people, including Mr. López.“The instructions that he had from President Nicolás Maduro, he told me, ‘from Number One,’ Nicolás Maduro, were to get four arrest warrants,” Mr. Nieves said.He said that he asked General Bernal for documentation showing what crimes had been committed and that the general had told him he did not have any. Mr. Nieves said that at the general’s instruction he then met with an intelligence officer who he said had concocted the information needed to substantiate the warrants, which were for Mr. López and three other dissidents.“They made up those facts in the moment,” Mr. Nieves said.A spokesman for the national prosecutor’s office did not respond to messages on Tuesday.In March, General Bernal was included on a list of seven Venezuelan officials sanctioned by the United States over accusations of human rights violations. Mr. Nieves also accused the powerful head of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, of being heavily involved in shaping the case against Mr. López.Patricia Torres contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Prosecutor Ties Leader of Venezuela to Arrests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.