AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven ErlangerLONDON — A 74-year-old British man who has spent more than a year in a Saudi jail for possessing homemade wine will be released in the next week and will not face further punishment, the British foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, announced Wednesday in Saudi Arabia.The Briton, Karl Andree, who has lived in Saudi Arabia for decades, had violated the kingdom’s harsh laws against alcohol production, possession and consumption. He was arrested in August 2014 in Jidda by the religious police, and his family feared that he would be subjected to a public flogging and might not survive it.There was never any indication that Mr. Andree was about to be flogged, though his family had been told that it was part of his sentence. The family recently spoke of their concerns to British newspapers and then the BBC, hoping to embarrass the Conservative government of Prime Minister David Cameron and spur the Foreign Office to take more urgent action in the case.On the same day this month that the news media published reports about the family’s concerns, there was a Cabinet struggle over the propriety of a small British government contract to provide “training needs analysis” for Saudi prison staff.Justice Minister Michael Gove opposed the 5.9 million pound deal (about $9 million) as inappropriate, given Saudi Arabia’s record on human rights and gender equality, the conditions of its prisons and its harsh treatment of those who break its religious laws — especially when those same laws are often flouted by rich Saudis themselves.Mr. Gove was opposed by Mr. Hammond and the Foreign Office, but in the furor, Mr. Cameron decided to cancel the prison-training contract. The Saudi ambassador to Britain, Prince Mohammed bin Nawaf bin Abdulaziz al Saud, warned in The Daily Telegraph of serious repercussions over what he called an “alarming change” in official British attitudes toward the kingdom and said it would “not be lectured to by anyone.”Mr. Hammond was in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, on Wednesday to mend fences, and secured a promise from the authorities that Mr. Andree would be released within a week and would not be flogged, which was considered unlikely in any case.Mr. Hammond, who appeared at a news conference with his Saudi counterpart, wrote on Twitter that he was “delighted to announce Brit Karl Andree will be released from Saudi custody within a week & reunited with his family.”Mr. Cameron, who had written to the Saudis about the case after the news media storm, wrote on Twitter that the news was “good to hear.”Mr. Andree’s son, Simon, said he was “absolutely thrilled” at the news about his father, who has seven grandchildren and worked in the oil industry. His daughter Kirsten Piroth said that the news ended a “long, long year” of anxiety.Saudi Arabia is Britain’s most important trade partner in the Middle East and its biggest market for arms exports. Mr. Hammond is on a regional tour to discuss the crises in Syria and Yemen and the conflict with the Islamic State and will fly to Vienna this week for further talks about Syria.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement