By MICHELLE INNISOCT. 28, 2015
WELLINGTON, New Zealand —  The flightless kiwi bird with green lasers shooting from its eyes has been ruled out. As has the woolly sheep with red stars for its eyes.The more than 10,000 designs submitted for New Zealand’s new flag have been whittled down to five, four of which feature variations on a fern, an indigenous plant of great symbolism in the native Maori culture and the logo of the national rugby team.“It is about new life, new growth,” said Andrew Fyfe, whose black-and-white spiral based on a fern made the final cut. “It would be amazing to spot that on a traveler’s backpack in another part of the world.”Most New Zealanders, however, are somewhat less enthusiastic.“They are O.K.,” Rose Pike, 21, a university student from Wellington, said of the five finalists. “But they look like they could have been done with Photoshop on a home computer.”AdvertisementShe would rather retain the current flag.“It is our history and our heritage,” she said. “We should keep it. All my flatmates feel the same way.”AdvertisementThe idea of replacing New Zealand’s flag, a blue banner with Britain’s Union Jack in the upper left quadrant and the four stars of the Southern Cross in red on the right, has percolated for decades, with new proposals for changing it cropping up every few years. But none has gotten as far as the current one.Prime Minister John Key promised last year that if he won the September election, his third, he would hold a nationwide referendum on a new flag.“The design of the New Zealand flag symbolizes a colonial and post-colonial era whose time has passed,” he said. “The flag remains dominated by the Union Jack in a way that we ourselves are no longer dominated by the United Kingdom.”There were also practical reasons. The flag of neighboring Australia also features the Union Jack and Southern Cross on a blue field. More than once at official functions abroad, Mr. Key has been placed in front of the wrong flag.“There is sheer confusion over what our flag looks like,” he said in an interview last week in the Beehive, Wellington’s distinctive round, tiered government center.“I want to build greater signs of overt patriotism and pride in New Zealand,” he said. “We have those attributes in spades, but we don’t show them in the way other countries do.”He often cites Canada, which in 1965 changed its flag to the instantly recognizable maple leaf, as a model. Canada, like New Zealand, remains a member of the Commonwealth and a constitutional monarchy under Queen Elizabeth II.AdvertisementBut polls consistently show that 60 to 70 percent of New Zealanders are content with the flag they have, according to Barry Milne, a research fellow at the University of Auckland.In a recent poll of 890 voters conducted by the university’s Compass Research Center, 61 percent opposed changing the flag, 27 percent said they might support a new flag depending on the design, and 12 percent favored changing the flag.The attitude of Tom Dinning, 73, a retired garden center manager from Hamilton, was fairly typical: “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.”New Zealand voters will be the ones to decide.In May, they were asked to submit designs for a new flag. By the mid-July deadline, the government had received 10,292 submissions.A panel of 12 New Zealanders chosen by politicians from six political parties reduced the list to 40 and, after a period of public discussion, trimmed it to four.Three of the designs featured a silver fern. The fourth was Mr. Fyfe’s swirl, a Maori symbol known as a koru, based on an unfurling fern frond.But strong public criticism of the narrow choice led the government to add a fifth, nonfern option. This design, known as the Red Peak, is also based on a Maori motif, representing earth, mountains and sky.There was early support for a black flag with a silver fern in white until someone noticed that it could be mistaken for the Islamic State flag.Advertisement“Any new flag must be unmistakably from New Zealand,” said John Burrows, a former lawyer and chairman of the Flag Consideration Panel.“We must be able to recognize ourselves in it,” he said, adding that, to his knowledge, New Zealand’s flag would be the first designed and chosen by the people. “It is an entirely democratic process.”Voters will rank the five flags in a mail-in vote during three weeks starting in late November. In March, a second postal referendum will pit the most popular new flag against the incumbent.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some New Zealanders have objected to the $18 million cost of the process, which includes the referendums, town hall meetings convened across New Zealand, bunting and sample flags.Rameka Wehipeihana, 35, a welder, said the money would be better spent easing poverty or improving public schools or hospitals.“I feel there’s nothing to change,” he said. “People have fought under that flag and put their lives on the line for that flag.”For that reason, some military veterans are boycotting the first referendum because it does not allow them to choose the current flag.“Why are we having a debate about the flag?” said B.J. Clark, president of New Zealand’s largest veterans group, the Returned and Services’ Association. “Our flag is relevant to our country.”AdvertisementMr. Key said he had mulled changing the flag for years but kept putting it off to deal with more pressing issues, like the financial crisis in 2008 or the earthquake that leveled central Christchurch in 2011.“By 2013, I thought there would never be a right time,” he said. “But this was a good time to get a lot more serious about it, and either get change or put the issue to bed.”Dr. Milne said it might be the latter. “John Key often shows up as most preferred prime minister in polling,” he said. “But he may have got this one wrong.”A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: New Zealand Narrows Field for Flag Vote to Five Contenders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.