By MELISSA EDDYOCT. 28, 2015
BERLIN — Federal prosecutors charged a 44-year-old German man with attempted murder on Wednesday in the stabbing of a mayoral candidate in Cologne, an attack the authorities said was driven by his anger over her work on the refugee issue.The attack shocked the country as it grapples with a growing backlash in parts of society against the thousands of migrants flocking here to seek refuge.The man, who has been identified only as Frank S. in keeping with German laws that protect the identity of a suspect, was charged with attempted murder and dangerous bodily harm in the Oct. 17 stabbing, which severely wounded the candidate, Henriette Reker, who went on to win, and hurt four others. If convicted, he could face life in prison.The suspect had “sought to send a signal against what he saw as the continually rising number of foreigners in Germany and the political decisions” that led to their presence in the nation, the office of the country’s top prosecutor said in a statement.Advertisement“As such, the act is the high point in a whole line of intimidation and threats against people engaged in assisting refugees and taking them in to Germany,” it said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uwe Schlosser, the federal prosecutor, took over the case from state prosecutors in Cologne on grounds of the particularly dangerous nature of the stabbing, which came against the backdrop of a rising tide of attacks by the extreme right or neo-Nazis on accommodation for refugees.AdvertisementThe violence, including about 500 attacks on refugee shelters and an outbreak of hate-speech in social media, has strained the political situation in Germany as it struggles to cope with thousands of people arriving daily.There has also been a surge of anti-immigrant rallies in recent weeks, with about 20,000 people joining a weekly anti-Islam march held in the eastern city of Dresden this month. For the first time, the government has openly accused the far-right of organizing the rallies, while calling on Germans to “stand together.”Ms. Reker, 58, who previously served in the municipal government as the official responsible for the care and housing of refugees in Cologne, won the election with a clear majority. She is expected to recover fully from her injuries.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.