AdvertisementSupported byBy Katrin BennholdPASSAU, Germany — Newly arrived migrants were lining up at the train station in this border town for their first registration one recent evening. In a group of young Afghans traveling on their own, Matin, from Kabul, said he was 17 years old.A police officer laughed. “Yes, you and all your friends are 17,” he said. “You know how often I hear that every day?”One of the hardest challenges in processing unaccompanied teenage migrants is to determine whether they are still minors. Their legal situation changes radically on their 18th birthday.Migrants under 18 are considered “children first and refugees second,” giving them the same rights as German children, said Johanna Karpenstein of B-UMF, a Berlin-based charity focused on unaccompanied minor refugees across Germany. That means where possible they are fast-tracked into youth housing, German lessons and schools. Perhaps the biggest prize: If they are granted asylum, their families are allowed to join them in Germany.The age assessment happens early on. When a migrant claims to be a minor, a youth worker is assigned to determine if the claim is credible.“It’s a very uncomfortable situation,” said Lothar Kaseder, who heads the department dealing with unaccompanied minors at the Passau youth authority. And the science is inexact: Facial hair, complexion and even traumatic experiences can make a person appear older than their biological age. Some of Mr. Kaseder’s colleagues focus on the hands, rather than the faces, of the youths.In recent months European nations have worked to block the main route taken by migrants fleeing war and upheaval.If a migrant is deemed over 18, he or she has four weeks to appeal. A medical examination may follow to settle the dispute. Mohammed Jouni of the charity Youth Without Borders — himself a refugee and now a medical student — said that for young Arab or Afghan boys who had never been naked in front of anyone, these examinations could be distressing.Even medical tests tend to be imprecise. An X-ray of the wrist has a margin of error of about two years, and a more exact analysis of the jawbone, teeth and clavicle is so expensive that it is done only when a dispute goes to court, said Sandra Wagner-Putz, a youth worker.She pointed out that in some countries, like Afghanistan, birthdays have little cultural significance. “Often, they don’t know their date of birth,” she said.Few have documents. But one of the more common birth dates the police have recorded for migrants arriving this fall has been Jan. 1, 1999. “The smugglers tell them,” said the police officer at the Passau train station.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement