Headlines in the Chinese state news media on Friday did not announce the end of the “one child” policy, as many international news outlets did. Instead, they had a clear message for Chinese citizens: The government would fully put in place the “two child” policy.China is just moving the number of permissible children per family up by one, not abandoning family planning, said Wu Youshui, a lawyer who has campaigned for the past two years to cast light on the system by demanding that local governments reveal how much revenue they earn by fining parents for out-of-plan children. So valuable are these fines, and so entrenched is the family-planning bureaucracy, that he expects the system to continue to exercise a hold over citizens’ reproductive health.“Family planning remains a basic state policy,” said Mr. Wu in an interview from Hangzhou, where he is director of the Zhejiang Bijian Law Firm. “The political power of the family-planning authorities won’t change.” Mr. Wu’s convictions are born of a quest that began by chance.On a business trip in Henan Province in early 2013, Mr. Wu discovered that the local government was imposing unusually low penalties on couples for an out-of-plan child — several thousand renminbi, or several hundreds of dollars, rather than the hundreds of thousands of renminbi that are often assessed in China.The reason was that the local government viewed the fines less as a punishment than a lucrative source of revenue that could be threatened by fines so onerous that they actually deterred extra births.Family planning was not just state policy, he concluded, it was also a business.Mr. Wu, who specializes in economic law, submitted requests for information on the fines to all of China’s 31 provincial-level governments under the country’s “open government information” regulations. He succeeded in obtaining information from 24.The data showed that in 2012, the authorities collected more than 20 billion renminbi, about $3.18 billion, in fines, called “social support payments,” from parents. None of the governments have been able to fully account for how the money was spent.There are also bureaucratic interests at stake. About half a million people work on family planning for the National Health and Family Planning Commission, according to Chinese news media estimates.“I don’t think these departments will lay off people,” Mr. Wu said. “Those workers are very good at finding things to do even when there is nothing to do.”Mr. Wu said he expected that the policy change might reduce the collection of fines by some local governments. As for some of the more notorious abuses, such as forced abortion, he said he expected those to continue.The government’s mentality “hasn’t changed,” he said.“They still believe as long as they are in power they can do anything,” he said. “If there’s no way of supervising them, things will stay the same.”Mr. Wu said he had given up calling for government transparency regarding family-planning fines, because he saw little hope of success; he has started working for the abolition of the fines altogether. Many of the provincial authorities from whom he requested information said they could not provide it, because the fines are managed at a more local level.“They’re not in line with the law, and they’re unreasonable,” he said.More fundamentally, he said: “Childbirth is a personal act. Public authorities have no right to interfere with citizens’ rights to have children.”Vanessa Piao contributed research. Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.