On Thursday, China’s governing Communist Party said that the country’s 35-year-old policy of limiting many couples to having just one child would come to an end. The “one child” policy would become a “two child” policy. The policy, aimed at curbing population growth that was seen as crimping economic development, helped rapidly bring down the country’s birthrate. But it also had traumatic effects on generations of Chinese citizens.Mei Fong, a former reporter for The Wall Street Journal in China, explores many of the policy’s unintended consequences in her coming book “One Child: The Past and Future of China’s Most Radical Experiment.” In an interview, she discussed how the birth restrictions reshaped Chinese society, perhaps irreversibly.How has the one-child policy affected Chinese life?Even if we move away from extreme issues like forced abortion, you can see that the policy has had very big impact on everyday issues. It has vastly intensified marriage anxieties. Parents of single children are enormously invested in their children’s decisions, including whom they marry. It has even impacted hiring decisions. Some companies have explicitly advertised a preference for applicants with siblings. They say that single children have less staying power, and that their parents are quick to object when the job is hazardous or requires travel or relocation. How do you run an economy that way?You said that economists have said that the gender imbalance, having far more marriage-age men now than women, has actually contributed to the rise in real estate prices. How does that work?The argument they have is that these are families with sons who in order to increase their eligibility on the marriage market will buy an apartment for their sons. Every apartment purchase is a joint family purchase, and there’s an artificial demand for it all the time because of the bridal shortage.By abandoning the policy now, would any baby boomlet come in time to ease some of the worst imbalances of the one-child policy, such as the lack of care workers for the elderly and the falling ratio of workers to dependents?The question of the boomlet is a big one. In nearly every other country where countries have fiddled with the baby tap, they’ve been able to turn it off with some success, China most of all. But turning it on, every modern society that has experimented with it has not been able to do it.For example, China looks at Singapore a lot for examples. Singapore actually did practice a form of family planning that was nowhere as extreme as China’s. Now it’s desperate to turn on that baby tap but women don’t want to have more children. So they’ve been unable to do it, which is why they’ve had to bring in immigrants, which has its own set of problems.I seriously doubt that this two-child policy is going to be able to turn it on. It going be interesting to see what they may do to supplement the population. Because this is China, because they have a history of taking extreme measures, that’s what’s going to be interesting going ahead. What are they going to do?Did China wait too long to end the one-child policy?There was some talk even starting from the 1990s, where all the demographers were already starting to sound out some of these issues and noting that the population growth had slowed down drastically. The time to have started thinking about this was the 1990s.Why didn’t they?A lot of people think that part of this process was because this old collection system of fines [on couples who had more children than permitted] had become so entrenched in provincial economics. To remove that would removed a major source of funding.There is a saying at local levels that big cities depend on land sales and small cities depend on babies for funding.The whole rationale for [the birth restrictions] was to help launch China forward economically. But it didn’t really have anything to do with it. That big burst in the Chinese economy was due to any number of things.Did China need to enact the one-child policy?My argument here is that China didn’t need to go to such an extreme step. They already had a policy in the 1970s, a much less restrictive family-planning policy. It was called “Later, Longer, Fewer.” It had been going on for 10 years before they launched [the one-child policy]. During that time the family sizes went from an average of six kids per family to three.The one-child policy is really like crash dieting, because it was too extreme and now they are going to have all these extreme consequences. They’re going to be living with these side effects for years to come.Follow Michael Forsythe on Twitter @PekingMike. 