By ALAN COWELLOCT. 29, 2015
LONDON — It has been a staple for as long as anyone can remember at bed-and-breakfast establishments and greasy spoon cafes, offered alike to travelers in five-star hotels and bleary-eyed passengers at the tail end of overnight flights to London.It is known as the “full English” — a combination of bacon, sausage and egg, with ad hoc additions of baked beans, black pudding, cooked tomato, mushrooms, fried bread, hash browns, splotches of spicy brown sauce, ketchup, buttered toast and dollops of marmalade. And a nice cup of sweet, milky tea, of course.The miracle, apparently, is that so many have survived its flawed allure for so long.A report this week by the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer suggested that processed meats like sausages belong in the same nominal category of carcinogens as asbestos, alcohol, arsenic and tobacco, albeit with much lower levels of hazard.The findings were global, but they struck a particular resonance in Britain, where the battle between health and indulgence is uneven at best, and often postponed for another day.AdvertisementThis is a land where prime-time television accords equal prominence to boot-camp tests of ripped physical prowess and belly-bulging cooking shows; where gym memberships compete for attention with the siren call at lunchtime from countless outlets selling sandwiches slathered in mayo.AdvertisementProcessed meat itself has been the butt of humor since a Monty Python sketch in 1970 that revolved around Spam, the canned meat that gave its prewar name to a newer generation’s unsolicited email.“Killer in the kitchen,” The Sun, a tabloid, proclaimed this week in a front-page headline above a photograph of a sausage. “Banger out of order.”Health warnings seem only to inspire irreverence and potential denial in scofflaws.“I drink heavily, I smoke 20 a day,” a reader identified as MartinArd wrote on The Guardian’s website, one of more than 4,000 postings in response to coverage of the W.H.O.’s findings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“My work is very stressful, I often grab fast food, I do zero exercise. I ride a big motorbike to get to work and I am sort of obese,” he wrote. “I will go down with bacon sandwich in hand singing the national anthem.”For others, there was something of a sense of puzzlement: What were people to make of this latest warning after so many earlier alarms — over salt, alcohol, tobacco, saturated fats, sugar, butter, mercury in fish, margarine and eggs? Or red wine, which saves the heart or dooms the body, depending on your perspective?Britons in any case cherish their gallows humor as much as their bacon and eggs. “If I’d known smoking was only as dangerous as eating sausages,” a writer called amandajanewood posted on The Guardian’s site, “I would have carried on smoking.”Of course, there were far-reaching implications in the W.H.O.’s allocation of processed meat in its Group 1 category of carcinogens, meaning that “sufficient evidence” had been found of a link with cancer. (The hazards of red meat were more ambiguous, the organization said.)Even a relatively modest intake of processed meat — 50 grams, or a little less than 2 ounces, per day — might increase the risk of colorectal cancer 18 percent, the study found, reflecting a growing body of evidence of links between diet and disease.Just last week, before the W.H.O. findings were released, Prof. Mohammed Keshtgar, a leading breast cancer specialist, told a packed auditorium at the Royal Free Hospital in London that up to 9 percent of cancer cases may be prevented by dietary changes. Processed meats, he said, are “generally high in saturated fat and salt, so it makes sense to limit their intake.”AdvertisementWhether Britons will heed such advice is unclear. “I mean who cares,” said another posting to The Guardian. “We’re all going to die of something in the end” — sooner, it now seems, than later.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.