AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — After more than six years of work and a succession of embarrassing delays, a report on Britain‘s role in the Iraq war is finally taking shape and is likely to be published in June or July, its lead author said on Thursday.Expected to run to two million words, the document should be complete by April 2016, but it will then need to be vetted by national security agencies, John Chilcot, a former senior civil servant who is leading the inquiry, said in a statement.Prime Minister David Cameron, who has previously expressed frustration, said in a letter issued by his office on Thursday that he would make available additional resources if it would speed up publication, though he did not specify any figure. “Whilst it is welcome, of course, that there is now a clear end in sight for your Inquiry,” he wrote, “I am disappointed — and I know the families of those who served in Iraq will also be disappointed — that you do not believe it will be possible logistically to publish your report until early summer.”Mr. Cameron added that he “would welcome any further steps” to speed completion of the investigation.The inquiry, which was created by a Labour government in 2009, is expected to cover the run-up to the conflict, military action in Iraq and its aftermath. It is expected to assess Britain’s involvement in Iraq, including the way decisions were made, and to identify lessons for the future.Those objectives have been overshadowed by delays to the inquiry, which have cast doubt on the practicality of completing such an exercise in a timely and cost-effective manner, while still respecting the rights of those whose decisions are being scrutinized.Critics note that the inquiry has now lasted longer than did British combat operations in Iraq, and that it has cost more than $15 million. The families of some of those who died in the conflict have expressed anger over the delays, as have many politicians.Mr. Chilcot told lawmakers this year that he had underestimated how long it would take to study about 150,000 documents. He also said there had been protracted negotiations over the release of classified documents, including correspondence between Tony Blair, prime minister when the allied forces invaded Iraq, and George W. Bush, the president who ordered the invasion. The inquiry was also set back when one of its five members, Martin Gilbert, died this year.One of the main delays was caused by a process in which significant witnesses were given the opportunity to respond to criticisms of themselves. Another result of this policy is that, even before the report is completed, the central players are aware of the likely criticisms they will face. Some people say that they may already be seeking to pre-empt these criticisms by getting in first with their version of events.Mr. Blair, who decided to join the United States-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, said on Sunday that removing Saddam Hussein from power had inadvertently helped give rise to the Islamic State.Although he told CNN that it was “hard to apologize for removing Saddam,” he said he also accepted that there were “elements of truth” in the view that the war in Iraq helped pave the way for the Islamic State.When the inquiry began in 2009, Mr. Chilcot said that he hoped to conclude it in “if not a year, a year and a half, maybe a bit more.” He also said he hoped to avoid the fate of other lengthy inquiries that, he said, had become engaged in “tortuous and, dare I say, legalistic proceedings.”Advertisement