AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa Hadid and Rami NazzalHEBRON, West Bank — Shadi Sider proudly pointed with his lit cigarette at the television blaring news of another Palestinian attack against Israeli soldiers just a few hundred feet from his home in this ancient city surrounded by Jewish settlements.“Hebron is called the sleeping lion,” said Mr. Sider, 32, a trader and father of six. “Now it is waking up.”This month’s Palestinian uprising, which started with a wave of knife attacks in Jerusalem, has shifted 18 miles south to Hebron, another holy city with a stark history of violence and tension. On Thursday alone, the authorities said, Israeli forces shot dead a Palestinian who stabbed a soldier in the head just outside Hebron and another who pulled out a knife at a storied settlement in its Old City, bringing to 11 the number of attacks in the area over the past week.Hebron, the West Bank’s largest city, with 200,000 Palestinian residents, has long been a hot spot for tensions. Palestinians call it, and a surrounding belt of villages, “the fortress of Hamas,” because of its role as the militant Islamist group’s unofficial West Bank headquarters. It is a place where the Palestinian Authority is weak and residents are culturally conservative. It is also the only spot outside Jerusalem where several hundred Jewish settlers live side by side with Palestinians, in heavily guarded enclaves in an area of the Old City under Israeli military control.These days, Hebron’s streets are strewn with banners memorializing about 20 residents killed by Israelis this month in demonstrations and attacks. Confrontations erupt frequently with Israeli forces at the city’s entrances and around the Old City. And nearly 240 Palestinians from Hebron have been arrested by Israeli forces since the most recent flare-up of violence began, reported Addameer, a Palestinian prisoners rights group.The uprising has also taken on more local grievances, with Hebron residents furious that Israel has refused to release the bodies of Palestinians killed after alleged attacks. The authorities are holding about 25 bodies, Palestinians said, including 12 from Hebron. Residents have raised particular outrage over the fate of two young women, Bayan Oseili, 16, and Dania al-Husseini, 17, who were shot dead eight days apart by Israeli forces who accused them of trying to stab soldiers. Palestinians see it as an affront to the Muslim tradition of immediate burial, and a defilement of their honor.“The uprising is in Hebron because we are more religious, and we have to mix with the settlers,” said Khalaf Gheith, 48, a tile maker. “And since the girls were killed and humiliated,” he added, pausing briefly, “the blood boils.”Analysts say the anger here in Hebron poses more risk to the area’s stability than that in any other part of the West Bank. Hamas, which dominates the Gaza Strip, has been celebrating the attacks and urging more through its Aqsa television channel and social media networks, trying to give the sharp rise in violence more momentum. It appears partly driven by a desire to embarrass and undermine President Mahmoud Abbas, analysts said.Still, Hamas is mostly staying out of the uprising, most likely fearing violent retribution in Gaza, said Daniel Nisman, a security analyst at the Levantine Group, a geopolitical risk analysis firm based in Tel Aviv. Hamas has claimed responsibility for only one stabbing attack, in a town near Jerusalem on Oct. 22. The perpetrators were from Sourif, a village near Hebron. But Mr. Nisman did not discount that Israeli forces had thwarted other attacks planned by Hamas.A leading Hamas official in the Hebron area, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of being arrested, said that Mr. Abbas’s security apparatus was already powerless in Hebron. But he said the Israeli occupation was driving the uprising.“There is no horizon,” he said. “That is the real reason.”Like Jerusalem, Hebron is holy to both Muslims and Jews, believed to be the burial place of the biblical patriarch Abraham, and has a long history of conflict flaring amid periods of uneasy coexistence.There was 1929, when Palestinians massacred 69 Jews, pillaged homes and ransacked synagogues.And in 1994, Baruch Goldstein, an American-born Israeli doctor, went on a shooting rampage that killed 29 Muslim worshipers inside a Hebron shrine known to Jews as the Tomb of the Patriarchs and to Muslims as the Ibrahimi Mosque.The 1997 Hebron protocol set up a unique arrangement dividing the city into an area under Palestinian control, and another — about a fifth of the territory — in Israeli hands, forcing Muslim residents to pass through military checkpoints to enter the mosque and choking off Hebron’s old city to Palestinians.“That creates more Israeli-Palestinian friction, stokes Palestinians’ sense of anger and subjugation, and increases the opportunity to act on that anger,” said Nathan Thrall, a Jerusalem-based analyst for the International Crisis Group.Upheaval appears to be the new normal in Hebron.One day this week, radio reports said that Raed Jaradat, 22, from the nearby village of Beit Anoun, had been shot dead as he tried to stab an Israeli soldier at a nearby junction. Hours later, a distant relative from the same village, Iyad Jaradat, 19, was killed as he threw stones at a nearby military jeep in protest. The Israeli military said it was looking into reports of the second death, but had no immediate confirmation.That evening, dozens of men flocked to a hall to pay respects to the father of Ms. Al-Husseini, the 17-year-old. “Hebron is the land of the martyrs!” blared a voice over a loudspeaker. “Today we give this martyr of Palestine, we come to renew our pact with martyrdom!”The slain girl’s uncle, Jawad, 42, a printing-press owner, said his niece was quiet and studious. “If we want one thing from the world, we want the bodies of our daughters,” he sobbed.A senior Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to do otherwise, said the government was holding the bodies to avoid a cycle in which funerals for so-called martyrs often erupt into violent clashes.“Our policy is to de-escalate, to try return calm, and from bitter experience we know that these funerals of dead terrorists can be exploited by extremists for incitement and violence,” he said.On Tuesday, dozens of women trudged up a muddy road to Ms. Al-Husseini’s family home. Some pinned her photo to their dresses. Some wore green Hamas lapels. One held a picture of her own son, Fadel Qawasmi, who was killed Oct. 17 by a Jewish settler in Hebron who accused the youth of trying to stab him.“There’s so many martyrs,” sighed another woman, who is 39 and would give only her nickname, Umm Ubayda. “Everybody comes to console each other.”Nearby, thousands of men rushed down the main thoroughfare toward an Israeli checkpoint in Hebron’s Old City, protesting the withholding of the bodies.Shopkeepers shut their doors with practiced slams as the boom of tear gas being fired grew louder.Mr. Sider, the trader and father of six whose narrow two-floor walk-up is nearby, gestured to the stairs leading to the flat roof. “Go up and you will see how we are surrounded,” he said, though he himself would not go up, saying he was scared.Within sight of Mr. Sider’s home is a playground reserved for the Jewish residents, a synagogue, an apartment building for Jewish settlers and a military post.Surveying the situation from the stairwell, Mr. Sider said he was pleased to see the surge in violence turn to Hebron. “They don’t want to leave,” he said of the Jewish settlers around him. “So this is their medicine.”Advertisement