By DOUGLAS DALBYOCT. 29, 2015
CARRICKMINES, Ireland —  The fire tore through the encampment, claiming the lives of 10 people from two families, including five young children and a pregnant woman. The tragedy, in the early hours of Oct. 10 in the south Dublin suburb of Carrickmines, was the single biggest loss of life in a fire in Ireland in almost 35 years.It did not take long for it to become apparent that the wellspring of grief and sympathy for the dead would not be extended to the survivors. The victims are from a community known as the Travelers, the most stigmatized group in Irish society. Even in the midst of such catastrophe, there would be no softening of long-held prejudices.When the local government sought to set up emergency accommodations nearby for the 15 survivors of the fire, residents of the area blocked access to the proposed site, claiming that it was unsuitable and that they did not believe promises that the presence of the Travelers would be temporary.Atlantic OceanSCOTLANDENGLANDN. IRELANDIrish SeaDublinCarrickminesBRITAINIRELANDWALESCeltic Sea100 MilesOCT. 29, 2015
Days after burying their relatives, the survivors moved on Sunday to an isolated parking lot adjacent to a decommissioned dump — a site whose single apparent advantage was having nobody living close enough to object. The situation was described as temporary, but the site where the fire occurred was also supposed to have been temporary — the Traveler encampment was there for eight years.AdvertisementWhen local officials backed down from their initial relocation plan, the government minister with responsibility for equality, Aodhan O’Riordain, described the objections of the neighborhood residents as “indicative of a wider view throughout Irish society.”Advertisement“There are few groups within Irish society about whom people can say pretty much what they want, and often people in public life say whatever they want about Travelers and pretty much get away with it,” Mr. O’Riordain said on national radio.Few issues divide Irish society like attitudes toward Travelers, whose name has become a byword for criminal activity and antisocial behavior. Governments have wrestled for decades with how best to deal with them. Policies have at times included outright efforts at assimilation, but in the main, the Travelers have been regarded as a problem to be solved rather than a distinct group whose way of life should be respected.Their origins are disputed. Some say they were people displaced centuries ago by invasion and famine, but there is DNA evidence that their origins in Ireland go back at least 1,000 years. Many speak a distinct language and intermarriage is a norm. Many retain a nomadic lifestyle, but others are known as “settled Travelers” because they have chosen to stay put.According to the 2011 census, there are about 30,000 Travelers in the country, accounting for 0.6 percent of the population. Ethnically, they are distinct from other nomadic groups, such as the Roma, and are recognized as a minority group in Britain, but not in the Irish Republic.Far from becoming an opportunity for society to pull together, the 10 deaths appear only to have rekindled old antagonisms.Martin Collins, co-director of a Travelers’ rights group, Pavee Point, said it was ironic that only this year Ireland had been celebrated across the world for its stance on marriage equality, after voters approved same-sex marriages. Attitudes toward Travelers, he said, show that any claims Ireland has to tolerance are a facade.“Our community has been sickened to the pit of its stomach by the callous way the survivors have been treated over the past two weeks,” Mr. Collins said in an interview. “There is undoubtedly deep-seated racism in Irish society to the point where it has been normalized in the Irish psyche.”AdvertisementAlan Kelly, the government minister responsible for Traveler housing, said the residents’ actions were “shameful,” but the residents found plenty of support in various online polls.Social media has provided a ready platform for divisiveness. But the antagonism has played out in many ways in recent years, frequently around political opposition to housing for Travelers. Many politicians who have control over where Traveler accommodations are set up have won elections based on promises to block approval of housing sites for Travelers.Such is the animus toward Travelers that almost half of the country’s 31 localities returned the money allocated by the central government for Traveler accommodations this year. In addition, from 2006 to 2013, 50 million euros, or about $55 million, were left unspent. It is not as if the funding is not needed: Of the 10,226 Traveler families in Ireland, more than 1,500 are believed to be living in overcrowded, unsanitary conditions like the site at Carrickmines — or worse. Many camp on roadsides with no facilities at all.It would appear that most people in Ireland form an image of Travelers from depictions of them as tight-knit gangsters, housebreakers and feuding thugs. They are frequently refused service in pubs, shops and hotels, though few prosecutions on charges of discrimination have been successful.Travelers make up a disproportionate percentage of the prison population. Supporters of the Travelers say that is not surprising because only a minority of Travelers stay in school beyond their early teens, which leads to poor prospects for employment. Fewer than one in five have a job. Their social exclusion makes Travelers vulnerable to drug abuse, suicide and crime.According to the 2010 All-Ireland Traveler Health Study, male life expectancy is 61.7 years — 15.1 years less than for men in the general population. Female Travelers can expect to live for 70.1 years — 11.5 years less than women in the general population. The study found the death rate among infants in the Traveler community was 14.1 per 1,000 births, significantly higher than the death rate of 3.9 per 1,000 births in the general population.Two weeks after the fire at Carrickmines, the narrow gravel road leading to the scene remained sealed off as police forensics teams scoured the blackened ruins of the ramshackle huts and caravans of house trailers in an effort to discover the cause of the blaze. Flowers and teddy bears were strewn around the statue of Our Lady at the entrance to the former site, where vigils have taken place to remember the dead.Mourners at one of the two funerals were told the tragedy must become a watershed moment. The Rev. Derek Farrell, of the Parish of the Traveling People, said the entire community had to ensure that these deaths mattered. He also denounced the lack of tolerance for diversity.“There are important lessons to be learned. We must learn, above all, to walk in the shoes of the other if we are to develop genuinely inclusive and pluralistic societies,” he said. “Many of us in the settled community have failed to walk with empathy in the shoes of our brothers and sisters in the Traveler community.”A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Sympathy Is Short-Lived for Marginalized Irish After a Deadly Fire .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.