AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas ErdbrinkTEHRAN — A month after hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Muslims died in a stampede during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, Iranian authorities are accusing the Saudis of having exploited the chaos to kidnap Iranian officials, using them as hostages in the increasing war of words between both countries.The elevated tensions could not have come at a worse time — just as Iran and Saudi Arabia are both set to attend multination talks on resolving the conflict in Syria. Iran, which backs the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, is attending the talks for the first time. Saudi Arabia opposes Mr. Assad.The most prominent Iranian missing in the hajj stampede outside Mecca on Sept. 24 is Ghazanfar Roknabadi, a former ambassador to Lebanon and a key figure in Iran’s involvement in Lebanese politics and the Syrian war.Mr. Roknabadi, who served in Lebanon until 2014, was last seen by Iranian witnesses in the aftermath of the stampede, a deputy foreign minister, Hossein Amirabdollahian, told the Tasnim news agency on Thursday.“We are seriously pursuing the case of Mr. Roknabadi, our former ambassador to Beirut. Witnesses confirm seeing Mr. Roknabadi alive until he was transferred to a Saudi ambulance,” Mr. Amirabdollahian said. Iranian forensic experts have said they have not found a match with Mr. Roknabadi among the remains presented to them by Saudi officials.Maps showing where more than 700 people were killed in a stampede near Mecca, Saudi Arabia.While the remains of 399 Iranians are now accounted for, 65 Iranians are still missing, including Mr. Roknabadi, and 29 may have been buried in Saudi Arabia, state television reported on Tuesday.Saudi Arabia has said that 769 people died in the stampede. The Associated Press, in an independent count, has reported that 2,177 people died. Iran has accused Saudi officials of blocking a main road in order to let the convoy of a high official pass, leaving the pilgrims suddenly facing a dead end. As masses started backing up, a panic broke out. Saudi Arabia has said Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps orchestrated the disaster.Iranian officials are now openly contemplating whether Mr. Roknabadi and others have been abducted as a part of the deeper mistrust between the two rival nations.“Considering his unknown status, the officials of our country consider the likelihood that these individuals have been abducted or there has been a plot against them. So the Saudi government and officials should be accountable in this respect,” Alaeddin Boroujerdi, who heads the Iranian Parliament’s foreign policy commission, told the semiofficial Mehr News Agency.Suspicions have been further aroused in Iran over what the Iranians have called a Saudi refusal to release security camera images of the stampede disaster that would allow an independent investigation of the cause. The Saudis have long boasted of having deployed at least 5,000 security cameras around the pilgrimage site.Iran, which is majority Shiite, and Saudi Arabia, majority Sunni, are entangled in several disputes, most notably the conflicts in Syria, Iraq and Yemen. They are also competing for support in Lebanon and the Palestinian territories.Saudi Arabia viewed Mr. Roknabadi as a mastermind of Iranian operations against its regional allies. He survived a bombing at his embassy and, in private, Iranian security officials say that Saudi Arabia has organized at least two other assassination attempts against Mr. Roknabadi.Advertisement