AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBAGHDAD — After a night of intense rainstorms in Iraq, millions of Baghdad residents awoke to knee-deep floodwaters that seeped into homes and paralyzed parts of the city.Blocks of ice, typically for sale, floated down the streets of the Sadr City neighborhood as residents trudged through the muddy water to assess the damage.The rare rainstorms began late Wednesday and continued into Thursday, dumping heavy rain on the Iraqi capital and across the country. The Iraqi government declared a holiday Thursday to ease the burden on people who might otherwise struggle to get to work or school.Police officers and security forces, already stretched thin across the country as they battle Islamic State militants, were deployed in Baghdad to help citizens navigate the floodwaters.“We are your brothers, and we are here to serve the citizens of Iraq,” one police officer in central Baghdad said on the state-run Iraqiya television network.Old and inadequate drainage systems have long been an issue in Iraq and among the complaints of citizens who have been protesting for better basic services and an end to corruption. Calls for change have intensified since the summer, when scorching temperatures led to chronic power cuts.Iraq’s power, communications, water, sewage treatment and health facilities were severely battered during the 1991 United States-led Persian Gulf war, and then again in the 2003 invasion. In between, stringent United Nations sanctions severely limited the country’s ability to rebuild.Despite some investments to rebuild infrastructure, many Iraqis blame the lack of progress on corruption at home.“There is neither infrastructure nor reforms,” said Muyad Ali, a Sadr City resident whose home was severely flooded when he woke up Thursday. “They promise to do something and then do nothing. Families are fleeing from their homes because they are flooded.”Still, the burden is always hardest on those who are already struggling. At a camp for displaced people in the town of Yusufiyah, south of Baghdad, the water was knee-high and pouring into tents, soaking mattresses and other belongings.Iraq has more than three million displaced Iraqis and Syrian refugees, many of whom are barely able to get by.“Our furniture is soaked,” said Malak Saad, a 10-year-old who lives in the camp. “We want to go home. I want to go to my school. I can’t stand living here in a tent. I want to go home and play with my friends.”Advertisement