By MELISSA EDDYOCT. 29, 2015
BERLIN —  Law enforcement authorities said Thursday that a 32-year-old man had confessed to killing a 4-year-old boy whose disappearance from outside the city’s main refugee registration center this month had raised alarm about chaotic conditions for migrants.The authorities said the man, who was arrested at his mother’s home, showed them a child’s body covered in cat litter in the trunk of his car.The police said the man’s mother drew them to the house, after she called to say that her son had told her he had killed the child. The suspect, who was identified only by age, was in custody but had not been charged.The boy, Muhammad Januzi, was reported missing on Oct. 1, after he was separated from his mother and siblings outside the Berlin Office of Health and Social Affairs. Several hundred people gather each day in the courtyard of the building to wait for an appointment to register for asylum or receive services.AdvertisementThe boy’s family is believed to have come to Germany several years ago from Bosnia-Herzegovina, and is not among the tens of thousands of migrants who have walked through Europe in recent months. Nevertheless, his disappearance gripped the capital and raised concern for the welfare of migrant children.AdvertisementThe case focused attention on Germany’s difficulty with processing the stream of migrants who are being transported from border areas and relocated around the country. Over all, many in Germany have expressed worries about the strain on resources throughout the country, with more than 800,000 people expected to seek asylum there this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An autopsy of the boy has not yet been completed, Michael von Hagen, a Berlin state prosecutor, said. “But based on the testimony of the suspect, it is believed to be the missing 4-year-old,” he said.Authorities had not determined a motive for the killing, Mr. von Hagen said, adding they had no indication of far-right extremism or a hatred of foreigners.A video showing the boy leaving the area while holding a man’s hand on the day he was reported missing helped the police and prosecutors in their search.This week, prosecutors released a second video showing the man walking in the neighborhood near the center and offered a reward for information about his identity.  Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Officials in Berlin Say Suspect Confesses in Case of Missing Boy .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.