AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim Arango and Ceylan YeginsuISTANBUL — A lot has happened in Turkey in the five months since national elections deprived President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of his party’s hold on Parliament.Suicide bombers, widely thought to be part of the Islamic State, killed more than 100 people in the heart of Ankara, the capital, and Mr. Erdogan committed to military action against the group. At the same time, the war between the government and Kurdish militants was renewed after years of truce, and some southern cities are now wastelands.A crackdown on dissent intensified, with journalists threatened and, this week, a large media conglomerate seized in a police raid. Two days later, the company’s two newspapers had become supportive of the government: One blared the headline “Turkey Is One Mind” across a picture of Mr. Erdogan in aviator sunglasses and surrounded by Turkish flags.Analysts here saw all of that as a clear sign that Mr. Erdogan was cementing his support with nationalists and seeking to marginalize the Kurdish opposition party that hurt him in the June election. But as Turks warily prepare to vote again in a snap parliamentary election on Sunday, little is expected to change at the polls: Most projections hold that, again, no party will win a majority.If that is the case, Turkey could face even more political instability while the economy is faltering, and while the country is fighting a war with Kurdish militants and facing increased security threats from the Islamic State. And as always, the spotlight will be on Mr. Erdogan, who has been the country’s dominant political force for more than a decade.“He has shown that he is willing to go very far to keep in power,” said Svante E. Cornell, the research director at the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute and an expert on Turkey. “I see him finding ways, which are more or less unconstitutional, to continue to maintain his power, whether by announcing another election or some form of temporary government. I have a hard time seeing him accept the reality and going in to some form of coalition.”As the country has become more polarized, with dividing lines between Islamists, secular Turks, nationalists and Kurds becoming ever sharper, no one seems eager for another election. And politics, once a national obsession, has become an almost taboo subject.“For years, I’ve had heated debates with my customers, but now people are so divided that you can’t even talk about the political agenda,” said Onder Kabak, 51, a barber who lives in Besiktas, a largely secular district of Istanbul. “The Ankara bombing was the tipping point. Without a transparent investigation, everyone has come to their own conclusions over who was behind it, based on their ideology and choice of political party.”Around noon on a recent day, Aydin Ozpetek was getting his hair cut in Mr. Kabak’s barbershop. “No one wants to go to another election,” he said. “But we are all forced to because Erdogan wasn’t happy with the last result.”Ever so briefly, the June election results were hailed as a victory for Turkish democracy. Mr. Erdogan’s Islamist party, the Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P., had been in control for more than a decade. Suddenly, it appeared that it would be forced to share power.The biggest gain went to the Kurdish-dominated Peoples’ Democratic Party, which had appealed to liberals opposed to Mr. Erdogan and religious Kurds who once voted for him, and which for the first time passed a 10 percent threshold to earn representation in Parliament. Most polls predict that the Kurdish party will repeat that performance on Sunday.The result in June effectively blocked Mr. Erdogan’s ambition of establishing an executive presidency.This time, while not remaining silent, Mr. Erdogan has campaigned less robustly than he did before the June election, when his aggressive and divisive rhetoric seemed to backfire. His party earned about 41 percent of the vote — still the largest share, but not a majority, and down from about 50 percent in the last national election in 2011.In public appearances, he has framed this election as a choice between “stability and chaos,” and his party’s campaign motto this time around was “Turkey’s road map to serenity and stability.”“There are those who can’t handle Turkey getting stronger,” Mr. Erdogan said last month. “These people exist both within and outside our borders. In order to not let them get away with their designs, I firmly believe that the upcoming election on Nov. 1 will be a vote between stability and chaos.”Amid renewed fears over terrorist attacks, depleted party campaign budgets and voter fatigue, it was hard even to notice in recent weeks that the country was preparing for a national election. There were few large-scale rallies, and the colorful party flags are scarcer even in big cities.“We simply don’t have the budget for big election campaigns,” said Sezgi Onay, a member of the Republican People’s Party, the main secular opposition party, in Istanbul.She added: “The voters and campaign volunteers are tired, too. No one is in the mood for another election, especially after the terrorist attack in Ankara.”At a recent rally in Istanbul held by the A.K.P., but not attended by Mr. Erdogan, thousands showed up, although the attendance was noticeably smaller than at gatherings held before the June election.“People are worried about security because of the Ankara terrorist attacks,” said Sevket Basusta, 23, a member of the A.K.P.’s youth branch. “Maybe more people would have come if Erdogan held the rally, but this isn’t just about him anymore. People want stability and security, and they know that the only way they can achieve that is through a single-handed A.K.P. government.”The other morning, Ayhan Yildiz, a 30-year-old engineer, turned on his television and saw riot police officers storming the offices of the Koza Ipek media group, while the news anchor of the Bugun news channel narrated the events. Scuffles broke out as the police — enforcing a court order to seize the channel, based on charges of supporting terrorism that critics saw as a politically motivated move to silence free expression — arrested journalists and executives. By the end of the day, the channel had gone black.Hours later, standing outside Bugun’s office, which was surrounded by police officers wielding plastic shields and tear-gas guns, Mr. Yildiz explained why he had once voted for Mr. Erdogan but would no longer. Like many, he believes Turkey is slipping from a Western-style democracy — he noted that Mr. Erdogan, in his early years in power, promoted membership in the European Union — toward a Middle East-style autocracy.“He was a supporter of the E.U. in his first years,” Mr. Yildiz said. “After he got more and more power, he decided to be a dictator.”The police raid was a vivid example of the government’s crackdown on two of its perceived enemies just before the election: the opposition news media and followers of the exiled cleric Fethullah Gulen, a onetime ally of Mr. Erdogan who now opposes him and who was said to be close to gaining ownership of the closed news channel.After the raid, a photograph of a bloodied press card held by one of the channel’s journalists went viral. Opposition politicians rushed to the scene, using it as an opportunity to campaign. The Kurdish leader, Selahattin Demirtas, was interviewed on Bugun and denounced the “mafia-like” tactics of the government. And Emma Sinclair-Webb, the Turkey researcher for Human Rights Watch, wrote, “Not since the days of the 1980 military coup have there been such dramatic moves to close down and prevent scrutiny of power.”Mr. Yildiz was asked what would happen after the vote if the result is the same as in June.He paused and then said, “God knows.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement