AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick Cumming-BruceGENEVA — The United Nations expressed concern on Friday over a crackdown on Cambodia’s political opposition, urging an independent and thorough investigation of a mob attack this week that seriously injured two opposition lawmakers.“We are concerned about the worsening climate for opposition politicians and activists in Cambodia,” Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the high commissioner for human rights, told reporters in Geneva.The United Nations was reacting to an attack on Monday in which a crowd of around 2,000 pro-government demonstrators dragged the two lawmakers from their car as they left the National Assembly and severely beat them while police officers reportedly looked on. Such inaction by security services was “in stark contrast to their response to protests” by government critics, she said.“It started with judicial harassment, and now it’s moved to physical assault,” she said.“It’s getting very, very worrying,” she added, describing the situation as “clearly untenable.”The incident was organized and “clearly orchestrated,” Ms. Shamdasani said, adding that the two, Nhoy Chamreoun and Kong Sakphea of the Cambodia National Rescue Party, had traveled to a hospital in Thailand for treatment for fractures suffered in the attack.Prime Minister Hun Sen, who has governed Cambodia for 30 years, condemned the assault in a televised broadcast, saying the attackers should be arrested and prosecuted, and has set up an investigation.“We stress that the investigation will only be credible if it is independent, impartial, thorough and prompt,” Ms. Shamdasani said. “Those responsible for the violence must be brought to justice.”The prospects for such an outcome, however, are overshadowed by an increasingly heated conflict between the governing Cambodian People’s Party and the Cambodia National Rescue Party, which is led by Sam Rainsy, a longstanding adversary of the prime minister.The two leaders appeared to have reached an accommodation last year promising “a new culture of dialogue.” But in July, amid growing tensions between the two parties, Mr. Hun Sen warned that a victory by the opposition in elections scheduled for 2018 could lead to a resumption of civil war.The protesters involved in the assault were demanding the resignation of Kem Sokha, the opposition party’s deputy leader and an outspoken critic of Mr. Hun Sen, accusing him of inciting unrest. On Friday, Mr. Kem Sokha was ousted from his post as vice president of the National Assembly in an unexpected vote that opposition lawmakers boycotted.As evidence of the deteriorating political climate in Cambodia, Ms. Shamdasani noted that 11 opposition activists were serving prison sentences of seven to 20 years on charges of participating in, or leading, an insurrection. An opposition lawmaker in the National Assembly was also awaiting trial for incitement to commit crimes and forging documents, she said.Advertisement