By MICHAEL FORSYTHEOCT. 30, 2015
HONG KONG — A Chinese real estate tycoon has said that relatives of China’s president sold their shares in his company two months before its initial public offering, missing out on a “fortune” in capital gains and, he said, proving there was no corruption involved.The tycoon, Wang Jianlin, made the comments as a rebuttal to a New York Times investigation, which he was asked about at a Harvard forum on Thursday.Asked if the political ties reported by The Times were responsible for his company’s rapid growth, he said, “We owe our rapid growth to our core competence of innovative business model and effective management practices.”He also offered new insight into the share holdings of a sister and brother-in-law of President Xi Jinping.AdvertisementThe Times article said that the couple had acquired large stakes in Mr. Wang’s flagship company, Dalian Wanda Commercial Properties, before it went public. The shares they purchased through a holding company for $28.6 million in 2009 are now worth $201 million.Mr. Wang said that Mr. Xi’s sister, Qi Qiaoqiao, and her husband, Deng Jiagui, had sold their shares before the I.P.O.“Mr. Deng Jiagui gave up huge gains,” he said, according to a report on the speech by Caixin, a prominent Chinese newsmagazine. “The investment endured for six years, and in the blink of an eye he could make a huge fortune, but he did not.”Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Wang added, “This actually proves that it is not corruption, but that President Xi Jinping governs the country strictly, and he manages his family even more strictly.”It is extremely rare for Chinese business executives to comment on the financial holdings of the country’s top leaders, and Caixin’s account of Mr. Wang’s remarks was taken off the Internet several hours after it was posted. Wanda Group subsequently sent reporters an English-language transcript of the remarks, confirming them.AdvertisementIn defending the company’s ties with Mr. Xi’s relatives, Mr. Wang may have inadvertently drawn attention to a common practice among wealthy and powerful Chinese people: the transfer of shares, sometimes to distant relatives or business associates, to mask business interests.Corporate records show that Ms. Qi and Mr. Deng transferred ownership of the holding company to an employee in October 2013. Mr. Wang said they had sold their stake two months before the I.P.O., which would have been October 2014.If true, his statement suggested that Ms. Qi and Mr. Deng still somehow owned the shares after they had, on paper, been transferred to the employee.Wanda’s pre-I.P.O. documents show that the holding company, Qinchuan Dadi Investment, held shares in Wanda as of mid-August 2014.It is not clear from available public records whether the holding company sold the shares. At the end of 2013, the holding company listed three companies that it held stakes in, including Dalian Wanda. In its 2014 annual report, the company did not list any investments.The holding company was still listed on Friday as being owned by the employee, Xu Zaisheng.Mr. Deng and Ms. Qi did not respond to a request for comment faxed to their office in the southern city of Shenzhen. David Connolly, a spokesman for Wanda in Beijing, said that his connection was bad and that he could not hear a reporter’s questions. He did not answer his cellphone after that and did not reply to an email and a text message asking for comment.When property is transferred on paper to hide its ownership, the new putative owner is known in China as a “white glove.”So-called white gloves have bedeviled the work of China’s own corruption investigators as they seek to document the wealth of Communist Party members suspected of graft, according to the party’s Central Commission for Discipline Inspection.Advertisement“White gloves are accompanied by power’s black hands,” the commission wrote in a report in May.In addition to the shares in Dalian Wanda held by Mr. Xi’s sister and brother-in-law, the Times article documented holdings in two of Mr. Wang’s companies by relatives and business associates of three other top Chinese leaders.The holdings tied to all four leaders’ families were valued at more than $1.1 billion at the time the two companies held their share sales in December 2014 and January 2015. The shares were worth $1.25 billion during midday trading on Friday in Hong Kong and Shenzhen.Mr. Wang did not discuss the holdings of the three other officials’ relatives and business associates.In many instances, they appear to have made capital gains far in excess of those that Mr. Deng and Ms. Qi stood to make. The family of Wang Zhaoguo, who retired from the Politburo in 2012, acquired a stake in a Wanda company in 2007 for less than $500,000 that, by the time of the I.P.O., was worth more than $500 million, a thousandfold gain.Business associates of relatives of former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and the former Beijing Communist Party secretary Jia Qinglin also held stakes worth more than $200 million at the time of the I.P.O.“Wanda has no political affiliations,” Mr. Wang said, according to the company’s transcript.A version of this article appears in print on October 31, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Tycoon Defends Xi’s Relatives, and Himself, on Business Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.