AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — North Korea’s ruling Workers’ Party, which analysts say has grown more powerful under the country’s supreme leader, Kim Jong-un, will hold its first full-fledged party congress since 1980 next year, state-run news media reported on Friday.The party’s Politburo said the meeting, to be held in May, was needed to strengthen the party’s role under Mr. Kim’s leadership, according to the report from the official Korean Central News Agency. The report provided no additional details of what would be discussed.Since inheriting the country’s leadership from his father, Kim Jong-il, who died in 2011, Kim Jong-un has tried to cement his control over both the Workers’ Party and the army. His government is struggling to revive a moribund economy while building an arsenal of nuclear weapons and long-range missiles, despite tough penalties from the United Nations.Outside analysts say that under Mr. Kim, the Workers’ Party has regained some of the powers and prerogatives, including the right to trade in minerals and other goods, that it had ceded to the military under his father, who championed a “military first” policy.“Kim Jong-un will likely use the congress to present his new vision for his country and officially declare to his people that his era has arrived,” said Kim Yong-hyun, a professor of North Korean studies at Dongguk University in the South Korean capital, Seoul. “It will also signal that the party has finally restored its normal functions after all those ‘military first’ years.”This month, North Korea honored the party’s 70th anniversary with a military parade in Pyongyang, the capital, at which Mr. Kim gave his first public speech in three years.The congress, the party’s seventh, will give Mr. Kim an opportunity to enforce “generational change” by filling the party’s key posts with younger cadres chosen by himself, Professor Kim said. One function of the party congress is to elect a new Central Committee, which in turn could prompt changes in other crucial party organs like the Politburo, he said.The Workers’ Party holds congresses to review or change important party policies or elect new leaders. The party last held such a congress in 1980, although it called smaller meetings of party representatives in 2010 and 2012.Jeong Joon-hee, a spokesman for the Unification Ministry of South Korea, said the government was closely watching the developments.Mr. Jeong also said that the government was monitoring a nuclear test site in the North but could not confirm South Korean news reports that a tunnel was being dug there, possibly in preparation for a nuclear test. One report, from the Yonhap news agency, quoted an unidentified government source as saying that there had been increased activity at the site, but that more analysis was needed to determine whether that signaled an imminent test.North Korea has conducted three underground nuclear tests since 2006 at Punggye-ri in northeastern North Korea, the last one in February of 2013. This month, the South’s National Intelligence Service told lawmakers in Seoul that North Korea was preparing for another nuclear test but not in the near future.Advertisement