

      By LIAM STACK

OCT. 4, 2015

Leadin goes here
Related Article
At least 19 people were killed when an airstrike hit a hospital in the embattled Afghan city of Kunduz on Friday, and the American military said it might have been responsible. It is not the first time the United States has been linked to the deaths of a large number of civilians in Afghanistan. The American military’s record of civilian casualties there has alienated the Afghan public and hurt its relationship with the government. Here are a few examples of large civilian casualty incidents in Afghanistan caused by the United States military.An American AC-130 gunship bombed the village of Kakrak in southern Afghanistan on July 1, 2002, believing it to be a hotbed of Taliban and Qaeda activity. When more than 300 American and Afghan soldiers arrived the next day, they discovered a large home in the village center strewn with dead and injured women and children who had been celebrating a wedding engagement. Villagers said they were bringing the dead to a mosque, and gathering dismembered body parts from the street and a nearby orchard, when the soldiers arrived. The bombing killed 48 people and injured 117, according to Afghan and American officials. Six more were killed in the nearby village of Siya Sang. The bombing produced the first public rift in the relationship between the American military and the Afghan government.After an official review of this and other incidents in 2002, Col. Ray Shepherd, a spokesman for United States Central Command, said, "We painstakingly assess the potential for injuring civilians or damaging civilian facilities, and positively identify targets before striking.''An investigation by the Afghan government in May 2007 found that two days of American bombing in the rural Zerkoh Valley near the city of Herat killed at least 42 people, including women and children, among them infants. The bombing also destroyed 100 homes and left an estimated 1,600 people homeless, Afghan officials said. American Special Forces said they were battling Taliban forces in the area and called in airstrikes to assist in that fire fight. President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan expressed outrage at the killings. “We are very sorry when the international coalition force and NATO soldiers lose their lives or are injured,” he told reporters. “It pains us. But Afghans are human beings, too.”In response to the incident, a Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Col. Jeremy Martin, said, “We’re aware of the allegations, but we don’t have any information through operational channels to confirm the latest incident.” He added, “We take all measures possible to limit civilian casualties.”Afghan officials said that an American airstrike in the remote village of Hyderabad in the southern province of Helmand killed 45 civilians and 62 Taliban militants, a number that the United States contested. ''People tried to escape from the area with their cars, trucks and tractors, and the coalition airplanes bombed them because they thought they were the enemy fleeing,” Haji Zahir, a tribal elder, told The New York Times. American officials said that they believed that fewer than a dozen civilians had been killed, and they accused the Taliban of using women and children as human shields.A coalition spokesman, Maj. Chris Belcher, said American warplanes had aimed at “clearly identified firing positions” and that “remains of some people who apparently were civilians were found among insurgent fighters who were killed in firing positions in a trench line.''Afghan officials said at least 27 civilians at a wedding party, mostly women and children, were killed in an American airstrike in the Deh Bala district of Nangarhar Province. The bride was among those killed. An investigation by The Guardian said that 47 people were killed when three missiles hit a group of mainly women and children walking along a country road from the bride’s village to the home of the groom, part of a traditional wedding ceremony. Hajj Khan said he was holding his grandson’s hand when the blast hit. “When I opened my eyes, everybody was screaming,” he said. “I was lying meters from where I had been, I was still holding my grandson's hand but the rest of him was gone.Officials of the American-led coalition disputed the report, saying that the airstrike killed militants and that there was no evidence of women and children at the scene.A United Nations investigation found that American airstrikes killed 90 civilians, among them 60 children, in the village of Nawabad in the Azizabad area of Shindand district. An Afghan member of Parliament for the region said that the villagers were preparing for a memorial service for a local man who had recently died, and were cooking food at night over outdoor fires. The American military at first insisted only five to seven civilians died in the strikes, but after a more thorough investigation, it later revised that estimate to more than 30.A military official told reporters that their initial estimates were inaccurate because Special Forces soldiers “were definitely not welcome” in the village in the immediate aftermath of the strikes. “We were wrong on the number of civilian casualties partly because the initial review was operating under real limitations.”Afghan officials said that at least 40 civilians were killed and 65 injured when an American missile hit a compound where a wedding party was being held near the village of Wech Bakhtu in the rural Shah Wali Kot district north of the city of Kandahar. Women and children were among the casualties, and the bride was one of the injured. Survivors of the attack said the number of dead was much higher, with one of the hosts of the wedding telling reporters that more than 90 guests were killed.American statements after the attack did not refer to civilian casualties but did accuse the Taliban of using civilians as human shields. A spokesman for United States forces, Col. Greg Julian, said the militants provoked situations in which civilians were caught up in the fighting because "our close air support has been so devastating with the Taliban that they are trying to stop us using it."American airstrikes in the village of Granai in Farah Province killed scores of people on May 4, 2009, although the number is deeply contested. The Afghan government said that 147 civilians were killed in the bombardment, including many women and children who sought shelter, but an independent Afghan human rights commission put the number at 117. The United States rejected those claims, and instead estimated that 20 to 30 civilians and as many as 65 Taliban fighters had been killed. The ferocity of the blasts complicated a full account of their toll: the bombs were so strong that many victims were ripped to shreds. An American review of the incident later found that military personnel had made significant errors, including one plane that did not reconfirm its target before dropping bombs. “In several instances where there was a legitimate threat, the choice of how to deal with that threat did not comply with the standing rules of engagement," one military official said.Advertisement