AdvertisementSupported byBy Nick Cumming-BruceGENEVA — Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, said on Saturday that the world had responded with “disturbing paralysis” to conflicts around the globe and their devastating effect on civilians. Mr. Ban joined the head of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, to issue “an unprecedented joint warning” on lassitude in confronting suffering. “In the face of blatant inhumanity, the world has responded with disturbing paralysis,” Mr. Ban said in a statement. Without greater international commitment to maintaining peace and security, “we can expect only greater chaos and suffering,” he told journalists. “The continued failure to act is a disgrace.” Mr. Maurer said the world had entered “an era of protracted armed conflicts, which add up to a world at war” in which the international community too often accepts the harm inflicted on people. Over four years of war has forced more than four million to flee the country, fueling a migrant crisis in the Middle East and Europe.As evidence of the horrific toll of conflict on civilians, Mr. Ban cited missile attacks launched on Friday by Syrian government forces on the town of Douma, a rebel-held suburb of Damascus, which reportedly killed dozens of people, and indiscriminate airstrikes on other populated areas.Those attacks came as Secretary of State John Kerry and Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, joined diplomats of 17 countries in Vienna to try to accelerate efforts to broker a political solution to Syria’s nearly five-year-old war. After seven hours of sometimes heated discussion, they agreed to explore ways of achieving a nationwide cease-fire, but remained sharply divided on the fate of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad. Commending their initiative, Mr. Ban said the future of Mr. Assad should not be allowed to hold up efforts to end the war, and urged a nationwide cease-fire to allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the millions of people in need of food and medical aid.But he and Mr. Maurer kept the focus of their comments on the widespread and brutal disregard for laws of war that sees daily attacks on civilians and medical staff, and pointed to airstrikes on hospitals run by the charity Doctors Without Borders in Afghanistan and Yemen.“That’s a crime against humanity,” Mr. Ban said of such attacks.The United States military and the Afghan government have begun investigations of the airstrike in early October by American aircraft on the Doctors Without Borders hospital in the northern Afghan town of Kunduz, which killed 13 of the organization’s  staff members and 10 patients, as well as seven other people whom it has not been possible to identify.Mr. Ban acknowledged those investigations, but urged the United States to allow for an independent inquiry, a demand made by Doctors Without Borders that American authorities have yet to accept. Advertisement