By CHOE SANG-HUNNOV. 1, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan held the first high-level meeting between their two nations in more than three years on Monday and agreed to accelerate talks on repairing ties strained by bitterness rooted in Japan’s colonial rule of Korea.The leaders started their meeting at Ms. Park’s presidential office here, the Blue House, with Ms. Park calling on Japan to “heal the painful history” and Mr. Abe urging South Korea to “look to the future.”After one-and-a-half hours, they produced no breakthrough, simply agreeing to support talks already underway between their governments to narrow differences, especially over the issue of so-called comfort women — tens of thousands of Korean and other Asian women sent to work at front-line brothels for Japan’s World War II military.But their summit meeting reflected a growing awareness on both sides that the neighbors, both staunch allies of the United States, should not let their historical grievances trump mutual economic and security interests, including a joint effort in stopping North Korea’s nuclear weapons development.On a trip that highlighted the challenges faced by Washington and its regional allies, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter of the United States met his South Korean counterpart, Han Min-koo, in Seoul on Monday to discuss combined defenses against what they called North Korea’s growing nuclear and missile threats.Advertisement“Keeping in mind the fact that this year marked the 50th anniversary of the normalization of diplomatic ties between South Korea and Japan and provided an opportunity for a turning point, the two heads of state agreed to add impetus to the talks on comfort women,” Kim Kyou-hyun, Ms. Park’s presidential secretary for foreign affairs, said after the meeting.AdvertisementMr. Abe told Japanese reporters that he agreed to try to find an “early solution” to the subject of comfort women, one of the most emotional issues stemming from Japan’s often brutal colonization of Korea from 1910 to 1945. He said he did not want to “leave an obstacle for the future generations in building” relations with South Korea.Even before the two leaders began talks, the gulf between their interpretations of their shared history remained so wide that analysts said the only significant achievement of their meeting might be the meeting itself.Yet in some ways, the meeting was a chance for both Ms. Park and Mr. Abe to save face.For years, Washington, on which both Japan and South Korea depend for national defense, has been pressing its two Northeast Asian allies to resolve their differences, given the anxiety rippling across the region over China’s growing assertiveness and North Korea’s nuclear arms program.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By refusing to meet Mr. Abe while holding several summit meetings with President Xi Jinping of China over the past few years, Ms. Park set off speculation in Washington that she was drawing Seoul too close to Beijing, a concern her government has been trying to ease.Mr. Abe, whose nationalistic views on Japan’s imperial past have incited rancor among South Korean and Chinese leaders, attended a trilateral meeting with leaders of both South Korea and China, which took place on Sunday. It would have been especially awkward for the visitor not to have a bilateral meeting with the host, Ms. Park. Ms. Park met one-on-one with the visiting Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, on Saturday, throwing a dinner for him.In a sign of unresolved animosities between Japan and South Korea, Ms. Park’s office decided not to host a luncheon for Mr. Abe after their late morning meeting on Monday.Until now, Ms. Park has refused to meet Mr. Abe, insisting that Japan take steps toward what Seoul regards as proper atonement for its colonial-era activities. South Korea says that Japan not only has failed to take responsibility for forcing or luring the comfort women into sexual slavery, but that under Mr. Abe, it has systematically attempted to whitewash its wartime atrocities.Japan says that the matter was resolved once and for all in the 1965 treaty that restored diplomatic ties between the two nations.AdvertisementSouth Korea and Japan held their last summit talks in 2012, when President Lee Myung-bak and Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda met and bickered over the issue of the comfort women. Bilateral ties chilled further after Mr. Lee became the first South Korean leader to visit the South Korean-held islets that Korea calls Dokdo later that year. Japan also claims the islets, which it calls Takeshima.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.