By DAVID E. SANGERNOV. 1, 2015
SAMARKAND, Uzbekistan —  Secretary of State John Kerry prides himself on his willingness to deal directly with some of the world’s most repressive governments, and his insistence on “engagement” has yielded results this year from Iran to Cuba. But even the State Department had a hard time explaining the strategy for transforming the behavior of President Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan, a ruler whose human rights record is frequently compared to North Korea’s.The United States Embassy in Tashkent, the capital, famously described Mr. Karimov’s government, in a diplomatic cable leaked in the WikiLeaks trove, as a “nightmarish world of rampant corruption, organized crime, forced labor in the cotton fields and torture.” The State Department’s human rights reports indicate that with the possible exception of child labor, the situation has not improved. Mr. Karimov has been in power for a quarter-century and is in his fourth term, brushing off reminders that Uzbekistan’s Constitution limits him to two.On Sunday, Mr. Kerry spent more than an hour with Mr. Karimov, on the second stop of a tour of all five Central Asian nations. And like the Bush administration and his immediate predecessor, Hillary Rodham Clinton, who visited here in 2011 and relaxed some of the sanctions imposed after hundreds of antigovernment protesters were shot in the streets a decade ago, he found himself struggling over how hard, and how publicly, to press one of the harshest authoritarian governments in the world.The reality, some American officials acknowledge, is that seven years into its strategy of engagement with Mr. Karimov’s government, the United States cannot claim that its private warnings and occasional public shamings in human rights reports have substantively changed anything.AdvertisementFor more than a decade, Washington’s need for help in the war in Afghanistan was the impediment to pressuring Uzbekistan: Until last year, the country still provided a transit point to ferry troops in and out of Afghanistan. A distribution network for the movement of military supplies through a small, dusty Uzbek town on the Afghan border was critical after Pakistan cut off the main supply lines. Uzbekistan was also said to be involved in the secret rendition of terror suspects during the Bush administration.AdvertisementWith the American troop presence in Afghanistan vastly reduced — even if the time period is extended — all that has faded away. But now Mr. Kerry is engaged in an effort to build an economic partnership with all five Central Asian states, whose foreign ministers he gathered in Mr. Karimov’s perfectly manicured marble palace and meeting center on Sunday for a first-of-its-kind effort to plot a regional trade relationship. While the United States has talked about helping establish a “New Silk Road,” until now that has largely been a slogan; in reality, the countries have created enormous obstacles to moving goods, electricity and oil across their territories.Russia was missing from the table, and Mr. Kerry’s presence was part of an unsubtle message that the United States offers the region something President Vladimir V. Putin cannot: a nonthreatening trading partner.While American officials say there is no effort here to revive the “Great Game” of competition with Russia, which has far deeper economic and cultural roots with the five former Soviet states than the United States, the Obama administration wants to establish a counterweight. Mr. Putin’s military adventurism in Ukraine and Syria has created that opportunity.Yet that means walking a fine line between seeming to embrace some of the world’s worst human rights violators and championing the values that President Obama refers to as “who we are.”Mr. Kerry clearly felt that tension on Sunday.Normally, he offers his hosts lavish praise. The best he could manage with Mr. Karimov was a somewhat awkward comparison to the worst practices of the Islamic State. In a brief appearance with Mr. Karimov in this spectacularly preserved Silk Road city, long a center of commerce and religious learning, Mr. Kerry said he admired “what you and your government have done to preserve that history and culture, and some of the architecture.” He added, “You’ve created something which is such a stark contrast to what Daesh, ISIL, is doing in the world today,” using two terms for the Islamic State, as he referred to that terror organization’s destruction of ancient monuments in Palmyra, Syria.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the end of the statements, a reporter from The Washington Post asked Mr. Karimov about his country’s human rights record; she was quickly escorted from the room by American and Uzbek security officials. Mr. Karimov, who has evicted numerous foreign correspondents from his country and has shuttered any news organization that hints at questions over his rule, said nothing.In their private meeting, officials said, Mr. Karimov filibustered for much of the session, reducing Mr. Kerry’s time to raise specifics. And while a senior administration official, who asked for anonymity to discuss continuing diplomatic matters, said that Mr. Kerry did talk about human rights issues in the private meeting — in public he spoke vaguely about “the human dimension, the issues concerning individuals and their participation in society” — specific cases were only discussed with the foreign minister. Asked about Mr. Kerry’s use of the “human dimension” terminology, the official said that Uzbekistan and the other Central Asian states, many of which also have questionable records, “feel that human rights is narrow, and want a broader discussion.”Yet the central dilemma facing Mr. Kerry is the one that confronted Mrs. Clinton: The canny Mr. Karimov watches visiting diplomats come and go, and has concluded that there is very little price he will ultimately have to pay for his government’s worst practices, which include, according to human rights reports, prisoners being boiled alive. The annual State Department human rights report pulls no punches, but the cables published by WikiLeaks draw a picture of Mr. Karimov as a man who simply does not care as long as the costs are low.AdvertisementAnd they are low: When military aid to Uzbekistan was restored by Mr. Obama on national security grounds during the surge in Afghanistan, Mrs. Clinton argued that the country was on the road to improvement.In 2011, when Mr. Kerry was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he wrote that “the challenge for the United States is to strike a balance between its short-term, war-fighting needs and long-term interests in promoting a stable, prosperous and democratic Central Asia.”For him, that balancing act will play out during the rest of his trip, to Kazakhstan, where he arrived Sunday night, and to Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerry Is Muted on Human Rights in Uzbekistan .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.