By DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOWOCT. 28, 2015
BEIJING — They roam the streets of Beijing, looking for illegal vendors, fire hazards and trash. They step into quarrels between neighbors, tell dog owners to clean up after their pets and try to untangle traffic jams. Sometimes, they help to catch criminals.For the Yongshan Persuaders, a group of older Chinese volunteers who patrol their neighborhood of Fengtai in southwest Beijing, no infraction is too small in the service of public order.On a recent morning, members of a Persuader patrol were inspecting the balconies of a hulking apartment block for fire hazards. They knew which residents would agree to clean up their spaces and which would not answer their door.A local party official who was accompanying the volunteers pointed to one balcony overflowing with cardboard boxes, a possible safety issue. “That guy keeps pigeons,” said the official, Zhao Shuling. “That’s allowed.”AdvertisementThey see themselves as do-gooders giving back to society, though others may see them as busybodies. Either way, they are among the fast-growing  ranks of retirees in China — by 2050, up to a third of the country’s projected population of 1.5 billion may be 60 or older. Many are bored at home and looking for ways to stay active.AdvertisementEmpowered by both a cultural respect for elders and the state’s desire for control, the Yongshan Persuaders patrol in red armbands and color-coordinated T-shirts emblazoned with “City Security Volunteer.” They are part of a thousands-strong force of volunteers across the city, including groups like the Chaoyang Masses and the Xicheng Aunties.“When I’m wearing a red armband, I’m working,” said Liu Yuzhen, 79, a great-grandmother and a Persuader.“But when I’m not wearing a red armband, I’m still working,” she said in the Persuaders’ headquarters, housed in a small building with the Yongshan Communist Party committee.“It is kind of like entertainment for us,” Ms. Liu said. “It’s a fun thing to do. Also, when we are successful, we feel a sense of achievement.”On the recent morning outing, the Persuaders approached two vendors operating illegally, including a man offering blood pressure monitoring services on a small collapsible table. The team felt he was blocking the sidewalk and asked him to pack up.“O.K.,” the man said. “But I’m serving the people, too, you know.”Yang Chaonan, 80, said it was important to ask people nicely: “After all, we can only persuade, we can’t fine.”She added: “When we started out, there was lots of trouble. People would shout at us to mind our own business. But it’s O.K. now, they know who we are.”AdvertisementNext to the Pure Truth Mosque on Wenti Road, a halal meat vendor who gave his name as Mr. Yang was skeptical about the volunteers’ effectiveness.“Really, they’re elderly people who have nothing to do,” he said. “But it’s good they are here. Better than nothing.”An employee at a nearby cigarette store, who would give only her surname, Li, said: “They do help keep the street clean. And they get rid of the peddlers.”Founded in 2007 with 80 members to help a citywide effort to brush up Beijing’s image before the 2008 Olympic Games, the Yongshan Persuaders have grown to about 200, though that number varies with members’ infirmities or deaths. The youngest are in their 50s and the oldest in their 90s.After their shifts, they write up reports and submit them to the party committee.“Often, their reports are really detailed,” said a local party official who gave her name only as Ms. Gu because she was not authorized to speak to a reporter. Too detailed, maybe: “They write things like, ‘Today, it rained very heavily.’ Some really get into the writing.”The volunteer groups support the work of the Beijing Public Security Bureau and the chengguan, a municipal public order force.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since 2007, the Yongshan Persuaders have logged 12,340 “uncivilized” events, helped catch 223 suspected criminals and provided 60 items of “antiterrorist” intelligence, the Public Security Bureau told The Beijing News, a local newspaper. (The Beijing police did not respond to a request for comment on those numbers.)While most of their work is mundane, there is a national security aspect. The volunteers are especially vigilant over holidays and around major political meetings: all were on duty on Sept. 3 during a military parade commemorating China’s victory over Japan in World War II, Ms. Gu said.Advertisement“They had special instructions to watch out for flying objects, including children’s toys and pigeons, and for fires,” she said. Vigilance is higher again this week for the Communist Party’s Central Committee meeting, Ms. Yang said.Using networks of civilians to help maintain order is not new in China. It dates from the baojia system of the Warring States period around 300 B.C., when a household supplied people to monitor the morals of their neighborhood, said David Schak, an anthropologist at Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia.China has undergone rapid social change since the Persuaders were young. Today’s older Chinese grew up in a tougher times: Food and clothing were scarce, and some children from very poor families may even have been given away.That may make them more sympathetic to supposed troublemakers. For Yang Shaochuan, 72, a retired secondary school teacher, street vendors operating illegally are merely struggling to make ends meet. He tries to find them spots at legal markets instead of driving them away.Mr. Yang says being paternal gets results.“If someone our age tries to persuade you, well, we’re like a parent,” said Mr. Yang. “We ask, ‘What problems do you have? Why are you here?’ ”Whether seen as kindhearted citizens or snoops, the Persuaders’ morale is high.They even have a team song.Back at headquarters, Ms. Yang struck up in a rich alto as her team members Xue Yuehua, 62; Hu Chunmei, 59 (whom the team nicknamed Peng Mama for her resemblance to Peng Liyuan, the wife of President Xi Jinping); and Fang Kaisheng, 68; looked on approvingly.She sang, “We are the Yongshan Persuading team, we persuade, persuade all year round, seize on innovation and love to care.”Vanessa Piao contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: No Infraction Is Too Small for Beijing’s Persuaders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.