By WILLY LOWRYNOV. 1, 2015
ARUSHA, Tanzania —  A string of small bombings on the island of Zanzibar has residents there fearing that the explosions could be related to last month’s disputed election and that more trouble could be coming.Early Sunday, a small homemade bomb exploded near Stone Town, a popular tourist destination known for its labyrinthine streets and teeming bazaars.On Saturday, two similar bombs went off. On Friday, an undetonated bomb was found with a cellphone.The police said there were no injuries from any of the explosives. Still, many residents and foreign embassies were concerned.Britain issued a travel advisory that read: “Violence could escalate quickly. If you’re in Zanzibar, avoid being out on the streets and avoid traveling into the center of Stone Town.”AdvertisementIn the 19th century, Stone Town was the bustling capital of an Indian Ocean empire that traded in spices, carvings, elephant tusks and slaves. Today, Zanzibar is a semiautonomous part of Tanzania and usually a friendly, relaxed place to visit.AdvertisementBut during election times, it can get tense.In 2001, dozens of people were killed in Zanzibar and on a neighboring island after a disputed election.Last week, the chairman of the Zanzibar election commission abruptly canceled all results from local elections, held Oct. 25, which the leading opposition party said it had won.The election chairman said that the results had been marred by ballot box fraud and fistfights among election managers.The American Embassy in Tanzania urged the election chairman to reverse his decision, saying that the American government was “gravely alarmed” and that “this action halted an orderly and peaceful election.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The troubles on Zanzibar did not directly affect Tanzania’s presidential race, which the governing party won by a comfortable margin, but on Zanzibar people are beginning to worry that more trouble may be brewing.“It’s not good,” said Abdulla Amour, who works at an early childhood educational center in Stone Town. “We’re seeing bombs in the streets.”Mkadam Khamis Mkadam, a regional police commander, said that the police had arrested two suspects who had been near the explosions, but that it was not clear who was behind them.“The language of politicians may be an influencing factor,” Commander Mkadam said.On Friday, the opposition party issued an ultimatum to Zanzibar’s government, in front of a crowd of supporters, to release the election results by Sunday evening. It was unclear what the consequences would be if that did not happen.Advertisement“The government expires tomorrow night,” said Ally Saleh, a parliamentary candidate for the opposition. “We should be handed over the government.”Zanzibar is supposed to hold new local elections in three months. Opposition leaders on the island accuse Zanzibar’s election commission of canceling the recent results simply to rob them of victory.In mainland Tanzania, the leading opposition party has yet to concede defeat. Opposition leaders have accused the government of rigging the vote and they met on Sunday to discuss their next move.Jeffrey Gettleman contributed reporting from Nairobi, Kenya.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Blasts on Tanzania Island Could Be Tied to Election.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.