By NIKI KITSANTONISNOV. 1, 2015
ATHENS — A week of drownings in the Aegean Sea was capped on Sunday by more tragedy when a plastic boat carrying migrants from Turkey capsized and sank off the Greek island of Samos in high winds, killing 11 people including six children, according to Greek officials.Another two bodies were pulled out of the sea off the small island of Farmakonisi, south of Samos, a few hours later, and seven migrants were found dead off the island of Lesbos, according to a Greek Shipping Ministry official. The seven bodies could be from a large wreck on Wednesday in which more than 20 people died, according to the official who spoke on the customary condition of anonymity.“We had several rescue operations today, in several parts of the Aegean,” the official said.The first instance on Sunday occurred at around 9 a.m., when a plastic boat flipped over in near-gale force winds just 20 meters from the coastline of Samos. Rescuers recovered the body of a woman from nearby rocks and divers found another 10 people trapped in the cabin of the sunken boat, the official said. “There were four women in there, as well as two children and four babies,” she said, adding that 15 people were rescued. Winds were still strong at around noon when the two bodies were found near Farmakonisi.With such strong winds, the Greek Coast Guard ordered vessels to remain anchored in many ports across the country on Sunday.AdvertisementThe bad weather has not discouraged migrants from risking the short but dangerous sea crossing from Turkey to Greece. More than 60 have died over the last week after their boats sank in choppy waters, nearly half of them children.Foreign volunteers helped migrants arriving on the Greek island of Lesbos on Thursday, a day after the Greek Coast Guard saved some 240 migrants after their boat capsized off the island.Largely due to the proximity of Turkey’s coastline to a necklace of Greek islands in the Aegean Sea, Greece remains a favored entry point into Europe for thousands of people fleeing war or seeking a better life.AdvertisementMore than half a million people have arrived in Greece so far this year. A handful of islands in the eastern Aegean, including Lesbos and Samos, have borne the brunt of the influx. Lesbos has been particularly overwhelmed with more than 300,000 landing on the island this year, nearly four times the island’s population.Most migrants arriving in Greece are keen to leave the country, which remains mired in a deep financial crisis, and to continue their journeys to more prosperous nations in Western and Northern Europe. But they face further trials on the way as Balkan and European nations on their route have intensified border controls or erected fences.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Greece, a wire fence set up along the country’s land border with Turkey in 2012 to discourage migrants from sneaking into the country has become the focus of protests. Hundreds of members of leftist and human rights groups gathered at the border on Saturday, calling for Greek authorities to remove the fence and offer migrants “safe passage” through the land border so they do not risk the hazardous journey by sea.Greece’s migration minister, Yiannis Mouzalas, told Greek television on Saturday that the fence cannot be taken down for “technical reasons” but expressed fears that large numbers of refugees could become “trapped” in Greece.A day earlier, in a speech in Parliament, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras railed against European leaders for “passing the buck” on a solution for the refugee crisis and “putting up fences and barbed wire.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.