By CHOE SANG-HUNNOV. 1, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  Meeting for the first time in three years, leaders from China, Japan and South Korea agreed on Sunday that they would meet annually and work toward greater trade ties, even as they continued to wrangle over territorial and historical disputes.Given their countries’ long history of mutual grievances rooted in a wartime past, the meeting of Prime Minister Li Keqiang of China, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan and President Park Geun-hye of South Korea was in itself considered progress.“This summit meeting carries a historic significance because it restores a system of cooperation among the three countries, which in turn is an important frame of peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia,” Ms. Park said during a joint news conference with the two other leaders.During their talks, held at Ms. Park’s presidential headquarters, the Blue House, the three appeared to have skirted their countries’ territorial and other thorny disputes, with their joint statement saying they would work for regional peace and stability “in the spirit of marching to the future while looking squarely at the history.”AdvertisementThey also produced widely expected pledges to stay committed to ending North Korea’s nuclear weapons ambitions and to add momentum to efforts to negotiate a trilateral free trade agreement, a new engine for joint economic advancement. They also agreed to meet again next year, in Tokyo, in a continuation of discussions that were suspended for three years because of political tensions between Japan and the other two.AdvertisementEven before the three leaders met on Sunday, few analysts expected any major deal to emerge. But their discussions reflected the fact that their countries, which are among the world’s largest economies, rely on one another for badly needed growth, despite the persistence of animosities rooted in Japan’s colonial aggression in the early 20th century.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During the news conference on Sunday, Mr. Abe said he had had a “quite frank exchange of opinions” with Ms. Park and Mr. Li. But he did not mention any of the issues that have distanced his country from the two neighbors, like the recruitment of Korean, Chinese and other Asian women who were forced or lured into working in front-line brothels for Japan’s World War II soldiers.Mr. Li came close to calling Mr. Abe to task during the news conference. Without mentioning Japan by name, he said that the three countries needed to “heighten mutual political trust” and that “mutual trust is conditioned on a mutual understanding of historical and other important issues.” He said that Beijing did not want its trilateral and bilateral ties with the others to be disrupted again.Leaders of the three neighbors held five annual trilateral meetings between 2008 and 2012, but those ended after Mr. Abe took office in late 2012. Tokyo’s relations with Seoul and Beijing, already frosty because of territorial disputes over islands and conflicting interpretations of wartime history, chilled further after the Japanese leader visited or sent offerings to the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo, where war criminals, as well as other war dead, are honored.Mr. Abe’s insistence that there was no proof that Japan’s military systematically forced Korean and other Asian women to serve as sex slaves during World War II so angered South Koreans that Ms. Park has refused to meet with him one on one. She has met with Mr. Li and President Xi Jinping of China several times since taking office in early 2013.Mr. Abe was traveling with no compromise on historical issues, South Korean officials said. The rift between him and Ms. Park remained so wide, especially over the sex slaves, known euphemistically as comfort women, that South Korea decided not to hold a state banquet for him, an honor it gave Mr. Li on Saturday, when he discussed trade and other ties with Ms. Park and South Korean business leaders.Washington has repeatedly asked Japan and South Korea, its key allies in Northeast Asia, to mend ties to cope with China’s growing regional influence.Mr. Abe’s arrival in Seoul came as many Japanese accuse Ms. Park of taking South Korea too close to China, to the detriment of the regional security partnership linking Japan, South Korea and the United States. South Korea recently completed a free-trade agreement with China, already its biggest trading partner.AdvertisementAlso Sunday, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter of the United States visited the buffer zone separating North and South Korea, highlighting the American commitment to defend South Korea from what he called a “notoriously unpredictable” North Korea, an ally of China. Mr. Carter was on a trip to Seoul for annual defense talks.A version of this article appears in print on November 2, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: China, Japan and South Korea in Trade Pact.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.