Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版By the end of 2011, for the first time in China’s history, more Chinese lived in cities than in the countryside, according to official figures, as millions of people migrated to urban areas in search of better lives.In his new book, “Dragons in Diamond Village,” David Bandurski, editor of the China Media Project at the University of Hong Kong, writes about “urban villages,” formerly rural spaces engulfed by expanding cities. In an interview, he discussed the important role these enclaves have played in supporting China’s economic boom by offering cheap housing to millions of migrant workers.What are urban villages?Basically, they are bizarre pockets of rural China right inside the city. These villages were overtaken by cities as they expanded in the 1980s and 1990s, swallowing up their farmland. Once this happened, the villagers built tenements on top of their old village housing plots, their own homes. They rented these apartments to migrant workers coming into the city, who couldn’t afford to live in residential blocks. Eventually, urban villages that might have been home to 2,000 or 3,000 villagers became home to migrant populations of 40,000 or even 70,000 people. You can be in the center of Guangzhou, walk down an alley and find yourself inside a cramped village space where the streets have the same pattern they might have had a century ago. The buildings are often so close that they nearly touch, and sometimes even shut out the sunlight. In Guangzhou, in the main urban development area, there are 138 urban villages. But they can be found in just about every city in China, so there are thousands and thousands of them. They are the secret ingredient not just of urbanization in China, but also of the country’s overall economic growth. Without the cheap housing they provide, populations of cheap migrant labor couldn’t be sustained in major manufacturing centers.You looked at one village in particular, Xian — the “Diamond Village” of your title, for the high value of its land to developers — and its leader, the Communist Party secretary Lu Suigeng. What does his story tell us?His story is very common. Lu and his family dominated village politics and business, including land deals, going back to the 1980s. Xian’s land and property assets were extremely valuable, given the village’s position in the middle of Guangzhou’s new central business district, Pearl River New Town. So when the time came to demolish the village and build a new development in its place, the villagers were afraid they would lose everything, and they staged a protest movement that lasted for years.Corruption is endemic at the village level in China. [President] Xi Jinping is talking about the need to address corruption happening right beside the people. And there’s no better example of this kind of low-level corruption than what we see happening in village land grabs and forced demolitions, which are leading causes of unrest in China. Many city governments across China rely heavily on revenue from land sales, so there’s a lot of incentive to grab land, which can then be sold to developers. We tend to think these villages are in the countryside, but most in fact are in the cities.Your book describes local villagers as a community of rights defenders.Like other rights defenders in China, they just want a fair deal. But they find, as I document in my book, that the system shuts door after door. The petitioning system, which allows Chinese to seek audiences with officials, doesn’t work. It’s an endless wheel. The courts usually get them nowhere. Security police harass them. In some cases, the villagers become more and more radicalized, and they find support and advice in others like them.The more I watched the rights defense actions taken by various villagers, the more I realized that there was also a cultural component. For hundreds of years, these villages intermarried and shared community celebrations like the Dragon Boat Festival — the annual festival around which the rights defense movement in Xian eventually took shape. There are already strong links between the villages, and when they share a common threat in demolition, it’s only natural for them to come together.Have you seen any improvement in governance as a result of the rights defense movements you followed?Unfortunately, no. This is a revealing point, I think, about Xi Jinping’s anticorruption campaign. We have a lot of focus in the news on senior leaders who have fallen, and about the many thousands of leaders who have been disciplined. But for ordinary villagers facing unfair land seizure or forced demolition of their property, there are still no good avenues for justice.In the beginning, when I went to Xian, it had a wall around it, basically quarantining it. The wall was built by the local subsidiary of one of China’s most powerful real estate companies, Poly Group, which is connected to senior leadership figures. Until 2010, the chairman of Poly was He Ping, the son-in-law of Deng Xiaoping. So you can see how the fate of a tiny urban village like Xian is tied up with bigger questions of power.What about the argument that developing the village is just part of economic modernization, and people’s lives will actually improve as a result?That’s the argument you hear. Urban villages are cramped and dirty places, and if they are redeveloped into clean, modern neighborhoods, everyone will benefit. The problem is that corruption means there is no transparency about the process for the local villagers. They get low or no compensation and are left out of the decision about what kind of community to rebuild. This is why the villagers in Xian felt that they had no choice but to agitate for the removal of their party leader.Then there’s the question of the tens of thousands of migrants who live in urban villages like Xian. Once they are kicked out, where do they go? They have to move on to other urban villages, just as cramped and probably farther on the outskirts of the city.So the process of redevelopment usually displaces two types of rural people all at once, leaving behind luxury property developments for the minority super-rich. Party officials want clean and modern city landscapes that make a strong political statement about their competence as planners. But no planning is done for the migrant workers themselves.In this sense, urban villages are absolutely essential. Without them, it would be virtually impossible to house the millions of migrant workers floating in China’s cities.Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter @mrbaopanrui. 