AdvertisementSupported byBy Azam AhmedMEXICO CITY — The Mexican government extradited several top drug kingpins to the United States on Wednesday, signaling a change of heart after the stunning escape of Joaquín Guzmán Loera this summer from the nation’s most secure prison.Among the 13 people who were extradited are two top drug lords, including an American citizen, Edgar Valdez Villarreal, also known as “La Barbie,” as well as others charged with participating in the murders of an American consulate worker and an American immigration and customs agent.The extradition of the men, many of whom had been imprisoned for years in Mexico, is a change in tactics for the government. Since President Enrique Peña Nieto came to power in 2012, his government has adopted more of an arms-length approach to the United States on security co-operation than the previous government did. This has often meant taking a more assertive stance in matters of sovereignty, which has included a reluctance to cede control of prisoners to the United States.Indeed, just weeks before Mr. Guzmán’s escape from prison, the United States issued a formal request for his extradition. In the immediate aftermath of his escape, as the Mexican government pondered an offer of unconditional help from the Americans, the frustration between the allies grew.Wednesday’s move, however, appeared to be intended to show a warming of relations, and perhaps a fear of more embarrassment if another prisoner escaped.“Today’s extraditions would not have been possible without the close collaboration and productive relationship the Department of Justice enjoys with officials at the highest levels of law enforcement in Mexico,” Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said in a statement.Among the most colorful and ruthless of those extradited on Wednesday was Mr. Valdez, who grew up the son of a shop owner in Laredo, Tex., before fleeing to Mexico and climbing his way up the cartel ladder. Nicknamed La Barbie for his looks, he is thought to be one of the only American citizens to have risen so high in the Mexican drug world.During his time as a top lieutenant in the Beltrán-Leyva Cartel, Mr. Valdez was responsible for some of the most grisly violence of the drug war, including beheading rivals and videotaped executions. He oversaw a cadre of gunmen responsible for battling other drug gangs, including the Gulf Cartel, and is credited with dragging violence into the beach town of Acapulco, which he took over.Mr. Valdez was arrested in 2010 by Mexican authorities and convicted the next year. In the United States, Mr. Valdez is wanted on drug charges in both Georgia and Louisiana.Also extradited was Jorge Costilla Sánchez, who was once the leader of the Gulf Cartel and the Zetas gang and responsible as well for violence that has gripped Mexico over the years.In addition to Mr. Valdez and Mr. Costilla, Mexican authorities also extradited three men wanted in the murder of a United States consulate worker, her husband and the spouse of another consulate worker in Ciudad Juárez, the border city once engulfed in the violence of the drug war. Prosecutors also said that Jose Emanuel Garcia Sota, charged in the 2011 killing of an Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent, Jaime Zapata, was also among those extradited.Paulina Villegas contributed reporting.Advertisement