AdvertisementSupported byLetter From EuropeBy Celestine BohlenSÈTE, France — France’s nearly 3,000 independent bookstores — welcoming places for literary encounters, casual browsing and helpful staff — have withstood all manner of competition, including big chain stores and digital publishing.Their survival is mostly due to a 1981 law that allows publishers to set a fixed price for books, in stores and online. The practice is shared across much of Europe and was feared to be under threat in negotiations with the United States over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, known as the T.T.I.P.Last month, that threat was taken off the table by the European Union’s chief negotiator, who stated unequivocally that fixed book pricing — or “le prix unique” in French — would not be a matter of debate.Independent booksellers, in France and especially in Germany, let out a huge sigh of relief. “It was a real fear,” said Guillaume Husson, a representative of the Syndicat de la Librairie Française, a professional association. “The ‘prix unique’ is more than essential: It is what has saved our bookstores.”Sète, a fishing town of about 45,000 on the Mediterranean coast, has two general bookstores packed with offerings from the “rentrée littéraire,” an annual publishing event that has resulted in an impressive 589 works of fiction this fall, including almost 200 foreign books in translation and 68 debut novels.“A bookstore is much more than the books, which is what puts it at the center of cultural life,” said Sophie Garayoa, 37, who last year took over one of the Sète bookstores, the Nouvelle Librairie Sétoise, an act of faith in the future of books.Without the “prix unique,” she said, small bookstores would be at the mercy of the deep discounts afforded to larger competitors. That is the case in the United States, which has a population five times the size of France but fewer independent bookstores.The fear was that American negotiators would try to strip away this protection as part of the negotiations to create the world’s largest free-trade zone.It is unclear whether book pricing was discussed in the T.T.I.P. talks, which began in 2013 and this month entered their 11th round in Miami, as usual behind closed doors.The absence of information is what many find troubling. “These negotiations are so complex, no one knows what’s on the table or what’s off,” Mr. Husson said, which is why the booksellers and publishers pressed the European Union for an explicit exemption.But that has not prevented the T.T.I.P. from becoming a toxic subject in Europe. European leaders have been reluctant to speak to the protesters’ concerns, apparently fearful of risking political capital on an unpopular issue.“The leaders of the E.U. are hesitant to go public to ‘sell’ the T.T.I.P.,” the French newspaper Le Monde wrote recently. “They dread a public opinion that is up in arms against this treaty and its consequences, particularly in Germany.”Book pricing, widely seen as a bulwark for European culture against an American onslaught, is particularly sensitive. Fixed prices have benefited not only independent bookstores but also publishers, said Denis Mollat, part of the fourth generation in his family to run the Librairie Mollat, France’s largest independent bookseller, based in Bordeaux.“It allows publishers to take the risks on young authors, it gives them a great freedom on the editorial side, and it protects them and us from a kind of price dumping that makes room only for best sellers,” he said. “It is a source of double riches.”The e-book phenomenon has barely caught on in France, where it accounts for only 2 percent of book sales. Small bookstores also benefit from limited tax relief, on the condition that they host regular meetings with authors and devote a portion of their revenue to hiring employees capable of giving literary advice.The result is a readership that keeps coming back. “The book is not as sick as people think,” Mr. Mollat said.Advertisement