By DOUGLAS DALBYNOV. 2, 2015
DUBLIN —  A majority of members of the Northern Ireland Assembly voted on Monday to legalize same-sex marriage in the British-ruled region, but the majority Democratic Unionist Party immediately invoked a parliamentary maneuver to veto the measure.It was the fifth such vote on marriage equality in the local Parliament over the past three years — the previous four failed to garner enough support among assembly members. This time, of the 105 members, 53 voted in favor of the measure and 51 against. One member abstained.The motion was supported by members of the nationalist parties along with a number of unionists and independents. It was opposed by the D.U.P., which has a strongly conservative Protestant ethos.Under Northern Ireland’s complex power-sharing arrangements, any legislative amendment must command sufficient cross-community support. The D.U.P. used this so-called petition of concern mechanism to impose a veto.AdvertisementA petition of concern requires at least 60 percent of assembly members to vote for a motion, with at least 40 percent of both unionist and nationalist representatives present and voting. In this case, it effectively means that same-sex marriage legislation will remain prohibited as long as the D.U.P., which holds 38 seats in the Assembly, opposes it.AdvertisementNorthern Ireland is the only part of the United Kingdom where civil marriage between same-sex couples is not recognized. It was legalized in England, Wales and Scotland last year.Last week, the Republic of Ireland ratified same-sex marriage legislation after a referendum on the issue that passed overwhelmingly in May. The first such marriages are expected to take place there before Christmas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Peter Weir, a veteran D.U.P. Assembly member, told reporters after the vote that he did not regard it as a defeat or a demand for change.“If it requires a process of attrition to alter a result, it does not demonstrate a great deal of force behind the argument of those who have brought forward the proposal on each occasion,” he said.However, Patrick Corrigan, Amnesty International’s Northern Ireland director, told Attitude magazine that the failure of politicians to legislate on the issue would make a legal challenge inevitable.“It is a tragedy that same-sex couples are forced to ask the courts to fulfill a responsibility which has been abdicated for too long by too many politicians,” he said.Two separate challenges to the ban are expected to come before the High Court in Belfast in the coming months.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 3, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Same-Sex Marriage Bill Vetoed in Northern Ireland.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.