AdvertisementSupported byBy Deepak Adhikari and Nida NajarKATHMANDU, Nepal — Protesters and the Nepalese police clashed near the border with India on Monday, in violence that left an Indian man dead and threatened to further complicate a political and economic crisis in Nepal.The police in the border town of Birgunj fired on protesters belonging to the ethnic Madhesi population who have been agitating against a recently passed Constitution, saying it would dilute their political voice.About 5 a.m. on Monday, the police said, they cleared a number of tents and protesters from a bridge near Birgunj in a zone between the two countries, where the demonstrators had been staging a sit-in for over a month. More than 200 trucks that had been stranded in Nepal crossed into India afterward, but none of the hundreds filled with cooking gas and merchandise stranded in India made their way into Nepal.By late morning, about 500 protesters had converged in Birgunj, the police said. The demonstrators pelted security forces with stones, set fire to the office of a nongovernmental organization on the border and attacked a village police post, said Raju Babu Shrestha, the superintendent of police in Parsa District.“At this point, we began to fire tear gas shells to control the crowd,” Mr. Shrestha said. “As the protesters continued attacking us, we fired bullets.”The Indian man who was killed, Ashish Kumar Ram, was in his early 20s and from Raxaul, on the Indian side of the border, Mr. Shrestha said. It was unclear why he was killed. The police announced an indefinite curfew in Birgunj on Monday afternoon.The clash could undermine a dialogue between Madhesi political parties and the Nepalese government. For more than a month leading up to the passage of the new Constitution in September, Nepal was convulsed by protests that left more than 40 people dead, most of them demonstrators.Nepal has accused India of imposing an economic blockade on it by refusing to allow trucks carrying fuel and other essentials to cross the border, because of objections to the new Constitution. India, for its part, has criticized the way the Constitution was passed for not being inclusive enough, but it maintains that unrest in Nepal, not a blockade, has prevented trucks from entering.The impasse has led to severe fuel shortages in Nepal, which receives the majority of its imports from India. The Indian Ministry of External Affairs said that it was “deeply concerned” by the shooting in Nepal and the death of an Indian.Laxmi Prasad Dhakal, the spokesman for Nepal’s Home Ministry, said that the Nepalese police had cleared the demonstrators in an attempt to resume trade because Indian officials had repeatedly indicated that the reason for the impasse was Nepalese protesters. He said that although Nepal would allow trucks to cross the border, India “did not cooperate.” Officials on the Indian side said on Monday that the trucks could not enter Nepal because there was not enough time to get customs clearance before the protests resumed.Rabindra Mahato, a 44-year-old businessman in Birgunj, witnessed the clash on Monday and said in a telephone interview that though the fuel shortages were dire, Nepalis living near the border had been able to enter India and refuel at gas stations there. Now, he said, he feared recriminations across the border after the death of an Indian.“Today’s killing has deepened the fear here,” he said. “It’s getting worse for people like us.” Deepak Adhikari reported from Kathmandu, and Nida Najar from New Delhi.Advertisement