By JANE PERLEZNOV. 4, 2015
BEIJING — Differences over the South China Sea forced countries from Southeast Asia, along with China and the United States, to cancel a joint statement at a meeting of defense ministers in Malaysia on Wednesday.The Chinese Ministry of Defense confirmed that the meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, had failed to conclude a joint declaration, and it blamed “the individual country (countries) out of the region.” In a statement on its website, the ministry implied, but did not name, the United States as the main reason for the breakdown in the discussions.The ministry did not mention the South China Sea or China’s insistence that the statement not include any mention of the strategic waterway.Diplomats from countries in the region said that China had pushed for even a factual statement of the South China Sea to be absent from the joint declaration scheduled for the end of the gathering Wednesday afternoon.AdvertisementThe meeting was split between countries that agreed with China and those that strongly disagreed, including Australia, Japan and the United States, two senior diplomats involved in the talks said.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.China maintains that its territorial claims in the South China Sea must be discussed with individual countries that also have claims. It has consistently opposed efforts to have conflicting claims discussed in a regional setting like Asean, whose defense ministers are meeting in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, with their counterparts from Australia, India, Japan and the United States.Advertisement“The responsibility fully rests on the individual country (countries) out of the region as the meeting failed to issue the joint statement as scheduled,” the Chinese Defense Ministry said on its website.The American defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter, was attending the meeting, and the United States led the effort to have the sea accorded a place in the communiqué, the diplomats said. Mr. Carter met with China’s minister of defense, Chang Wanquan, on Tuesday in Malaysia, where the South China Sea was high on the agenda.The gathering in Malaysia comes a week after the United States carried out a freedom of navigation operation inside the 12-nautical-mile radius of Subi Reef, in the Spratly archipelago not far from the Philippines. The operation was devised by the Pentagon to show that the reef, which China has built into an artificial island with an airfield, was in international waters and was not entitled to a 12-mile territorial claim. China has built seven artificial islands in the South China Sea in the last several years.China’s extensive island construction could bolster it militarily in the strategic waterway, something that has unnerved countries in the region. Some nations, like the Philippines, an American ally, and Vietnam, a former enemy, have asked the United States for more military assistance since China’s policy on the South China Sea has hardened.“The countries of Southeast Asia are going to have to decide to push back against China, or see the South China Sea turn into a Chinese lake,” one of the diplomats involved in the defense ministers gathering said.The sea was the most contentious issue among the Asean defense ministers in Malaysia. Both the Philippines and Vietnam were among the Asian countries unwilling to sign the declaration if it had no mention of the South China Sea, the diplomats said.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Sea Dispute Causes a Rift as Officials Meet in Asia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.