By SOMINI SENGUPTANOV. 3, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  A month after a former president of the United Nations General Assembly was arrested in connection to a corruption scheme, the current head of the world body said he would make public what funds he receives from government and private donors and explain how they are used.The arrest of John W. Ashe, a diplomat from Antigua, in early October as part of an investigation into a wide-ranging corruption scheme embarrassed the organization and led to calls for greater accountability over the way in which the president of the General Assembly is funded and how the funds are spent.The secretary general of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, said on Tuesday that the incident had affected the “prestige and reputation of this General Assembly.”The current president of the General Assembly, Mogens Lykketoft, of Denmark, said Tuesday that in the interest of transparency, he would publicly declare what money he receives from donors, whether public or private, along with information about his official travel engagements.Advertisement“The obvious first step is total transparency about who is contributing,” he told reporters.Mr. Ashe has been accused of using his post to enrich himself personally, including by accepting hundreds of thousands of dollars from Chinese sources to buy suits and Rolex watches and to build a basketball court in his home in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.Mr. Ashe, who served as the president of the General Assembly from September 2013 to September 2014, was one of six people identified in a criminal complaint outlining a bribery scheme that involved more than $1 million in payments from sources in China for real-estate deals and other business interests.AdvertisementMr. Ashe pleaded not guilty to the charges by federal prosecutors in Manhattan last month. A federal magistrate judge had earlier set a $1 million bond for Mr. Ashe and said he would be subject to home detention.At the heart of the bribery investigation is a Macau-based real estate developer named Ng Lap Seng, who was arrested by customs officials in New York last month and charged with bringing $4.5 million into the United States under false pretenses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two foundations associated with Mr. Ng have also given money directly to United Nations agencies. One of those agencies, called the Office for South-South Cooperation, received money from one of Mr. Ng’s entities to organize a conference in Macau.Mr. Ban had already ordered an audit of the funds received by United Nations agencies from those two private foundations. On Tuesday, he said he had appointed a task force to review “financing and staffing” in the office of the president of the General Assembly and then recommend ways to promote greater transparency.The allegations have forced the organization to confront how to vet contributions from private corporations and charities at a time when it is consistently low on funds.The office is funded in part by the general budget of the United Nations, but it is allowed to supplement it with donations from governments and private contributions. Those contributions are supposed to come into a trust fund that is audited by the United Nations. In the case of Mr. Ashe, they are suspected of having vanished into his own accounts.A version of this article appears in print on November 4, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Pledges To Reveal Donor Data .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.