AdvertisementSupported byBy Eric SchmittAL UDEID AIR BASE, Qatar — Michelle Obama was greeted by roars of applause from three dozen service members in combat fatigues when she walked into the Fox Sports Sky Box bar here on Tuesday night.Mrs. Obama was joined by the late-night talk show host Conan O’Brien during a visit to this sprawling desert installation to show her support for the 11,000 troops stationed here. She is visiting Qatar and Jordan this week to promote education for adolescent girls.“This isn’t an easy post,” she said of a base where temperatures soar above 120 degrees in the summer. “You guys are doing the tough work.”The troops from all the armed services were selected by their commanders, based on merit, to meet the first lady.“I don’t know how I got picked,” said Capt. Daniel Winn, 30, an Air Force intelligence officer from Manchester, N.H. “I was told to show up.”The sports bar — two-thirds empty except for the handpicked junior officers and enlisted troops seated at four tables, and with the TVs turned off — is one of the few on-post facilities in the Middle East where service members can buy alcoholic beverages. The allowance is normally three drinks a day (beer, wine or liquor), bar staff members said.But instead, before she arrived with Mr. O’Brien’s camera crew, which was filming for his show, troops dug into scoops of Cold Stone Creamery ice cream — vanilla, pistachio or mocha — a treat arranged by Mrs. Obama. Ice cream had been inexplicably unavailable here for the past two months.Mrs. Obama’s visit drew praise from the service members.“It’s great to see our leadership here to support us,” said Tech. Sgt. Emmanuel Santillan of the Air Force, 29, from St. Croix, V.I. “We aren’t forgotten.”After her ice cream social, Mrs. Obama, wearing a blue and black print dress, went outdoors under a giant white tent and gave a shout-out to some 2,000 uniformed service members gathered there.“You’re probably wondering how your kids are doing in school,” she said to troops assigned here on tours ranging from three months to two years. “Are they walking or talking yet?”“We’re going to have your backs,” she continued, speaking on a stage in front of a giant American flag and pledging her personal support and the administration’s backing for benefits, training and other assistance to military families and veterans.Mrs. Obama said that whenever she traveled, domestically or abroad, she tried to visit American military bases.This time, she brought along Mr. O’Brien and other performers to do a U.S.O.-style show. After introducing Mr. O’Brien, she and the entertainer waded into the crowd to shake hands and pose for selfies.On Wednesday, Mrs. Obama is scheduled to deliver the keynote address at an international conference in Doha on educating adolescent girls. She then travels to Jordan to end her weeklong Middle East trip.Advertisement