AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew BrunwasserSID, Serbia — Two formerly warring nations, Serbia and Croatia, have forged a rare agreement to improve the journey of migrants in Europe, providing train service across their borders to ease travel through the West Balkans, a route known for its bottlenecks, chaos and misery.The first train service transporting migrants directly from Serbia into Croatia began on Tuesday, allowing men, women and children to bypass an isolated border crossing where migrants frequently had been stalled.The arrangement was part of an agreement between the two nations that would have been unthinkable in their recent past. The train journey began fewer than five miles from the spot where the first fighting broke out in Yugoslavia in 1991 between Serbs and Croats, eventually escalating into war and resulting in the loss of more than 100,000 lives.In the absence of an effective plan by the 28-nation European Union, the arrangement was also an unusual effort by European countries to work together, officially and publicly, to address a humanitarian crisis that continues to deepen, with thousands still arriving every day even as temperatures drop.The alliance was fraught with novelties. Among them: For the first time, the Croatian police were allowed to work in Serbian territory.On Tuesday, which was unseasonably warm and sunny, uniformed Croatian police officers worked side by side with their Serbian counterparts to load migrants onto Croatian trains.Several trains carrying about 1,100 migrants traveled from the Serbian border town of Sid to a recently completed migrant registration center in Slavonski Brod, Croatia, 66 miles away.Croatia opened the new center on Tuesday with accommodations that local officials said were better suited for the coming winter.The trains allowed the migrants to bypass the border crossing at Berkasovo, a lonely stretch where thousands in recent weeks had been forced to spend the night, often sleeping outdoors on muddy ground while waiting for the Croatian border to open so they could cross on foot.That crossing, said Melita Sunjic, a spokeswoman for the United Nations refugee agency in Serbia, had no electricity, water or light. “It was very difficult to bring aid there and it was very uncomfortable for the refugees,” she said.The latest E.U. proposal addresses just a fraction of a human crisis numbering in the millions.The train service was the result of a newly forged protocol on border cooperation signed by Serbia and Croatia on Friday.“I think we all realized that there is no sense in not cooperating,” Vladimir Cucic, the Serbian state commissioner for refugees, said in an interview. The protocol envisions six to seven trains a day making the crossing, carrying as many as 7,700 migrants daily. Mr. Cucic said he expected only three or four trains to make the trip on Tuesday, allowing Croatia time to empty its reception centers before accepting larger numbers of new migrants.The flow of migrants from the Middle East has continued seemingly unabated despite winter’s impending arrival, bringing with it scenes of shivering migrants trudging through muddy fields since Hungary effectively closed its border with Croatia two weeks ago.“The winter is the main problem for all sides,” Mr. Cucic said. “In two weeks it will be a disaster, after the rain and snow starts.”“You can negotiate with Croats, Macedonians, Germans and Hungarians,” he said. “But you can’t negotiate with God.”The Croatian government said it would slowly empty and then close its reception center in Opatovac, a tent city that accommodated, briefly, most of the 312,000 migrants who have passed through the country since Sept. 16. Speaking days before the opening of the new center, Ranko Ostojic, the Croatian interior minister, said he believed that the agreement would hold up, “along with effective coordination of all nations along the route.”His Serbian counterpart, Nebojsa Stefanovic, said when the agreement was announced, “We need to work together, because migrants will come and go, but neighbors will remain.”He added: “We don’t always need to agree and love each other, but we need to cooperate. We need good relations because of security and in the interest of both peoples.”At the Sid train station, aid workers applauded the train service.“This is a very big deal for the refugees,” said Ms. Sunjic, of the United Nations. “It is very organized, easy and fast.”Jovana Vincic, from the Asylum Protection Center, a Belgrade-based organization, said the system appeared to be working well so far. “It’s unclear how long it will last,” she said. As soon as either side reaches the limits of its capacity, she predicted, “there will be chaos.”Joseph Orovic contributed reporting from Zadar, Croatia.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement