By THOMAS ERDBRINK and RICK GLADSTONENOV. 4, 2015
TEHRAN — President Hassan Rouhani of Iran on Wednesday criticized the recent arrests of journalists and others by the Revolutionary Guard Corps, which has accused detainees of being part of seditious plots hatched by the United States.In remarks at a cabinet meeting posted on his Instagram account, Mr. Rouhani suggested that at least some of those arrests had been groundless.“Let us not go and arrest one person here, another there, based on an excuse and without any reason, and then make up a case and aggrandize it, and finally say this is an infiltration movement,” Mr. Rouhani said.His reaction signaled a deepening divide between his administration and hard-line adversaries over Iran’s future relationship with the United States and other Western powers. The hard-liners have vowed to severely limit dealings with the Americans despite the signing of an international agreement limiting Iran’s nuclear activities in exchange for ending onerous American and European economic sanctions. Mr. Rouhani’s administration was the main advocate in Iran for that accord.AdvertisementThe cabinet meeting was held on the 36th anniversary of the seizure of the American Embassy in Tehran by Islamic revolutionaries, an event that was the catalyst for the rupture in diplomatic relations that prevails to this day. The seizure has been enshrined as a sort of holiday here, and every year thousands of demonstrators gather in front of the vacant embassy buildings, known as the den of spies, to denounce the United States.AdvertisementAyatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, has declared that despite the nuclear deal, the United States remains Iran’s main enemy and cannot be trusted. The ayatollah has warned against what he has called Americans’ desire to infiltrate Iran culturally and economically to subvert the country’s revolutionary foundation.Mr. Rouhani’s Instagram post came a day after the Revolutionary Guards announced, without elaborating, that agents had arrested members of an “infiltration network affiliated with the U.S. and U.K. governments.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A report about the meeting on Mr. Rouhani’s official website conspicuously omitted his critical remarks about the arrests, a possible indication of its delicacy given the internal political rivalries that have become apparent over his two-year-old term.His website’s report said Mr. Rouhani had called on the security and intelligence authorities to stop “toying with terminology” used by Ayatollah Khamenei — specifically a recent warning about the “enemy’s plots to infiltrate the country.” “The people are well aware of the meaning of infiltration, and know about the arrogance, the history and the wrong attitude of the U.S.A., and can understand what the country’s future and national interests are,” Mr. Rouhani said.An anti-American backlash that has been gaining momentum in Iran since the nuclear agreement was reached in July has been abetted by state news media, much of it dominated or influenced by hard-liners.On Tuesday, for example, an unidentified operative working for the Revolutionary Guards’ intelligence service said in an interview with state TV that the crackdown aimed to dismantle a network of journalists that he called “pens for hire,” asserting they had sought to plant articles against national interests. “Their objective is to change the lifestyle of people and shape public minds,” the expert said.Because of the crackdown, he said, “the enemy’s influence was prevented.” The Committee to Protect Journalists, an advocacy group in New York, expressed alarm on Wednesday over the crackdown, which has included the arrests of at least five local journalists, two of them associated with reformist publications. The group has described Iran as one of the biggest jailers of journalists. As of December, it was holding at least 30 of them in prison. That number includes Jason Rezaian, The Washington Post’s Tehran correspondent, an Iranian-American who has been convicted of espionage.Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran, and Rick Gladstone from New York.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: President of Iran Takes Issue With Arrests.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.