AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi Rudoren and Jonathan RosenJERUSALEM — A Palestinian teenager fatally stabbed two ultra-Orthodox Jewish men in Jerusalem’s Old City on Saturday night, the Israeli police said, and wounded the wife of one of them. It was the second fatal attack on an Israeli family in three days.The Palestinian apparently wrested a gun from the husband and fired at tourists and security forces in the area, wounding the couple’s 2-year-old son.The police shot and killed the attacker, a 19-year-old identified as Muhanad Halabi, a law student whose Facebook profile had a post Friday night saying that “the third intifada has begun.”“I do not think the people will accept humiliation,” the post said, referring to the escalating clashes between Muslim worshipers and the Israeli authorities and Jewish visitors at a contested holy site in the Old City. “The people will rise up; indeed, we are rising up.”The grisly attack came as the Israeli Army announced that it had arrested Palestinian suspects in connection with the drive-by shooting Thursday night of an Israeli couple in front of their four children as they drove between settlements in the occupied West Bank.Throughout Saturday night there were reports of Palestinians throwing stones, firing shots and otherwise clashing with Israeli forces and individuals in various parts of Jerusalem and the West Bank.“We are facing a difficult, daily, and ongoing struggle,” Israel’s president, Reuven Rivlin, said in a statement near midnight. “We must all work together to restore the sense of security to our citizens across the country.”Israeli officials said that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had called an emergency meeting of top security officials in Tel Aviv on Sunday afternoon, as soon as Mr. Netanyahu returns from New York, where he and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, both spoke ominously about the rising tension and violence last week at the United Nations.The mayor of Jerusalem, Nir Barkat, called on Mr. Netanyahu to “increase sanctions and act decisively against those who incite and encourage terrorism.”Isaac Herzog, leader of the opposition in Parliament, was one of several politicians across the spectrum who blamed Mr. Netanyahu for not doing enough to keep Israelis safe.“His government has shown ineptitude and absolute failure in handling security,” Mr. Herzog wrote in a Facebook post. “The government needs a policy and action and not talk and statements and hollow slogans.”Palestinian militant groups and individuals praised the attack and Mr. Halabi, a student at Al Quds University, as “heroic.”Amiad Arian, an uncle of Mr. Halabi, said in an interview that he had grown “suspicious” of the youth’s recent Facebook posts “because it seemed as though he was saying goodbye to everyone.”Another uncle, Mahmoud Arian, said Mr. Halabi was not affiliated with any political movement but had been deeply aggrieved by the Israeli forces’ recent fatal shooting of a close friend who had been a member of the Islamic Jihad organization.In response to the attack, Islamic Jihad said in a statement: “We bless this operation in Jerusalem and confirm that Israel is paying the price of its aggressive occupation and the resistance will continue and increase.”Hussam Badran, a spokesman for Hamas, said the attack “confirms that the Palestinians would not surrender” to Israeli actions at the holy sites and throughout Jerusalem.Nickolay Mladenov, the United Nations’ special coordinator for Middle East peace, said in a statement that he was “shocked that some find it appropriate to justify such attacks as ‘heroic’ when they are not only appalling but are also dangerous to both Palestinians and Israelis alike.”The police did not immediately identify the victims, but the Israeli news media said the dead were Nehemia Lavi, 41, a rabbi and father of seven who lived in the Old City; and Aharon Benita-Bennett, 22. His wife, also 22, was at an Israeli hospital in serious condition on Saturday night and the couple’s son is the 2-year-old boy who was shot.One woman who was stabbed ran to alert border police officers about 50 yards away, the police said. Soud Abu Sbeih, the Palestinian owner of a supermarket nearby, said the police “began shooting like crazy” and evacuated everyone from the store.The pair of deadly attacks on Israelis followed weeks of intense clashes at the Old City site known to Jews as the Temple Mount and to Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary. Mr. Abbas in his United Nations speech accused Israel of trying to change the status quo at the site, which bars non-Muslim prayer, or to divide it; Mr. Netanyahu denied this in his own speech, and accused Mr. Abbas of inciting the violence.The Israeli military, which had added four battalions of troops to the West Bank after Thursday’s fatal shooting of Eitam and Naama Henkin, on Saturday night released video showing scores of heavily armed soldiers marching through the West Bank city of Nablus. They entered several buildings and took at least two men away in handcuffs, according to the video.Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a military spokesman, refused to say how many people were arrested overall and whether they included the gunmen in Thursday’s attack.Avigdor Lieberman, leader of the ultranationalist Yisrael Beiteinu party and a frequent critic of Mr. Netanyahu, posted a photo from the scene of Saturday night’s attack on Facebook with the caption: “This is what a loss of control and deterrence looks like.”Yair Lapid of the centrist Yesh Atid party told Channel 2 News that “there is no security in the state of Israel today,” adding, “This is a clear accusatory finger at this government.”Ali Jarbawi, a Palestinian analyst, said it was still “too early” to define the growing violence as a third intifada, but said, “This is an S O S to the world: Either intervene, or the situation is likely to get worse.”Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Ramallah, West Bank; Majd Al Waheidi from Gaza City; and Diaa Hadid from Jerusalem.Advertisement