By JANE PERLEZNOV. 4, 2015
BEIJING —  In August 1945, Mao Zedong flew from his mountain redoubt in Yan’an to Chongqing, the headquarters of Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists and China’s sweltering wartime capital. It was to be the last meeting between leaders of the Communists and the Nationalists, the rival factions then contending for control of China.The encounter turned into a seven-week round of talks brokered by the administration of President Harry S. Truman, which hoped to engineer a coalition government for a united China and ensure that the hard-won war against Japan would not degenerate into civil war.The odds against success were high, because the two sides were old enemies. In 1923, the Communists and the Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, formed a united front, then split in 1927. They then fought for a decade, with the Communists retreating to the interior of Shaanxi Province on the Long March.With Japan’s invasion and occupation of Manchuria, Mao and Chiang agreed to a second united front in 1937 to fight the Japanese. It was an uneasy alliance, and during the latter part of World War II, the Americans — sometimes fitfully, sometimes with enthusiasm — tried to bolster the relationship between the Communists and the Kuomintang against the common foe.By the time Mao arrived in Chongqing, after the Allied victory over Japan, there was a slight thaw between Mao and Chiang. And Stalin, still an ally of the United States, had blessed the idea of the meeting.AdvertisementMao was so nervous about flying that he asked the United States ambassador, Patrick J. Hurley, to come pick him up in an American airplane. It was Mao’s first flight, according to a textured account of the encounter between Mao and Chiang in “China 1945,” a recent book on America’s dealings with China that fateful year by Richard Bernstein, a former New York Times bureau chief in Beijing.AdvertisementWhen Mao arrived safely in Chongqing, wearing a military-style jacket and a topee hat — a guerrilla antidote to Ambassador Hurley’s drawing-room bowler hat and bow tie — he was asked what he thought of the airplane.“Very efficient,” Mao replied, according to Mr. Bernstein. Mao was then treated to a ride into town in the embassy’s black Cadillac. (There is no report on how Mao liked the limousine.)Then as now, there was close attention to protocol and who called whom what. Communist propaganda had softened a bit — Mao’s publicity machine was calling Chiang “president” rather than the leader of a “reactionary clique.”The day after Mao landed on Aug. 27, he joined Chiang for dinner. It was the first time the men had met in 20 years, the New York Times correspondent Tillman Durdin reported at the time.Over the next seven weeks, the men held many private meetings, often walking in Chiang’s garden. Aides to both leaders toiled over documents that ambitiously envisioned a new, democratic China, with a national conference that would establish the rules for elections to a national assembly. They also proposed that all Chinese armed forces be unified under Chiang’s command.On Oct. 11, Mao flew back to Yan’an. A joint communiqué by Mao and Chiang was studded with phrases like “peace, democracy, solidarity and unity,” Hannah Pakula wrote in “The Last Empress: Madame Chiang Kai-shek and the Birth of Modern China.” Yet a full settlement proved elusive.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For Mao, though, the visit to Chongqing was worth the time. He had mollified the Americans, whom he wanted to keep on the sideline of the coming struggle with the Kuomintang. His strategy had been to “fight fight, talk talk.”Zhou Enlai, Mao’s partner in negotiations, had coined the expression, Mr. Bernstein said, to describe the Communists’ goal of buying time, deterring aggressive action by the enemy and then, when the time was ripe, going for all-out military action.By the next year, full-fledged civil war had resumed. And by 1949, Chiang and his Kuomintang forces had fled to Taiwan, and Mao declared the establishment of the Communist People’s Republic in Beijing.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: In Heat of August 1945, Mao and Chiang Met for the Last Time .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.