AdvertisementSupported byBy Salman MasoodISLAMABAD, Pakistan — At least 16 people were killed and dozens wounded when a factory undergoing expansion collapsed into rubble Wednesday evening in an industrial park in eastern Pakistan, rescue workers and government officials said. Seventy laborers were pulled out from the debris alive, rescue workers said, but about 100 are still believed to be trapped underneath. Excavators and cranes were used to dig through the rubble and debris to look for survivors.Troops from the army’s engineering corps have also been sent to the factory, near Lahore, to help in the rescue effort, a spokesman for the military said.A state of emergency was declared in Lahore hospitals.The site, run by Rajput Polyester Factory, manufactured plastic shopping bags. The factory is in the Sundar Industrial Estate, a 1,750-acre business park about 28 miles southwest of Lahore, the capital of Punjab Province, officials said. At least 250 workers were employed there.The exact cause of the collapse was not immediately clear, said Ahad Muzaffar Shah, a senior official of Bahria Town, a prominent property and real estate developer whose rescue team also reached the site.“The building was already in a debilitated condition,” Mr. Shah said. He said 54 workers were pulled from the rubble by his team. “We are using dumpers, excavators and loaders for the rescue operation,” he said.Construction work was proceeding on the three-story building to add a fourth story, and there was speculation initially that the roof under construction had caved in, Mr. Shah said.The building had also developed cracks after the earthquake that rattled Pakistan and neighboring Afghanistan last month. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan expressed grief over the episode and directed the provincial authorities to expedite the rescue efforts.The chief minister of Punjab, Shahbaz Sharif, the younger brother of Mr. Sharif, said an inquiry had been ordered into the cause of the collapse.The episode has led to renewed calls for the government to take measures to make sure that buildings do not violate laws and are properly scrutinized by the authorities to ensure security and safety.“Building and construction bylaws are not stringently implemented in the city,” said Sarah N. Ahmed, a building and urban design professional based in Lahore. “A re-evaluation of construction and safety standards is needed not only in Lahore, but all across the country.”“Pakistan is in an active earthquake zone, and rising density and urbanization require responsible development in order to reduce the risk of loss of life,” Ms. Ahmed said.Waqar Gillani contributed reporting from Lahore, Pakistan.Advertisement