By CHOE SANG-HUNNOV. 4, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — Summing up a search that has been underway for more than a decade, a South Korean government commission said on Wednesday that the remains of nearly 2,750 people believed to be Koreans who were forced to work in Japan in the World War II era have been found.Historians in South Korea estimate that at least 1.2 million Koreans were coerced, or sometimes duped, into laboring as part of Japan’s war efforts in Japan, China and elsewhere. They toiled in mines, airfields and factories for their colonial masters, and thousands died under brutal conditions. Their families in Korea were never told about the locations of their remains.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.South Korea and Japan began searching for those remains after Roh Moo-hyun, then the South Korean president, asked Junichiro Koizumi, then the Japanese prime minister, for help in returning them home in 2004.From 2008 to 2010, the remains of 423 South Koreans who served in Japan’s Imperial Army as soldiers or workers were repatriated after they were found in a Japanese temple. But talks on additional repatriations stalled as bilateral relations deteriorated over disputes rooted in Japan’s rule of Korea from 1910 to 1945, especially over “comfort women” — Korean and other Asian women forced or lured into being sex slaves for Japanese soldiers.On Wednesday, the South Korean commission set up in 2004 to investigate Japan’s forced recruitment of Korean laborers said that 2,745 sets of remains believed to belong to Korean workers have been discovered in 340 sites across Japan. The number could increase as the search continues, commission officials said.So far, officials said, they have found surviving relatives for only 153 sets of remains.Accusations of forced labor during Japanese colonial rule are among the issues that have contributed to growing tensions between the two countries. South Korean courts recently ordered Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and other Japanese companies to compensate dozens of former Korean workers for involuntary labor. About 300 Japanese companies still in operation are believed to have used such workers, South Korean officials said.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; South Korea: Wartime Remains Found.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.