By KAREEM FAHIMNOV. 4, 2015
Footage shows the damaged walls of a police club in northern Sinai, Egypt, where at least four police officers were killed.CAIRO — At least four police officers were killed on Wednesday morning when a suicide bomber detonated an explosives-packed vehicle next to a police club in northern Sinai, according to the Egyptian state news media. The Islamic State’s local affiliate, called Sinai Province, claimed responsibility for the bombing in a statement distributed on social media accounts.The militant group said in the statement that the attack, in the northern Sinai town of El Arish, was in retaliation for the government arrests of women from Sinai, though the statement did not provide details.At least five civilians were wounded in the attack, according to medical sources cited by Al Ahram, the leading state newspaper.The bombing was the latest evidence of the resilience of Egypt’s jihadist insurgency in northern Sinai, which has killed hundreds of police officers and soldiers in years of attacks on the government. The assaults have continued despite repeated statements by Egyptian officials, including President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, that the insurgency has been brought to heel.This week, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for bringing down a Russian charter flight in Sinai on Saturday, almost 50 miles south of El Arish, killing all 224 people aboard. Investigators have not said what caused the crash, and the Islamic State has yet to provide any evidence for its claim. But the statement itself appeared to serve as a warning that the Islamic State was willing to countenance the mass killing of civilians, after years of focusing most of its attacks on the government.Mr. Sisi dismissed the militants’ claim as “propaganda” in an interview with the BBC this week. “Believe me, the situation in Sinai, especially in this limited area, is under our full control,” he said. But the crash has threatened the status of Sharm el Sheikh, the resort city at the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula and one of the few remaining brights spots in Egypt’s tourism industry.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Middle East; Egypt: Bombing Kills Police Officers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.