By KIT GILLET and PALKO KARASZNOV. 4, 2015
Prime Minister Victor Ponta of Romania said he is resigning in the wake of public discontent after a fire killed 32 people in a Bucharest nightclub.BUCHAREST, Romania — Huge protests, some of the largest since the fall of communism, toppled the government of Romania on Wednesday, five days after a fire at a nightclub killed 32 people and set off a wave of outrage over corruption and ineptitude.Prime Minister Victor Ponta — who was already under pressure, having been indicted this year on charges of forgery, money laundering and tax evasion — said he was bowing to the will of the more than 20,000 demonstrators who had taken to the streets of Bucharest on Tuesday night to demand his ouster.“I have the obligation to acknowledge that there is legitimate anger in society,” Mr. Ponta, 43, said in a statement. “In my years as a politician, I put up a fight in any battle with political opponents. However, I won’t put up a fight against the people.”It was a startling and sudden fall from power for Mr. Ponta, who became prime minister in May 2012, and it was reminiscent of the uprising that overthrew the government of Ukraine last year. It was also a vivid reminder of Romania’s awkward fit in the European Union, which it joined, with Bulgaria, in 2007 despite concerns about corruption and the rule of law.AdvertisementThe communist era in Romania ended violently in 1989 with the execution of President Nicolae Ceausescu. Despite the 25 years that have passed, many say they feel that the governing elite has not changed sufficiently, and that corruption and nepotism still rule the day.Advertisement“Romanians came out of the 1989 revolution thinking they would finally get a government that was worthy of them,” said Katherine Verdery, an anthropologist at the City University of New York Graduate Center who studies Romania. “What they got was second-tier communist apparatchiks.”Anger at that elite may have reached an inflection point.The protesters Tuesday accused the government of being too lax in the granting of permits and of failing to adequately inspect public venues. Some in the crowd carried signs that stated, “Corruption Kills.”They demanded the ouster not only of Mr. Ponta but also of Gabriel Oprea, the deputy prime minister, and Cristian Popescu Piedone, the mayor of the Bucharest district where the nightclub is; he also stepped down on Wednesday.President Klaus Iohannis — who won a surprise victory over Mr. Ponta in an election a year ago, drawing strong support from Romanians working abroad in countries like Italy and Spain — said he would convene a gathering of the country’s political parties on Thursday in an attempt to form a new government.Liviu Dragnea, the leader of Mr. Ponta’s Social Democratic Party, said its priority was “to preserve stability” and acknowledged that the next prime minister might not come from the party’s ranks.Mr. Iohannis, once the leader of the opposition National Liberal Party, a former mayor of Sibiu and a member of Romania’s ethnic German minority, had praised the protesters, writing on Facebook on Tuesday night: “It is a street movement that comes from the desire of people to have their condition and dignity respected. I understood that they ask and expect, rightly so, for someone to assume political responsibility.”Mr. Ponta was indicted in July on charges that include forgery, money laundering and being an accessory to tax evasion while he was working as a lawyer in 2007 and 2008. He had resisted calls to step down, although he did surrender his position as the leader of the Social Democratic Party.AdvertisementMr. Ponta’s time in office is likely to be viewed unfavorably. It was marked by controversies, including a fight with Mr. Iohannis’s predecessor as president, Traian Basescu; allegations that Mr. Ponta had plagiarized an academic thesis; and now the criminal charges.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Romania is scheduled to hold parliamentary elections in December 2016, but some are now predicting that they could be held as early as the spring, with an interim cabinet in place until then.“I think it is likely that early elections will happen in the spring, with maybe the head of the central bank, Mugur Isarescu, acting as caretaker prime minister until then,” said Cristian Ghinea, director of the Romanian Center for European Policies, a research group.Others disagree, suggesting that Parliament would see out its full term, with a cabinet led by either a caretaker or a Social Democrat minority coalition.Adrian Moraru, deputy director of the Institute for Public Policy in Bucharest, said he thought early elections were unlikely. “It would be a first for Romania,” he said, “but then this is the first time a prime minister has resigned due to street protests.”Alina Inayeh, an analyst in Bucharest for the German Marshall Fund of the United States, said the resignation was a response to popular outrage, but was also politically convenient for Mr. Ponta. “He’d put himself in a position without any way of exiting honorably,” she said in a phone interview. “By resigning today, he makes it look like an honorable and statesmanlike decision, taking responsibility for what happened in the nightclub. It’s a way of saving face.”Alina Mungiu-Pippidi, a political scientist, said on the website of the newspaper Romania Libera that the protests were an opportunity to end the “administrative incompetence and the state of perpetual illegality in which we live.”Another commentator, Stela Giurgeanu, wrote on the blog of Dilema Veche, a literary magazine, “To pessimists who say that nothing will change in this country and that those responsible for this and other tragedies will escape justice, I can say right away that the calm of those who took to the streets, peaceful and grieving, is in fact the calm before the storm.”In 2012, the European Commission, the executive arm of the European Union, announced that it would increase monitoring of Romania because of alarm about the country’s insufficient commitment to democratic values.Romania and Bulgaria had joined the bloc on the condition that they submit to regular reviews because of concerns about corruption and organized crime.Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 5 about the collapse of the Romanian government after a nightclub fire that killed 32 and set off a wave of protests over corruption misidentified the event that a Romanian political scientist said in an op-ed article was an opportunity to end the “administrative incompetence and the state of perpetual illegality in which we live.” The comments, by Alina Mungiu-Pippidi, referred to the protests, not to the resignation of Prime Minister Victor Ponta.Kit Gillet reported from Bucharest, and Palko Karasz from London. Sewell Chan contributed reporting from London.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 5, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Yielding to Outcry Over Corruption, Romanian Prime Minister Steps Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.