Just 13 of the 6,000 characters in the communiqué issued by the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee last month referred to pensions. But in a country where nearly 40 percent of the population is expected to be 60 or older by 2050, that terse mention contained one of the document’s most important policy statements.“We will achieve a basic pension for all employees nationally,” said the communiqué, issued after 18th Central Committee’s Fifth Plenum, which concluded last month.China already provides pensions for many of its older citizens, but the system is fragmented and under severe strain. Longer life spans and four decades of the “one child” policy, which was lifted in another significant policy statement from the plenum, have swollen the ranks of retirees while shrinking the number of working-age adults available to support them. The pensions push is part of a broader effort to provide “old-age insurance” to all Chinese, the communiqué said. Although it did not provide details, it said this would include:“Building a fairer and more sustainable social welfare system.Implementing plans for every person to take part in social insurance.Diverting capital from state-owned enterprises to social security funds.Offering all urban and rural residents insurance for serious illness.”(Health insurance has been significantly expanded in recent years, but it often does not adequately cover serious illnesses, meaning families must still save for such calamities.)In the current pension structure, there are two main categories:Broadly, one is for employees of urban enterprises and the other is more general, covering both rural and urban residents. Migrant workers in cities, of whom there are more than 200 million, who want to switch from the urban system back to their rural hometown system have encountered difficulties or even lost the money paid into their urban pension fund, though revisions to the rules in 2014 tried to improve that.The government has embarked on a long-term plan to “merge the tracks” of these systems to avoid this problem, a point underlined by the plenum’s statement that it would achieve it “nationally.”In theory, about 800 million of China’s 1.3 billion people receive or are eligible for a pension. Pensions for nonstate employees vary widely, as high as 3,000 renminbi, or $480, a month in Beijing to just 80 renminbi for farmers in some areas. Civil servants’ pensions are generally higher than those of nonstate employees.But expanding social security coverage will require more money. By 2050, China will have a huge proportion of the world’s retirees by 2050, according to the minister of human resources and social security, Yin Weimin, not just because of its rapidly aging population but because it sets some of the world’s lowest retirement ages.This week, there was another statement of intent from the very top, when Xinhua, the state news agency, issued a brief report that the plenum had “suggested” raising retirement ages.Currently, Chinese women retire at 50 or 55 and men at 55 or 60, depending on whether they are blue- or white-collar workers, with the former retiring earlier. The retirement age is lower for women because they are expected to care for grandchildren and older family members.But in China, as in other countries, retirement age is a delicate issue; many people are unhappy at the suggestion that they might have to work longer to help pay for the government’s expanding pension plans.Some comments on the Xinhua article demonstrated that sentiment.“I firmly oppose this!” a user with the handle Maternal Uncle 2014 wrote.“Please don’t mess lightly with the rules of the game” another, identified as chonglang988, wrote.Critics may have time to adjust. The plenum said any revisions to the retirement schedule would happen “progressively.”No major changes are expected before 2017. At that point, the retirement age may be raised by several months each year, Mr. Yin, the human resources minister, said this year.Fully carrying out the revision may wait until 2022, he said. He did not mention what the final retirement age would be, but noted that in most countries people do not qualify for a pension until 65 or 67.Many expect China to settle for 65, for both men and women.Women’s rights advocates have long argued that the earlier retirement age disadvantages women, by reducing the income they can earn over their working lives as well as their pensions.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.