By LIAM STACKNOV. 6, 2015
A popular British retailer said it would designate a strip of sidewalk in front of its Liverpool store specifically for fast walkers, that uniquely urban breed of pedestrians who silently fume over the ambling gaits of those in front of them.The one-week experiment, which began Monday, is a marketing ploy by the retailer, Argos. But it has awakened the imaginations of many disgruntled fast walkers, leading some to express the hope on social media that fast lanes would pop up in their cities, too.So, could this be the first volley in the liberation of speedy pedestrians? Research funded by Argos would seem to suggest that (in Britain, at least) quite a few people are fed up.But Liverpudlians are not alone in their sidewalk distress. Complaining about gawking tourists and pedestrians who saunter down the street is practically a rite of passage for New Yorkers (don’t get them started on Times Square), and some have sarcastically taken matters into their own hands.AdvertisementIn July, an East Village blog drew attention to an official-looking notice from the nonexistent “New York City Department of Pedestrian Etiquette” that was found in the neighborhood. It warned visitors and new arrivals that they would be kicked out of the city unless they passed a class on the rules of the sidewalk.In 2013, Cory Bortnicker, a writer and producer in New York, created a line of coarsely worded “Pedestrian Penalty Cards” to call out sidewalk offenders guilty of sins like standing on the wrong side of an escalator or being part of an Italian tour group.Advertisement“I think it is a great idea,” Mr. Bortnicker said of Liverpool’s fast lane. He called it “a sensible solution,” but also suggested that it might be in fast walkers’ best interest to manage their frustration, “even if for their own cardiovascular health.”“Slow walkers live on a different planet than fast walkers,” he said. “Moving fast is not in their DNA. They are lucky, and I wish that I were one.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Research has shown that city dwellers really do walk more quickly than people in suburban or rural areas. Social scientists have reached no consensus about why that may be. One theory involves a version of the fight-or-flight mechanism (crowded spaces provoke people to navigate them more quickly), and another argues for an innate sense among urbanites that time equals money and slow walkers equal added time.Mr. Bortnicker said his attitude toward slow walkers had “softened quite a bit” in the two years since he created his penalty cards. He explained that “there is no cure for road rage or sidewalk rage except for thinking about the things you can control and the things you can’t.”Where you live in the city may also play a role, he said. A less crowded neighborhood could translate into less time spent sharing the sidewalk with pedestrians who slowly plod from place to place.“Also I moved from Manhattan,” he said. “That helped a lot. I just moved to Astoria, Queens.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.