By WAQAR GILLANINOV. 5, 2015
LAHORE, Pakistan —  Rescue workers on Thursday intensified their search for survivors in the collapse of a factory near Lahore the day before after pulling out 108 survivors over two days, Pakistani officials said.By Thursday evening, the confirmed death toll was 20, and it was unclear how many might still be trapped in the factory, which made plastic bags.Officials initially said that 200 people had been inside when the building collapsed toward the end of the day shift, though on Thursday some said that number may end up lower.There was still no clarity on what caused the collapse of the multistory building, and officials said the focus, for now, was on the rescue operation.AdvertisementArshad Zia, chief of the rescue operation, said that at least 400 rescue workers were involved, and that efforts had been intensified as time was running out to find survivors.Advertisement“After 24 hours, the chances of workers being alive seem less, and that is why we have increased the speed of rescue operation,” Mr. Zia said.The factory, in a business park on the outskirts of Lahore, was built in 2012. Even as officials refused to speculate on the cause of the collapse, some reports cited complaints of safety and building code violations.As rescue workers, aided by excavators and cranes, rummaged through the rubble, several anxious relatives of those still missing stood at the site Thursday afternoon, hoping to learn about their loved ones.“My 17-year-old son, Muhammad Naveed, was in the factory when it collapsed, and we have not heard about his fate for the past 18 hours,” said Khalil Ahmed, his eyes filled with tears.Muhammad Ali, who worked at the factory as a junior electrician on the night shift, said many of his friends were trapped under the rubble and there had been no news about them.“I was coming to the factory for duty when I received a phone call from a friend that the building has collapsed,” Mr. Ali said. “I was frozen for a few moments.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said the building had been damaged in the magnitude 7.5 earthquake that shook Pakistan and Afghanistan last month. “The pillars of the buildings had developed cracks after the recent earthquake, and many workers had been complaining to the owner,” Mr. Ali said. “But he did not care.”The owner, Rana Ashraf, was among the dead, officials said.Muhammad Mushtaq, a 28-year-old worker who witnessed the collapse, said he was working outside the main entrance of the factory when suddenly the whole building fell.Advertisement“I heard voices of many trapped workers, and a few moments later rescue vehicles came in,” he said.He said the majority of the workers were young men 15 to 24, and they were mostly from farther-out districts of Punjab Province, with many living or sleeping in the factory.Muhammad Imran, a 15-year-old worker who was being treated for a broken leg at Sharif Medical City Hospital in Lahore, said he had been on his way to the cafeteria to have tea when the building collapsed.His family lives far away, and he said the factory owner was able to get cheaper labor — Mr. Imran said he made around $120 a month — by offering free lodging to workers.The factory collapse on Wednesday was the second such disaster in Lahore in recent months: In September, the roof of a garment factory collapsed, killing four workers.Human rights activists accused the government of negligence in enforcing safety and construction codes.“Workers are being killed for their work,” said Khalid Mahmood, a labor rights activist based in Lahore.“These incidents are happening because there is no factory inspection being done in real terms all over Pakistan. There is no political will in government to implement factory inspection and other labor laws.”Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.A version of this article appears in print on November 6, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: 20 Dead in Collapse of Factory in Pakistan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.