AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick BoehlerOn Sunday, more than 30 million voters across Myanmar can cast their ballots in the country’s first relatively free elections in 25 years. The nationwide vote is a milestone in the Southeast Asian nation’s transformation from isolated military dictatorship to a more open society, seeking to attract foreign investment and tourists.Moreover, it will be a crucial test of the popularity of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel laureate and democracy icon who is believed to be the country’s most popular politician. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, who was held under house arrest for 15 years during military rule, hopes a strong victory at the polls could finally give her party political power even though she is barred from becoming president.Here is a brief guide to some of the ins and outs of the election.Why is this election important?In the last national election, in May 1990, voters’ overwhelming preference for the National League for Democracy, the opposition party led by Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, was followed by a brutal crackdown and two decades of harsh military rule. Now, her party is running against representatives of the former military junta.The military-aligned party, the Union Solidarity and Development Party led by President Thein Sein, has campaigned on its record of running the government the last five years and a promise to guarantee stability.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s campaign has centered on strengthening the rule of law.The new government will inherit immense problems: sectarian violence, fighting with ethnic militias, rampant cronyism and corruption, and inadequate infrastructure and financial institutions to attract foreign investment. Some parts of the country are controlled by ethnic militias, and several of Myanmar’s leading exports, including jade, opium and timber, have been tied to conflict, crime and corruption.Why can’t Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi become president?Myanmar’s military rulers, concerned that Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s popularity could threaten their hold on power, introduced a new Constitution in 2008 that effectively bars her from holding the highest offices in the country. Article 59, believed to have been written with her in mind, says that anyone married to a foreign citizen or whose children are foreigners cannot become president or vice president. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi was married to the British historian Michael Aris, who died in 1999. Her two sons are British citizens.But Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has said that if her party wins, she will run the government.How does the election work?Voters will choose three-quarters of the representatives to the country’s two houses of Parliament. The remainder will be appointed by the armed forces. The two houses of Parliament and the military then each will nominate one candidate for the presidency. The two houses will hold a joint vote to choose the president. The runners-up will serve as vice presidents. After the election, there will probably be weeks of negotiations among the leading parties and the military before the president is chosen.How much influence does the military have?The military appoints a quarter of all lawmakers, one of the three nominees for president, the powerful home minister, the defense minister and the minister of border affairs. U Tin Aye, the chairman of the election commission, which oversees the election process, is a former general and lawmaker of the ruling, military-aligned party. The military’s commander in chief, Senior Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, reportedly has called on soldiers and their families to vote for the “correct” candidates, presumably referring to those from the ruling party.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has said that if her party wins, it would begin the process of changing the Constitution, hoping to make her eligible to become president and strip the military of its political powers. The current Constitution gives the military a veto over proposed amendments.There have been signs of cracks within the military-backed ruling party. In August, the party ousted its chairman, Thura Shwe Mann, who had formed an alliance with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi.Will Myanmar’s ethnic minorities be able to vote?Hundreds of thousands of Rohingya, a mostly Muslim ethnic minority, have been excluded from voter lists this year amid a wider government-led effort to disenfranchise them. Ethnic militias controlling large swaths of territory near Myanmar’s eastern border with China and northern Thailand rejected a last-minute cease-fire agreement in October. Voters in some areas under their control will not be able to vote.President Thein Sein A former general who as president oversaw the country’s transition to civilian rule starting in 2010. His government has lifted restrictions on the media, but it has also persecuted dissidents and disenfranchised the Rohingya ethnic minority. He signed a cease-fire agreement with some ethnic militias last month. He is not running as a candidate in the current elections, and his future political plans remain unclear.Aung San Suu Kyi, opposition leader The daughter of Myanmar’s independence hero Aung San leads the opposition party, the National League for Democracy. She is widely believed to be the most popular politician in Myanmar, but the Constitution bars her from running for president.Min Aung Hlaing, commander in chief of the militaryHe appoints a quarter of Myanmar’s lawmakers. His influence reaches into all branches of the government and the state security apparatus. Through its trading companies, the military is estimated to generate billions of dollars in income annually.Ashin Wirathu, Buddhist nationalist leader The Buddhist monk’s speeches have given him a strong following across the Burmese heartland. In his sermons, he has called for the expulsion of the Rohingya ethnic minority. Both the opposition and the ruling party sought his endorsement.OpinionDelphine SchrankOpinionThe Editorial BoardOpinionU Shwe MaungAdvertisement