AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas FullerKWUN CHAN KONE, Myanmar — This village at the end of a long, bumpy dirt road in the Irrawaddy Delta would seem a natural stronghold for the former generals who rule Myanmar.The villagers, mostly rice farmers, are overwhelmingly Buddhist and undereducated, and they live in a society still shaped by the traditional hierarchies of the preindustrial Burmese countryside.The local political boss is the national chairman of the military-backed ruling party. During a campaign stop here last week, he promised to pave the road and build a health clinic. He met with the village’s Buddhist abbot and even gave him a crimson robe.The abbot, Ashin Zawtika, was unimpressed.“If their actions matched their words, we would all be rich,” he said.Like many farmers here, he said he favored the opposition, the National League for Democracy, led by Myanmar’s democracy hero, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.“We are not allowed to be involved in politics,” he said of himself and his fellow monks. “But to be honest, we prefer the N.L.D.”In an impoverished country without a tradition of opinion polls, there is no way to reliably predict the outcome of Sunday’s election. Five years after the end of the brutal military dictatorship here, the military remains powerful, not only controlling the current government but also retaining the power to appoint a quarter of the seats in Parliament and the heads of several key ministries.But if this village is any guide, the country’s heart remains with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, whose rallies across Myanmar have been drawing frenzied crowds. Such outpourings suggest that her backing goes well beyond the Internet-connected city dwellers who have plastered their support for her on their Facebook pages and the celebrities who have very publicly broadcast their affection.The parliamentary election is the first time in a generation that the opposition has the opportunity to wrest power from the military, now represented by former generals who shed their uniforms to run the nominally civilian government. In a region where democratic rule is in retreat or under threat, the election is being closely watched from Beijing, the country’s former close ally, to Washington, where the administration has promoted its role in Myanmar’s relatively peaceful if still unsure transition to democracy.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, brimming with optimism and confidence at a news conference at her home in Yangon on Thursday, made forceful comments about her postelection plans.Although the Constitution bars her from becoming president, she left no doubt about who would be in charge. “I will be above the president,” she said, adding that she had “already made plans” to run the government if her party wins a majority.Even though she also pledged to build a “government of national reconciliation” if her party won, analysts said her plan to bypass the Constitution and install what some have described as a proxy presidency would rankle the powerful military.She called the Constitution, written by the military, “very silly,” and promised to begin the process of amending it in the new Parliament.Although she says she harbors no malice toward the military, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has for the past quarter-century been its main antagonist. Her years of house arrest under military rule only burnished her image as the nation’s icon of democracy.Her current campaign appears to be carrying over the momentum of a by-election three years ago, when her party even swept all four seats in the country’s capital, Naypyidaw, whose constituents are civil servants and ex-soldiers.To counter her popularity, the ruling party has sought to harness nationalist feelings and to position itself as the defender of Buddhism in the face of external threats by Muslims along the country’s border with Bangladesh. Leading members of the ruling party have appeared at rallies sponsored by a shadowy Buddhist organization, Ma Ba Tha, which is led by Buddhist monks who are hostile to the country’s Muslim minority and have been critical of Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi.The government passed a series of laws this year targeting Muslims that would, among other provisions, make it more difficult for Buddhist women to marry Muslim men. A change in voting laws this year disenfranchised hundreds of thousands of Muslims.Interfaith activists have warned that villages like Kwun Chan Kone, a five-hour drive from Myanmar’s largest city, Yangon, are vulnerable to a nationalist, anti-Islamic message because of their relative isolation and because local officials and monks hold sway in what is still a somewhat feudal and hierarchal culture.Campaigners for the ruling party handed out pamphlets that warned of a “foreign invasion” and of Buddhism’s being “destroyed.”“If the national religion is destroyed or fades away, we will not have a chance to rebuild it,” one pamphlet said. A parade of tractors carried loudspeakers with songs vowing to protect “race and religion.”Yet in this village and surrounding ones, the Buddhist nationalist message appears to have backfired.The abbot, Ashin Zawtika, said he had initially been open to the efforts by Ma Ba Tha to promote and protect Buddhism. “But when they became involved in politics, we didn’t trust them anymore,” he said. “They are manipulating the issues so that they can win.”The abbot of a monastery in a neighboring village received a pile of pamphlets but refused to distribute them, a villager said.U Aye Cho, a betel-nut seller who lives in an adjacent district, helped open a donation center for Ma Ba Tha earlier this year, but he and his friends are now critical of the organization. “They are supporting one side,” he said. “They went too far. It wasn’t successful because it was too obvious.”Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi said on Thursday that any effort to use religion for political purposes was unconstitutional, and she threatened to lodge complaints with the election commission.But in yet another example of the vast reach of military influence, the head of the election commission is a former military officer who has publicly expressed his loyalty to both the military and the ruling party.No matter how the vote turns out, such institutionalized partiality has led Human Rights Watch to describe the election as “fundamentally flawed.”“The sight of mass campaign rallies is a positive sign, but they don’t make up for an electoral system that systematically favors one party over others,” said Brad Adams, Asia director at Human Rights Watch. “Just because Burma’s political parties have no choice but to play against a stacked deck doesn’t mean the deck isn’t stacked.”Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi left open the possibility on Thursday that she would contest the fairness of the election, saying the process had already been “less than free and fair.”The farmers here are watching attentively and waiting to see what happens next.Aung San Lwin, a farmhand who earns $2 a day working in the rice fields, said he was still making up his mind about whom to vote for.“But we wonder,” he said. “If Daw Suu wins, will the government transfer power to her?”OpinionDelphine SchrankOpinionU Shwe MaungAdvertisement