AdvertisementSupported byVilla Baviera Journal9 PhotosView Slide Show ›Tomas Munita for The New York TimesBy Pascale BonnefoyVILLA BAVIERA, Chile — Claudio Pacheco took his family on an outing recently to Villa Baviera, a picturesque farming community tucked away in the foothills of the Andes. They ate a variety of German dishes and won a live deer in a raffle.And like other visitors, they spent much of the day wandering some of Villa Baviera’s 35,000 acres of forests, farmland and rolling hills — neatly trimmed lands once used to torture, kill and bury political prisoners, amass weapons and terrorize a community.Villa Baviera, once home to a deeply secretive German sect whose former leader was convicted of sexually abusing young boys and was under investigation for collaborating with the regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, has reinvented itself as a tourist attraction in a bid to stay alive after its leader fled the country and the colony fell into financial disarray.The community, which at its peak in the 1960s and ’70s had about 300 members, has turned former workshops where devotees labored without pay into a hotel. The communal dining hall, one of the few places where parents in the colony could glimpse the children who had been stripped away from them, is now a public restaurant. It celebrates Oktoberfest, and a small store sells souvenirs and homemade pastries and sausages.A tourism complex has a small lagoon with paddle boats, a pool, hot tubs and bicycles for rent. Services include wedding ceremonies and so-called historical tours through the former leader’s bedroom, where he abused boys, and the hospital, where followers were drugged and tortured.“I come here a lot; I love the Germans,” said Mr. Pacheco, a 64-year-old farmer from a nearby town. “I buy plants and eat at their restaurant. Although I had heard rumors, I learned what had happened here only a few years ago.”There has long been interest in Chile about what happened under the watchtowers of Villa Baviera while the sect’s leader, Paul Schäfer, ruled the community. Disturbing details of what went on here have trickled out since the 1960s, and continue to do so. In October, a classified police intelligence report detailing what detectives found during raids on the colony more than a decade ago was released and published by a human rights group.Mr. Schäfer, an evangelical German preacher, fled to Chile in 1961 to evade prosecution over charges related to sodomizing children. Hundreds of his followers came with him, and they created a colony here, formerly called Colonia Dignidad, that would build a self-sustainable agricultural community and provide charity to the local population.But inside these grounds, Mr. Schäfer exerted complete control over the lives, bodies and minds of his followers, who worked under slavelike conditions and were subdued through manipulation, beatings, electroshocks and drugs, according to the testimonies of colony members.Couples were not allowed to live together, and children were separated from their parents and raised in communal care. Only members of the leadership had access to television or any media. Barbed wire and guard towers sealed the residents in, and hidden cameras and microphones recorded them at all hours.General Pinochet’s secret intelligence agency brought dissidents to the colony to be tortured in the 1970s, according to Chile’s truth commission. Some were executed and secretly buried here, and, according to court testimony, their bodies were later exhumed, incinerated and dumped into a river.The general and other officers also spent weekend getaways at Colonia Dignidad.Over the decades, various Chilean governments gave the colony tax breaks for being a charitable organization and turned a blind eye when escapees reported abuses.But the colony’s leaders eventually lost their protection. Mr. Schäfer fled Chile in 1997 and went into hiding in Argentina, wanted for crimes related to child abuse, tax fraud, weapons production, forced labor and collaboration in the torture and disappearance of prisoners.He was captured in 2005 and died in a maximum-security prison in Santiago in 2010 while serving a 20-year sentence for sexually abusing minors. Most members of his inner circle were imprisoned three years later.After his death, the community voted: Would they bury him in their cemetery? They decided not to. The man they had worshiped had stolen their lives.Today, Villa Baviera is a shadow of what it was. Its economic strength is gone, and so is half its population. Most young adults left for Germany or other parts of Chile. The restaurant, hotel and farmland rely on workers from nearby towns.“When Schäfer’s dictatorship ended, we fell into chaos,” said Thomas Schnellenkamp, 46, a son of a jailed former leader. “We learned about what had happened here, people started blaming each other and no one trusted anyone anymore. There was a lot of frustration, and many left.”But it was also an opportunity for change, as some members of the younger generation left for a university education and the few who returned, including Mr. Schnellenkamp, took the reins of the sect’s corporate holding.The community that remains is struggling to stay afloat in the face of huge debt, because of an aging population, subsidized housing and services, poor investments and — in a significant change from the past — the need to pay workers. A poultry farm that produces 32,000 eggs a day is its major source of income. The community now hopes that tourism will pay off.In addition to exploring hiking trails in pristine woods and enjoying romantic moments by reservoirs, tourists can see — just doors down from the hotel’s guest rooms — the sleeping quarters of armed guards with dogs and a communications center, outfitted with an emergency fire pole, that controlled all movement inside the colony.Two old potato warehouses also hide secrets: In one, investigators discovered a large cache of weapons in 2005, while the other was used in the 1970s to torture political prisoners of the Pinochet dictatorship.Colony members wrestle with being regarded by outsiders as victimizers, when they were victims themselves. The second-generation leaders stress that they are not responsible for their parents’ crimes, but to many Chileans, they still represent the oppressive sect into which they were born.Within the community, there is a tug of war between appeasing older residents, many of whom continue to resist the changes, and forging a new future and assimilating into Chilean society.Some accuse the former leaders in prison of maintaining power.“They exert a moral influence over the community and their children who run it,” said Winfried Hempel, who fled the sect in 1997 when she was 20. “They maintain a psychological siege on people there.”But even for tourists, it is impossible to ignore Villa Baviera’s dark past. Along the winding roads, where bright yellow fields of rapeseed contrast with the green spring crops of wheat and oat, are huge holes in the ground, excavations where last November investigators searched for evidence of criminal activity. Climbing the Doradillo hill, one can see two smaller holes where dissidents were believed to have been buried in the 1970s.One of those victims may have been Claudio Escanilla, a 17-year-old student from the nearby city of Parral who disappeared in Colonia Dignidad.“I hope they find a button, a tooth, anything,” said his sister, María Cristina Escanilla, who along with a group of activists and victims recently held a memorial ceremony at the colony.Ms. Escanilla also questioned the colony’s new industry. “How can they have tourism where so many have been killed?” she asked.Although a few colony leaders are trying to set up a museum to honor the victims of Mr. Schäfer and General Pinochet, human rights groups have requested that certain places in Villa Baviera be preserved as memorials, and they continue to hold protests demanding answers.“We’ve told the families of the disappeared that we suffer for their loss, and we’ve let them come in to hold their ceremonies,” said Dorotea Baar, one of the sect’s original members. “But we don’t know anything, and we are victims, too.”Advertisement