AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressLAGOS, Nigeria — Multiple bomb blasts in two locations on the outskirts of the Nigerian capital, Abuja, killed at least 15 people, the National Emergency Management Agency said Saturday.The explosions on Friday night were in Nyanya and Kuje, both satellite towns of Abuja, an agency spokesman, Sani Datti, said in a statement. Mr. Datti said 13 people died in the blast in Kuje and two in Nyanya. At least 41 people were wounded, he said.No group has claimed responsibility, but the attack is similar to others carried out by Boko Haram, a Nigerian Islamist extremist group. Boko Haram’s fighters have been carrying out attacks mostly in the northeast but have occasionally attacked other towns.Violence from Boko Haram’s six-year insurgency has killed nearly 20,000 people and displaced 1.4 million from their homes. At least 1,000 people have been killed since President Muhammadu Buhari took office in May this year with the promise of wiping out the insurgents.Four suicide bombers killed at least 10 people on Thursday in Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State, the army said. No group claimed responsibility but Nigerian security forces blamed Boko Haram, which is based in the area.At least 39 others were wounded in the attack, in the Sareji neighborhood of Maiduguri, said a military spokesman, Col. Sani Kukasheka Usman.The Nigerian military on Thursday also accused Boko Haram of poisoning water sources in northeastern Nigeria. Colonel Usman said that some cattle had died after drinking the poisoned water.In a separate episode, residents say five people were killed Thursday by gunmen suspected of being Boko Haram militants in Kirchinga, a village in Adamawa State, which borders the Sambisa forest, a Boko Haram hide-out.Ahmad Musa, who fled the attack on his village, said militants shot indiscriminately, forcing residents to hide in nearby bushes to escape the onslaught.Mr. Buhari said Thursday that his leadership had taken the battle to the insurgents and severely weakened their logistical and infrastructural capabilities.“That they are resorting to shameless attacks on soft targets,” he said, “is indicative of their cowardice and desperation.” Advertisement