
NOV. 6, 2015

The United States, Britain and Russia appeared to be slowly moving toward a consensus on Friday that the crash of a Russian plane in the Sinai Peninsula was an act of terrorism most likely caused by a bomb aboard the aircraft. Egypt has dismissed terrorism as a cause in the crash, but if terrorism were the cause, the crash on Oct. 31 would not be the first time that a passenger jet was ripped out of the sky by an onboard explosive. Bombs have successfully brought down planes in a number of high profile acts of terrorism since the 1980s, while several other plots were disrupted before they could be brought to fruition. Here are a few examples of bombings that have succeeded in downing passengers jets, and some that have that were stopped before they caused damage. Two powerful bombs concealed inside cargo packages shipped from Yemen and destined for the United States were discovered in October 2010 at the Dubai airport and in a UPS cargo plane in England. The bombs were hidden in a desktop printer and an ink cartridge.  A passenger aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 253, flying from Amsterdam to Detroit, failed in an attempt to detonate plastic explosives concealed in his underwear. The man convicted in the bombing, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, was restrained by other passengers. The attempt became known as the Christmas Day bomb plot. An attempt to blow up several airplanes flying over the Atlantic Ocean was thwarted by the authorities in Britain who arrested dozens of people before the plot could be carried out. The men arrested in the plot, all British-born, had planned to carry liquids in drink bottles and combine them into explosive cocktails aboard as many as 10 flights.While traveling from Paris to Miami on American Airlines Flight 63, Richard Reid attempted to detonate plastic explosives concealed in his shoes. He was tackled by passengers and crew members and was tied to his seat after he was seen lighting two matches and appearing to try to detonate the explosives during the flight. Mr. Reid, the so-called shoe bomber, is in prison serving a life sentence without parole. Pan Am Flight 103 blew up over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing all 259 passengers and crew members aboard, as well as 11 people on the ground. A three-year investigation pointed at the involvement of Libyan intelligence officers. One of them, Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi, was handed over by the regime of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who admitted responsibility for the attack and paid compensation to families of the victims.  Air India Flight 182, a Boeing 747 flying from Canada to India, was destroyed by a bomb that detonated off the Irish coast. Indian officials quickly suspected that a bomb was the cause of the accident. The bombing was the deadliest terror attack involving a commercial airplane until the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.Advertisement