By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISNOV. 6, 2015
WASHINGTON —  Democratic members of Congress felt the wrath of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and pro-Israel groups almost immediately after announcing their support for the nuclear deal with Iran.They were left off the guest list of the annual Rosh Hashana reception at the Israeli Embassy in Washington, traditionally a bipartisan affair. Senator Chris Coons of Delaware was nearly disinvited by the American Israel Public Affairs Committee from a gathering with wealthy donors in New York City — a result, the group told members, of his “disappointing decision on the Iran vote.” Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, who is facing an expensive re-election campaign in 2016, had fund-raisers around the country canceled by pro-Israel supporters.Now Mr. Netanyahu, who is to visit Washington on Monday for his first meeting with President Obama since the vote on the Iran deal, is trying to heal the deep wounds. But both sides are eyeing each other warily, nursing raw feelings and fearing that the bipartisanship that is part of the bond between the United States and Israel may still be at risk.“The problem is the campaign was so intense that it has left scars that are difficult to heal,” said Greg Rosenbaum, chairman of the National Jewish Democratic Council, referring to the campaign by Mr. Netanyahu and pro-Israel groups against the nuclear agreement with Iran. “The question of whether he’s going to mend fences or not is still up in the air, but we’ve got to figure out a way that this doesn’t tear the community apart.”AdvertisementJudging from his schedule so far, Mr. Netanyahu is making an effort. He has arranged to speak on Tuesday at the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank that was among the most outspoken advocates for the Iran deal and has pushed aggressively for a two state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.AdvertisementIn addition, Ron Dermer, the Israeli ambassador who became the United States face of Mr. Netanyahu’s intensive campaign against the Iran deal, last week invited prominent Democrats — including Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew, Mr. Coons and Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff — to a dinner to commemorate Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister who was assassinated 20 years ago.And Aipac, the leading pro-Israel group that spent tens of millions of dollars and put its reputation for bipartisanship on the line to oppose the Iran deal, appears to be reaching out tentatively to the Democratic lawmakers it attacked for backing the agreement.The day after the committee informed supporters by email that it was punishing Mr. Coons for his Iran vote by removing him from its list of speakers at a lunch in October at the Grand Hyatt Hotel, it circulated a “clarification” message, calling the earlier email “in error,” and saying there would be no change to the program. Both emails were obtained by The New York Times.An Aipac spokesman said Friday that the organization never made a decision to disinvite Mr. Coons, and that the email indicating he had been dropped was “not authorized.”Mr. Coons, who attended the luncheon, said he “was made to feel very welcome, even though there were many people at the event who continued to make clear their disagreement with me.” He called the invitation episode “a misunderstanding.” (His spokesman later said that neither the senator nor anyone in his office was ever informed that the invitation had been rescinded.)“I think there is a recognition on many parts that we need to redouble our efforts to ensure that support for Israel is a bipartisan position, and that going forward, we reassert the strength, the durability and the unshakability of that relationship,” Mr. Coons said in an interview.Mr. Blumenthal declined to comment on the canceled fund-raisers, but said tensions persisted.“My vote caused some consternation, some real personal heartbreak and some remaining hard feelings, but I have really made an effort to explain and to tell people unequivocally that I’m moving forward to support Israel,” he said. “They’re not there yet; they’re not saying, ‘All is forgiven,’ by any means. Some have said: ‘We’re not talking to you again. We’re not supporting you again.’ ”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said he maintained “optimism” for healing the bruised relationships “over time.”Ilan Goldenberg, a former top State Department official who worked on the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, said Mr. Netanyahu’s tactics in the fight against the Iran deal — including a formal speech to a joint session of Congress railing against it — had permanently alienated some liberal Democrats.Advertisement“Those people are never coming back to him,” Mr. Goldenberg said. “Then there are the folks who are looking for a way back — they want this over, they want this done with, they want to be supportive of Israel without all these tensions and difficulties, and they don’t want to be put in this position again.”Both sides view the meeting between Mr. Obama and Mr. Netanyahu as a chance to make that happen. Included in their talks will be discussions on a new, larger United States security assistance package for Israel, something that lawmakers in both parties enthusiastically embrace.In recent meetings with American Jewish groups in Israel, Mr. Netanyahu has signaled a desire to move beyond the angry debate over the Iran deal, said Jerry Silverman, chief executive of the Jewish Federations of North America.“What we heard was, in a matter-of-fact but not a combative tone, the Iran deal passed, we still don’t agree with it at all, however we need to focus on Israel’s security,” said Mr. Silverman, whose organization will host Mr. Netanyahu at its convention Tuesday in Washington. “There’s no denying that differences over Iran led to the deep divisions in relations in the Jewish community and obviously between the administration and the prime minister’s office, but I think there’s a movement beyond that.”Mr. Netanyahu is also striving for balance in his public appearances. It was Mr. Dermer who reached out to the Center for American Progress to schedule Mr. Netanyahu’s appearance there. The prime minister is also speaking to the conservative American Enterprise Institute, and on Monday night will accept the group’s highest award at a black-tie gala.“He’s stepping out of his comfort zone to do this,” David Makovsky, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, said of Mr. Netanyahu. “It’s important because he knows the perils of partisanship in this relationship.”A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Netanyahu May Try to Mend Fences in First U.S. Visit Since Vote on Iran Deal .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.