AdvertisementSupported byBy Jeffrey GettlemanNAIROBI, Kenya — Western diplomats and analysts who pay close attention to sub-Saharan Africa are worried that Burundi is on the brink of a major conflict and could explode in violence when a deadline for opposition groups to disarm expires Saturday.Scores of people have been killed this year in Burundi, a small, poor, hilly country in central Africa, since President Pierre Nkurunziza decided to run for a third time despite protests that he was violating term limits. He won in a turbulent election in July, and this week he issued an ultimatum to opposition members to lay down their weapons.Addressing the nation on Monday, Mr. Nkurunziza said anyone who did not comply by Saturday would “be considered to be enemies of Burundi and will be treated as terrorists,” according to a transcript provided by the United States State Department.“This is the last warning,” he said.Many analysts fear that the ultimatum is a recipe for war. The opposition has so far refused to disarm, and the International Crisis Group, which studies conflicts around the world, issued a “conflict alert.” Seeing a “possibility of mass atrocities and civil war,” the group said the government was likely to use force to end protests that have been held in Bujumbura, the capital, since April.Opposition members are believed to have stockpiled weapons, possibly with the help of neighboring Rwanda. Historically, Burundi has been plagued by tensions between its two largest ethnic groups, the Hutu and the Tutsi. Tens of thousands of Burundians are believed to have been killed in ethnic bloodletting in the 1990s. In Rwanda it was even worse: 800,000 to one million were killed in a genocide.Recently, prominent opposition members have been hunted down, armed groups have clashed, and police officers have been ambushed. Just as frightening is the ominous language used by politicians, “reminiscent of the pre-genocide in Rwanda,” Ernst Jan Hogendoorn, an analyst for the International Crisis Group, said in an interview.Révérien Ndikuriyo, the president of Burundi’s Senate, was quoted by Western officials as warning neighborhood chiefs in a recent speech: “You must not go into the bush because if you dare, we will not spare you. The bush is already mined and reserved for something else. You must stay at home. You will die here, at home. We shall settle everything right here, at home.”The trouble in Burundi is unlike other recent conflicts in sub-Saharan Africa in one important respect: Western powers have been closely watching it for over a year. This is no sudden outburst of violence, like the religious fighting that erupted in the Central African Republic in 2013 or the large-scale bloodshed in Darfur, Sudan, in 2003 and 2004.Still, Western diplomats said that they had less leverage than might be expected and that Burundi might turn to Russia or China for financial support should the West decisively cut off aid. The European Union has already imposed some sanctions. Western officials have been urging the governing party and the opposition to agree to peace talks, with little success. “It’s a stare-down,” Mr. Hogendoorn said.Analysts said one important goal was to find a way for Mr. Nkurunziza to save face so he would not feel weak if, after all this buildup, he decided not to crack down on the opposition.The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, issued a statement condemning the killing on Friday of Welly Nzitonda, the son of a prominent Burundian human rights defender, Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, in Bujumbura.“This assassination reinforces fears that there is a systematic policy of targeting members of the opposition, journalists, human rights defenders and ordinary citizens perceived to be opposing the government,” he said. “So far there has been complete impunity for these crimes.”Advertisement