AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — Officially, Canada is disappointed. But the Obama administration ’s decision on Friday to reject the Keystone XL pipeline, which would have linked Alberta’s oil sands to the Gulf of Mexico, also appeared to bring Canada’s new Liberal government a sense of relief.The Conservative government that the Liberals, led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, replaced this week had made the approval of Keystone XL its top foreign policy priority, even though Canadians were divided over its importance.During the campaign, Mr. Trudeau said he would push for Keystone XL. But it was a promise made with little obvious enthusiasm, probably an attempt, many observers said, to avoid rekindling Albertans’ memories of a controversial energy program introduced by his father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, during his time as prime minister.Now, Mr. Trudeau no longer has to keep his pipeline pledge, and he will be free to pursue a campaign promise he is enthusiastic about: improving Canada’s record on greenhouse gas emissions.Former Prime Minister Stephen Harper had taken an almost combative approach with the White House over the pipeline. He repeatedly lectured Americans about the economic and energy security gains he said it would bring, while avoiding questions about the environmental impact of the oil sands, vast deposits of sand, clay and water saturated with bitumen, a form of petroleum. During one appearance in New York in 2013, Mr. Harper said that when it came to Keystone XL, “my view is you don’t take no for an answer.”The tone from the Canadian government was much different on Friday. When asked by a reporter about Mr. Obama’s characterization of oil sands production as “dirty oil,” Stéphane Dion, the new foreign affairs minister, replied, “I’m not surprised because the E.P.A., the Environmental Protection Agency, told him that.”Mr. Dion attributed the American decision to Mr. Harper’s poor environmental record. In 2011, Mr. Harper pulled Canada out of the Kyoto accord on climate change and replaced it with what critics have called an ever-shifting set of targets for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. In May, the Conservatives said they would cut emissions 30 percent from 2005 levels over the next 15 years, a reduction most environmental groups called feeble.Mr. Dion said achieving the new government’s plan for more ambitious reductions, which have not been specified, would be a challenge, but added, “We see the result today when we try to avoid the challenge.”If Canada improves its environmental record, Mr. Dion said, “then our products and oil will be welcome everywhere.”Most of Canada’s progress in reducing greenhouse gases has come from actions by provincial governments, like Ontario’s elimination of coal-fired electrical generation plants, and the imposition of carbon taxes by British Columbia and Quebec. While Alberta also introduced a carbon tax, the extensive expansion of the oil sands there more than offset most of Canada’s reductions in emissions.Even Premier Rachel Notley of Alberta, whose left-of-center New Democratic Party dislodged the Conservatives from power in May, had been ambivalent about Keystone XL, arguing that it would send refining and processing jobs to the United States. She has told the province’s energy industry that it needs to clean up its environmental act and set up a group to study how best to deal with carbon emissions.While many Canadian oil industry executives support effective measures to reduce climate change, others point to Canada’s relatively small contribution to global emissions as well as the decline in the amount of greenhouse gases created by each barrel of crude from the oil sands.Any climate change policy Mr. Trudeau introduces will require the cooperation of the provinces to be effective. He has invited all 10 provincial premiers as well as the leaders of the federal opposition parties to join the entourage Canada will send to the United Nations conference on climate change this month in Paris.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement