By EDWARD WONGNOV. 6, 2015
BEIJING — Relatives and hundreds of supporters of a Chinese civil rights activist who died suddenly this week in a detention center in southern China are demanding that the authorities explain in detail the time, location and cause of the man’s death and allow them to see the body.The activist, Zhang Liumao, died early Wednesday in No. 3 Detention Center in Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong Province, next to Hong Kong. He had been detained since August.The police most likely took him into custody because he had started a literary magazine that circulated around Guangzhou, according to a report by Radio Free Asia, which is financed by the United States government.On Friday evening, a lawyer for Mr. Zhang, Chen Jinxue, said in an interview that two sisters of Mr. Zhang and a nephew had been meeting since the afternoon with detention center officials. The family requested a written document explaining the death and access to surveillance video footage and to the body. Officials told the family that the body was at a funeral parlor in Guangzhou, Mr. Chen said.AdvertisementAn online petition circulating in support of the family’s demands had more than 200 signatures by Friday evening.Mr. Zhang was being held on suspicion of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” a charge that the police and prosecutors have often used  in recent years to silence dissenters.AdvertisementMany people in China become suspicious when news emerges of a prisoner’s death. In 2009, the death of a prisoner in Yunnan Province, Li Qiaoming, stirred outrage on the Internet. In July, a prominent Tibetan political prisoner in Sichuan Province, Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, 65, died under mysterious circumstances while serving a life sentence on charges of “terrorism and inciting separatism.” Tibetans in the city of Chengdu and the rural Litang area, where Mr. Tenzin Delek was from, held protests.Mia Li contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; China: Demands Follow a Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.