AdvertisementSupported byBy Joseph OrovicZADAR, Croatia — Croatia on Sunday will hold its first parliamentary elections since joining the European Union, a vote that could toughen the small Balkan nation’s response to the thousands of migrants coursing through its territory every day, as the opposition party hints at stricter border controls just short of the razor-wire fence Hungary built.Croatia, a member of the European Union since July 2013, and with a population of 4.2 million, has become a fulcrum of the migrants’ path toward Western and Northern Europe, shifting the course as conditions change and borders tighten or close along the so-called Balkan route.Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic and his center-left Social Democratic Party of Croatia have held dual stances throughout the crisis, promising repeatedly to guard the country’s interests but also maintaining an open-border policy that humanely but efficiently shuffles the migrants onward, analysts say.This practice of letting refugees pass through Croatian territory has earned Mr. Milanovic few friends among the country’s neighbors. The leaders of Hungary, Serbia and Slovenia have publicly criticized his handling of the crisis, accusing Zagreb of pushing the refugees through without regard for its neighbors’ interests.Tomislav Karamarko, leader of the conservative Croatian Democratic Union, the main opposition party, criticized in September the government’s handling of the migrant crisis days after it began, calling for the intervention of armed forces and the possible closing of the border.But Mr. Milanovic’s party has gained traction in recent weeks, winning back the support of voters who had been expressing weariness with his administration, political analysts said, possibly as a result of the opponents’ hard-line stance. Polls show that the prime minister’s coalition has closed the Croatian Democratic Union’s sizable lead just days before the election.“Voters perceive that these migrants are not coming to Croatia to stay,” said Nenad Zakosek, a political science professor at the University of Zagreb. “It would be different if we had to integrate 100,000 people.”While European countries like Poland have swung to the right in elections since the migrant crisis escalated, Croatia has a different history, he said. It hosted hundreds of thousands of refugees during the war that broke up the former Yugoslavia.“We all had this experience during the war,” Professor Zakosek said. “We had refugees or we were ourselves refugees.”In recent months European nations have worked to block the main route taken by migrants fleeing war and upheaval.A slight uptick in Croatia’s economy also seems to have benefited Mr. Milanovic, who has served as prime minister since 2011. Economic indicators at the end of 2014 began showing signs of a recovery, with three successive quarters of minuscule growth in gross domestic product ending six years of recession.Yet the country’s 15.4 percent unemployment rate and youth unemployment of 43.1 percent are some of the worst in the European Union.Still, opinions of Mr. Milanovic are mixed.“This current group in government are elephants when it comes to big words, and mice when it comes to actual deeds,” said Ante Vulin, 60, who runs bakeries and tourism operations in the coastal town of Zadar, a historic stronghold for the Croatian Democratic Union and Mr. Karamarko’s birthplace.Mr. Vulin cited the effects of an overwhelming tax burden and unfulfilled promises to create economic growth. The migrant crisis, on the other hand, has been handled admirably by the government, he said.“But we also have our own people who are poor, unfortunate and need help,” Mr. Vulin said. “What about them?”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.videoAdvertisement