By AURELIEN BREEDENNOV. 6, 2015
The interior minister of France, Bernard Cazeneuve, said the country would restrict its borders as it prepares for the COP21 international conference on climate.PARIS — France will reinstate border controls for a month around the coming climate change conference in Paris, the interior minister announced on Friday.The interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, told the BFM TV news channel that checks at the French border would be reinstated around the time of the climate conference, which is sponsored by the United Nations and will run from Nov. 30 to Dec. 11. Over 40,000 participants and about 80 heads of government, including President Obama, are expected to attend.Mr. Cazeneuve cited security concerns, saying that there was “a context of terrorist threats or of risks of disturbances to public order that could come and sully this large international gathering, which is carrying a great message for humanity.”France is part of the Schengen area, the 26-nation European bloc in which citizens may travel across borders without stopping to show a passport or visa.AdvertisementThe Schengen agreement allows the temporary reinstatement of controls at internal borders when there are security concerns, including for occasions like international gatherings or sporting events.France last reinstated border controls in 2011, during a summit meeting of Group of 20 nations in Cannes. Other European hosts of United Nations climate conferences have reinstated checks at their borders during the talks, including Denmark in 2009 and Poland in 2013.AdvertisementPrime Minister Manuel Valls said in September that France would not hesitate to temporarily reinstate controls to stem the flow of refugees fleeing the Middle East for Europe, as countries like Germany and Austria have done. But Mr. Cazeneuve said that Friday’s announcement was unrelated to the migrant crisis.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 7, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; France: Security for Climate Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »