By DAVID BARSTOWNOV. 6, 2015
NEW DELHI — The Maldives, which imposed a state of emergency after weeks of political turmoil and intrigue, did so to guarantee public safety and not to restore authoritarian government, the country’s foreign minister said this week.Calling the move a “precautionary and pre-emptive measure,” the minister, Dunya Maumoon, said in a telephone interview on Thursday that she hoped “the state of emergency will be lifted soon and that things will be back to normal so that we can go on with life.”The order to suspend basic civil liberties and give the government sweeping arrest powers for the next 30 days was imposed Wednesday by the Maldivian president, Abdulla Yameen. The tumult continued Thursday when Parliament voted to impeach Vice President Ahmed Adeeb, who is accused of plotting to assassinate Mr. Yameen on Sept. 28. The president’s speedboat exploded that day, injuring three people, including Mr. Yameen’s wife. The president was unhurt.The United States, India and several other nations have expressed concern about the emergency decree, and Amnesty International said it “raises the prospect of further attacks on dissent and human rights.”AdvertisementIn the weeks since the speedboat explosion, Ms. Maumoon said, there have been other plots to assassinate Mr. Yameen, and security forces have discovered hidden caches of weapons, including hand grenades, explosives and AK-47s. “More sinister and more worrying was the fact that weapons were missing from the armory,” she said.AdvertisementThe Maldivian government has declined to provide more than vague and cursory details about the suspected coup plots, and Ms. Maumoon acknowledged that many people were skeptical about whether the plots were genuine.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even the cause of the boat explosion is in dispute: The F.B.I., invited to investigate by Maldivian officials, said it found “no conclusive evidence” of a bomb.But Ms. Maumoon insisted that the government was “very sure” that the explosion was an attempt on Mr. Yameen’s life. Forensics experts from Sri Lanka concluded that the blast came from an explosive device, and experts from Saudi Arabia found traces of an explosive material, RDX, she said.Within days of the blast, investigators began to focus on Mr. Adeeb, an ambitious politician who had formed powerful alliances with crucial security and intelligence officials. Weeks later, Mr. Adeeb, 33, was under arrest, accused of “high treason.”Asked why Mr. Adeeb would want to kill the president who had appointed him to the vice presidency just three months ago, Ms. Maumoon said, “This is exactly the kind of question that I myself was thinking of.”“They did have a close relationship, and the vice president, obviously, was very young and came in and was hugely powerful — he was obviously going places,” she said. “But people can change, and power changes people as well.”One possible motive, she said, may be related to the “widespread speculation” about the vice president’s ties to powerful drug gangs. Crime bosses in the capital, Male, have accumulated significant wealth, which in turn is feeding government corruption, she said. “It is a very scary thing that needs to be addressed because that could lead to further violence and instability in the country.”AdvertisementFor three decades, the Maldives was ruled by Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, an autocratic leader who tolerated little dissent and regularly jailed political opponents. Then, in 2008, Mohamed Nasheed, a youthful and telegenic reformer, became the country’s first democratically elected president, and the country drafted a new Constitution that protected civil liberties like free speech and the right to assemble.A lawyer for the Maldivian politician Ahmed Adeeb said on Thursday that his client, accused of planning to kill the president, had been framed. Mr. Adeeb was impeached as vice president.Mr. Nasheed resigned under duress in 2012. He narrowly lost a re-election bid in 2013, and he and his party, the Maldivian Democratic Party, remain a major political force. Early this year, in a matter of weeks, Mr. Nasheed was arrested, convicted and sentenced to 13 years in prison after a terrorism trial judged by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to be deeply unfair.In the months since then, there have been a topsy-turvy mix of crackdowns on protest rallies and arrests or ousters of high-level government officials whose loyalty came into doubt. So when the state of emergency was declared this week, Mr. Nasheed’s supporters were quick to accuse Mr. Yameen, the half brother of Mr. Gayoom, of attempting to snuff out democracy in the Maldives.Ms. Maumoon, who is the daughter of Mr. Gayoom, said the opposite was true.“I’m not saying things are perfect,” she said. “We are a very young democracy. Our institutions are very young, and they’re still maturing and learning to work with each other. I think this is a journey, though, that the president and the government remain committed to, and there’s no backtracking on this.”Mr. Yameen’s decision to suspend basic rights, including freedom of speech and assembly, came two days before a major rally planned by the Maldivian Democratic Party to protest Mr. Nasheed’s arrest and conviction.Ms. Maumoon bluntly acknowledged that one aim of the emergency decree was to stop Friday’s rally. “If there was scope for mass demonstrations, this might lead to violence and possible use of explosive devices or weapons that we know are out there, which could injure not just government officials or citizens but also the opposition party members themselves who would be out there in the demonstrations.”In defending the state of emergency, Ms. Maumoon argued that the decree “was very selective in its abrogation of rights.” There is no curfew, and only a handful of people have been detained since the decree went into effect, she said. In a Twitter message on Wednesday, her father thanked Maldivians “for strongly supporting President’s moves to protect our people & country from the evils of terrorism & corruption.”The United States has called on the government “to restore immediately full constitutional freedoms to its citizens by terminating the state of emergency, and reiterates its call for an end to politically motivated prosecutions and detentions, including that of former President Nasheed,” according to a State Department statement.China, which has been courting the Maldives to extend its geopolitical influence in the Indian Ocean, has been more understanding, Ms. Maumoon said. “Obviously everybody is concerned when you hear about a state of emergency, but I think there are some countries who understand the need in certain situations to take such actions.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.