AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — Facing a public outcry, the Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, has called off his government’s recent business partnership with a felon who was supposed to be in prison for defrauding the country’s biggest private bank.The cancellation on Saturday came days after senior government ministers had appeared on national television with the felon, Khalilullah Frozi, the former chief executive of Kabul Bank, to sign an agreement for the development of a new township in the heart of Kabul, the capital.Mr. Frozi, who is serving a prison sentence of at least 10 years, said he had reached a deal with the government to work during the day, investing in projects that would eventually generate enough money to pay back what he owes, and serve his sentence at night. But now he will be in prison full time.“All parts of the court’s verdict on conviction of Khalilullah Frozi and his liability to pay back the loans are unalterable and binding,” Mr. Ghani said in a statement. He also ordered a review of ways to transfer Mr. Frozi’s 33 acres of land, upon which the township was to be built, to Kabul Bank “as a compensation for the outstanding debts.”Afghan courts have ordered Mr. Frozi to pay back $137 million in the fraud case, but so far he is believed to have paid less than one-fifth of that amount. Altogether, more than $900 million of depositors’ money was taken out of the bank in illegal loans by the country’s elite, pushing the bank to the verge of collapse in 2010.Reached by phone, Mr. Frozi said he was unwell in prison, surrounded by doctors, and could not comment.On Saturday, Mr. Frozi shared a message on his Facebook page that he originally posted in July, before his brief reprieve. “Don’t worry,” it said, “illness will cure, sins will be forgiven, prisoner will be released, traveler will return, sinner will repent, and the poor will be mighty.”Anticorruption activists welcomed the decision to call off the deal, but said the credibility of the government’s vows to fight corruption had been damaged.“It is not possible for President Ghani to be unaware of such an important event if his legal adviser and cabinet ministers are present there,” said Sayed Ikram Afzali, the executive director of Integrity Watch Afghanistan. “If the president does not take strong action against those of his officials present at the project launch, the message it sends to the people is that he knew about it all along and he only called it off after public pressure.”Present with Mr. Frozi at the ceremony for the township project last week was Ahmad Zia Massoud, Mr. Ghani’s special envoy for good government and reform, who the president has said has the same rank as his vice presidents. Also there were the ministers for urban planning and parliamentary affairs, Mr. Ghani’s legal adviser and his adviser on private-sector matters.Officials close to Mr. Ghani said the deal with Mr. Frozi had taken place without his knowledge and that he had ordered an inquiry when he learned of it.After taking office last year, Mr. Ghani reopened the embezzlement case, and a judge increased Mr. Frozi’s sentence. At a meeting of donors in September, Mr. Ghani said the actions he had taken had made Kabul Bank “no longer a symbol of impotence, but a symbol of resolve.”But at least two of Mr. Ghani’s close advisers who were at the ceremony with Mr. Frozi continued to justify the project and Mr. Frozi’s involvement.Abdul Ali Mohammadi, Mr. Ghani’s legal adviser, said the cabinet’s decision to find creative ways to expedite the return of the embezzled money was sound and unchanged. The problem, he said, had to do with the interpretation of a law barring anyone who is serving a prison sentence of more than 10 years from signing a legal agreement.Mr. Mohammadi defended Mr. Frozi and lauded his willingness to agree to the government’s “encouragement mechanism” that would allow him to pay his debts.“What the Ministry of Urban Planning did was a mistake, what Frozi did was not a mistake,” Mr. Mohammadi said. The ministry, which signed the deal with Mr. Frozi, should have been aware of the legal prohibitions, he said.Ali Akbar Zhwanday, Mr. Ghani’s private-sector adviser, said that given the country’s economic hardships, allowing Mr. Frozi to work and pay his debts and hefty tax bill was a good idea.“What is better: for him to die in prison, or to pay back the money?” Mr. Zhwanday asked.Advertisement