AdvertisementSupported byPassau JournalBy Katrin BennholdPASSAU, Germany — The first time it happened, Wolfgang Wagner thought it was funny. He was driving to work when the police stopped him. An officer asked him to open the back of his van.“They were checking for refugees; they thought I was a smuggler,” said Mr. Wagner, who runs one of the oldest inns in Passau’s baroque old town, near Germany’s southeastern border with Austria.The second time his van was stopped was less amusing, though, and since then, the controls have become a nuisance. One recent morning, Mr. Wagner, 61, was searched twice in one mile.Passau has 50,000 inhabitants, 48 churches and four local beers. These days it also has 35,000 migrants coming through each week. Faced with this relentless flow, the city has come to embody not just a steadfast German welcome, but also the public concerns that have put state officials in outspoken conflict with the government of Chancellor Angela Merkel.Long popular with tourists, this wealthy Bavarian town, nestled in the triangle between the Czech and Austrian borders, has become of one the most popular stops on the migrant trail — the first impression of Germany for the thousands who have endured long and harrowing journeys from war and poverty in the Middle East and Africa.This is where the global upper class and underclass come face to face: American and Japanese groups arrive by luxury cruise ships on the Danube River. Syrians and Afghans come by foot or on buses and trains sent across the Austrian border, a mere two miles away at the nearest point.“They call us the Lampedusa of Germany,” Passau’s mayor, Jürgen Dupper, said one recent evening. And like that Italian island, one of Europe’s southernmost points and a symbol of the mass migration toward the Continent, Mr. Dupper’s hometown has become emblematic of a crisis that challenges European unity and identity.Instead of abandoned smuggler boats on Italian and Greek beaches, there are confiscated vans at Passau’s police stations. More than a hundred suspected smugglers, mostly from the Balkans, fill the town’s prison, Mr. Dupper said.Children from refugee families that have settled here can be found in most primary schools. Empty buildings have become ad hoc shelters. And hotel rooms are harder to come by because of the federal police battalions sent here from all over Germany, to maintain public order.That is becoming more difficult as the influx of migrants has swelled from pre-winter levels. One day last month, about 1,000 migrants broke through police barriers at a nearby border crossing from Austria and marched on the highway toward Passau. At another crossing, on a bridge, two migrants became impatient and jumped into a river to swim to Germany. Emergency shelters ran out of space, forcing some newcomers to sleep outside for the first time since the crisis began.The mayor, a large man with a distinctive Bavarian lilt, is not easily shaken. Passau, Mr. Dupper said, is practiced in crisis management. Built on the banks of three rivers — the Danube, the Ilz and the Inn — the city center floods regularly. Flood levels going back to 1501 have been recorded on the facade of the 14th-century City Hall: In 2013 the water rose more than 13 meters, about 43 feet, to its highest levels in about 500 years. Locals used rubber boats to travel.“We have had our share of emergencies; we will cope with this one, too,” said Mr. Dupper, a rare Social Democrat in conservative Bavaria. And then, echoing Ms. Merkel’s declaration about the migrant crisis: “We can do this.”But the human flood passing through the city on their journey has some locals worried.At the train station one recent evening, Officer Claudia Klöfkorn of the federal police was counting migrants getting off a late train from Vienna. Early last month there were perhaps 1,000 new arrivals per day, she said.Now the figure is close to 2,000 arriving by train, and an additional 3,000 at various border crossings nearby.The donated beer tent, where migrants lined up for meals and fingerprinting before being sent on to reception centers across Bavaria and other parts of Germany, had been full for hours. Now the platform was getting crowded, too, and more people kept arriving.Passau’s train station is on Europe Square, an irony for some. If the rest of Europe was pulling its weight, said one volunteer, “this would all be very manageable.”Some also blame Ms. Merkel’s government. Last Wednesday, the chancellor’s coordinator on refugees, Peter Altmaier, visited Passau. Mr. Dupper told him the city needed more money and more help distributing migrants across Germany.A day later, Berlin announced measures to speed the processing of asylum applications and deportation where appropriate.Modeled on two recently opened centers in Bavaria, three to five special registration centers for applicants who are unlikely to get asylum have been promised nationwide. Residents of such centers, expected to be mostly from the West Balkan countries now deemed safe, if poor, by German authorities, will be restricted to the area immediately around the facilities and lose all benefits if they violate that rule. In addition, the Defense Ministry has pledged up to 6,000 soldiers to help with accommodating and registering refugees.Nobody is clapping anymore when migrant trains arrive in Passau. But the daily flows of generosity and volunteers are undiminished. Local bakeries work overtime to donate bread. Kebab vendors volunteer as interpreters. One in five Passau inhabitants is a university student, and some of them now double as soccer coaches and mentors for young refugees. Others have been coming daily after work.Maya Krug, 28, who is half-Tunisian and speaks Arabic, interprets for new arrivals and keeps them company through hours of waiting. They are always full of questions, “almost as bad as the American tourists,” she said. Her daytime job is in a souvenir shop, selling cuckoo clocks and the gingerbread-like lebkuchen.A border town since Roman days, when the Danube kept unruly Germanic tribes at bay, and once the last stop before the Iron Curtain, Passau has a long and sometimes complicated history of receiving refugees. For a few years after World War II, Holocaust survivors rented rooms from a still-hostile German population here, and German refugees expelled from former territories in Eastern Europe were put up in camps. Thousands of them settled nearby; they still have reunions every two years.Gerhard Hagen, a retired engineer who was handing out hot coffee to tired migrants, said his parents and grandparents had fled from the Sudetenland region in the modern-day Czech Republic. Such history, he said, “breeds compassion.”Not always. In 1989, Passau was the first West German city to welcome East Germans when Hungary opened its border months before the Berlin Wall fell. Some here point to the irony they see in the hostility toward refugees in parts of the former Eastern bloc today: “They were welcomed then, and now they are shouting the loudest,” said Helena Wagner, the innkeeper Wolfgang Wagner’s wife. Ms. Wagner is Czech. The hostility toward migrants through much of Eastern Europe has upset her so much that 25 years after first coming to Germany, she is considering giving up her Czech passport and getting a German one instead. She said she was ashamed watching clips of migrants being mistreated in Hungary and was “proud to live in a country that helps.”Her husband is more skeptical. Mr. Wagner, a native Bavarian with an upswept mustache and proud beer belly, worries that taxes will have to rise and life will become harder if the number of migrants is not controlled: “Where does it end?” he asked. It is a question echoed by regulars in his inn, whose name translates as the Green Tree.This split runs through all of German society. In sleepy villages outside Passau, some residents have installed burglar alarms, while others donate food, clothes and toys. Some worry about teacher resources being diverted to refugee children. Others volunteer to teach German themselves.Passau is a rich town in Europe’s richest country. Once in control of the salt trade, it used to be the biggest diocese in the Holy Roman Empire, stretching beyond Vienna and into western Hungary.Today, unemployment is low and the cafes are full. But the groups of migrants huddling in the free Wi-Fi zones of the multistory shopping mall in the city center are growing.At the train station, Officer Klöfkorn was helping the last migrants who had arrived that day onto buses. It was 3:30 a.m., the end of another 12-hour shift.“You hear the politicians say, ‘We can do this,’ and you’re thinking, ‘I’m the one actually doing it,’ ” she said. “I just hope they’re right.”Alison Smale contributed reporting from Berlin.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement