By RAPHAEL MINDERNOV. 7, 2015
LISBON —  Last month’s elections in Portugal were meant to deliver a clear verdict on the center-right coalition of Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho, whose austerity program has been held up as a model by creditors and countries like Germany that have advocated belt-tightening in Europe.Instead, it yielded a vexing muddle, allowing both left and right to claim victory, and threatening Portugal with a political limbo that will almost certainly blunt its austerity drive and revive debate here and across Europe over whether the pains of austerity have been worth it.Mr. Passos Coelho and his center-right coalition won the Oct. 4 elections with about 39 percent of the vote. But a majority of the votes were spread among parties on Portugal’s long-fractured left that oppose austerity.On Tuesday, lawmakers in the Parliament are scheduled to vote on the prime minister’s government program. If they reject it, as they well might, it could bring down his minority government, just weeks into its new term.Advertisement“We’re in an incredible impasse,” said Luís Cabral, a Portuguese economist and professor at New York University. “There are two different readings of this election, both legitimate, but with opposite prescriptions in terms of what should be done next.”AdvertisementThe deadlock is telling of the ways in which many Portuguese feel the effects of austerity have not been evenly distributed, a sentiment shared across much of Southern Europe.The policies are credited with arresting Portugal’s economic slide — after an international bailout of 78 billion euros — reducing unemployment, and restoring some growth and access to financial markets.However, the left — and apparently a majority of Portuguese — also blame the policies for increasing income inequality and poverty to levels that are among the highest in Europe.Portugal’s splintered left has now found common cause in attacking both conservative politicians at home and the austerity recipes preached by Germany, the powerhouse of the eurozone.“Germany has helped unite the left, but for negative reasons,” said João Cravinho, a former Socialist minister.“I think people in Portugal and elsewhere now have a common understanding that the policies of austerity haven’t worked in Europe and that the idea that everybody should be similar and obedient to the German economic model is untenable,” Mr. Cravinho said.Their opposition to austerity is so binding, in fact, that the left-wing parties are tinkering with forming a coalition.AdvertisementIt would be led by the main opposition party, the Socialists, with support from the Left Bloc, which made the biggest electoral gains, and even the country’s Communist Party, bringing it in from decades in the political wilderness.A left-wing deal — expected to be formalized by the Communists on Sunday — would present a sea change in Portuguese politics so profound that the Socialist party leader, António Costa, recently compared it to “bringing down the last remains of the Berlin Wall.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think nobody — and I mean nobody — expected the Communists to shift their stance like they did after the elections,” said António Vitorino, a former Socialist minister and European commissioner.In the early stages of a recovery, the political uncertainty is the last thing Portugal needs. Concerns are already mounting about whether the government will continue to stick to the deficit and debt goals set by Brussels. Portugal has already been warned by Brussels for delaying its 2016 budget plan.Even if Mr. Passos Coelho stays in office, his new minority government will face a fight for survival. That will most likely curb its ability to push through controversial measures to overhaul the pension and education systems, and the labor market, analysts warn, as well as complete its privatization program.“You’re simply not going to see any more structural reforms coming out of Portugal,” said Federico Santi, a political risk analyst at Eurasia Group, a think tank based in London.“The situation is better,” he added, “but Portugal is still hanging by a thread.”In fact, only one major credit rating agency — DBRS based in Canada — gives Portugal an investment grade rating, which has also been crucial in helping Portuguese banks get loans from the European Central Bank. The three main agencies — Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch — still rate Portugal’s debt as junk.Aware of the risks, the conservative president, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, faces a terrible bind.In January, voters are to choose his successor. Under Portuguese law, a president cannot call parliamentary elections in his last six months, and a new parliament must be given six months before it can be dissolved. If the Parliament rejects the government’s economic program on Tuesday, it will leave Mr. Cavaco Silva with a hard choice.He could either allow the left to form a government that promises to unwind part of Portugal’s austerity program, or he could leave Mr. Passos Coelho in place as what promises to be an ineffective, caretaker prime minister until new elections can be held.AdvertisementEither outcome seems destined to leave the country in a prolonged crisis that is being closely watched elsewhere, particularly in neighboring Spain.Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain, who champions austerity, hopes to get re-elected, but most polls show his Popular Party falling short of keeping its parliamentary majority. That raises the possibility that the Spanish could end up in a similar situation to that of the Portuguese.“The Iberian left is forming alliances against those in power and trying to create governments of losers,” said Pablo Casado, a conservative lawmaker who is spokesman for Mr. Rajoy’s Popular Party. “This could also happen in Spain.”At the very least, Portugal’s political deadlock has signaled the deep divisions the austerity debate continues to generate.“You can have an election where there is no winner, only losers,” said Mr. Cabral, the economics professor. “Which is an odd situation in a democracy.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 8, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Rising Left Bloc in Portugal Could Threaten Austerity Drive.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.