AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod Nordland and Jawad SukhanyarKABUL, Afghanistan — After men believed to be Taliban fighters forced a 19-year-old named Rukhshana into a freshly dug pit and methodically stoned her to death for adultery, a video of the killing surfaced on the Internet and incited outrage.Western embassies and human-rights groups denounced the attack as another example of abusive treatment of women by the Taliban. President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan called it a “heinous act” and ordered an investigation, sending a delegation to the central province of Ghor, where the attack took place.One of the leaders of that presidential delegation, however, is a prominent, pro-government mullah who believes the stoning and flogging of adulterers is perfectly justified — as he made clear both in a sermon on the Ghor killing at Friday Prayer and in a subsequent interview on Friday.“If you’re married and you commit adultery, you have to be stoned,” said the mullah, Maulavi Inayatullah Baleegh, during his sermon at Pul-e Khishti mosque, Kabul’s biggest, on Friday. “The only question was whether this was done according to Shariah law, with witnesses or confessions as required,” he said. “It is necessary to protect and safeguard the honor of women in society, as it was done in the past during the time of the prophet.”In the interview later, Maulavi Baleegh also declined to criticize the Taliban over the Ghor stoning or to give an opinion on whether a Shariah trial held by the insurgents would be considered religiously valid. “Do you want me to have a fight with the Taliban?” he said, when a reporter asked about the Taliban role in the killing, and he declined to say anything further about the insurgents’ actions.Maulavi Baleegh, who is a prominent member of the National Ulema Council, the country’s highest religious authority, and is an adviser to Mr. Ghani on religious affairs, said he was told he would lead the presidential investigating commission when it goes to Ghor this week.His theological support for the sort of stoning he is being sent to investigate is emblematic of the national conundrum over the role of Shariah law, particularly when it comes to punishment for so-called moral crimes. The Afghan Constitution recognizes Shariah as well as civil law, but a presidential decree known as the Elimination of Violence Against Women Act, issued in 2009 but never ratified by Parliament, outlawed the stoning and flogging of adulterers.The anti-violence law is simply ignored in many parts of the country, and by some of its highest authorities — including Maulavi Baleegh, who considers it invalid. The act also outlaws polygamy, for instance, but many Afghan men have more than one wife, and new plural marriages are still legally recognized.The stoning in Ghor took place on Oct. 25, in a Taliban-controlled area in Chaghcharan District, where the provincial capital is, according to Abdul Hadi Chelghori, head of the provincial police department’s criminal investigation division. He said the stoning of Rukhshana, as well as the flogging of a young man named Mohammad Gul, 22, whom she had tried to run away with, were ordered by three well-known Taliban mullahs from the area, two of whom are also insurgent military commanders, Afghan officials said.“There was no court to decide this,” said a member of Parliament from Ghor, Sayed Nader Shah Bahr. “They simply brutally stoned the girl to death and lashed the boy.”The governor of Ghor Province, Seema Joyenda, one of only two female governors in Afghanistan’s 34 provinces, said that Rukhshana had left her husband, but only because she had been illegally forced to marry him.As a child, she had been engaged to a different, much older man. But when she reached marriageable age, she refused the union and ran away with Mr. Gul instead.“Rukhshana was a pretty girl and had studied until Grade 6,” Governor Joyenda said. “She was literate and pretty, that was why everyone wanted to marry her, but she would not allow herself to be married to anyone against her will.”Caught and brought back to her village, she still refused the first arranged marriage, so as punishment her family forced her instead to become the third wife of a 55-year-old man. Again, she ran away with Mr. Gul, and again they were caught.Since Mr. Gul was not himself married, he was given the lesser punishment of 100 lashes and sent home, where a relative said he was still recovering from his wounds. (The relative, reached by telephone, asked not to be named because of fear of Taliban reprisals.) Because Rukhshana, who goes by just one name, was married, the Taliban condemned her to death by stoning.Rukhshana was put in a deep but narrow circular pit, so that just her head protruded. On the video she could be heard crying, over and over again, “Dear God,” as rock after rock was thrown at her head from close range, mostly by men wearing Taliban-style black turbans. During the ordeal, she could also be heard reciting the Shahada, the Muslim creed: “There is no god but God, and Muhammad is his prophet.”The Taliban are not the only ones carrying out Shariah law punishments in Ghor, or elsewhere in Afghanistan.Two child brides in a government-held part of Ghor, ages 13 and 14, fled their husbands in 2010 and were forcibly returned by the police, then flogged in public. In 2012 in Ghazni Province’s Jaghori District, a government-held area that claims a progressive attitude toward girls’ education and women’s rights, a 15-year-old girl was lashed 101 times after she was accused of having sex with a local tailor, because she was seen alone with him in his shop for a few minutes. After the flogging, she was examined by a doctor and found to still be a virgin. She was left permanently disabled from hip injuries caused by the lashes. The men who flogged her were never punished.Western condemnation of such attacks tends to be muted or absent compared with the reaction to outrages carried out by Taliban insurgents. When a 27-year-old woman named Farkhunda was stoned, beaten and burned to death in downtown Kabul in March by a mob reacting to concocted accusations of Quran-burning, the American Embassy expressed no criticism until the following week, after initial official and popular approval of the murder had turned to condemnation.By comparison, the embassy was quick to condemn Rukhshana’s killing, issuing a statement on Thursday, the day after video of it was widely publicized here. “The United States stands with the people of Afghanistan in condemning violence against women,” the embassy statement said.Maulavi Baleegh made it clear in the interview that he had no intention of sharing in that condemnation if the presidential review found that the victim was indeed an adulterer. “I have no problem with that,” he said.The National Ulema Council in Afghanistan has repeatedly called for legislation that would require courts to resort to Shariah-prescribed punishments like stoning in cases of moral crimes. So far, pressure from the international community, which sees stoning and flogging as human rights abuses, has counteracted those efforts with the threat of aid cuts if such punishments are restored.Afghanistan is a signatory of the United Nations’  Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which bans such punishments as cruel and inhuman.Advertisement