By HANNA INGBERNOV. 7, 2015
Myanmar will hold its first relatively free elections in 25 years on Sunday. Ahead of the vote, we asked people in Myanmar via Facebook to tell us what they hope, and fear, will come from the elections. We also asked readers to tell us which campaign issues were the most important to them. We heard from voters about their excitement, and their concerns about many of the pressing issues, including civil war and education, the country faces today. A number of respondents also expressed support for the National League for Democracy, the opposition party led by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who has long been a symbol of democracy in the country, formerly known as Burma. Here is a selection of the responses. They have been edited and condensed for clarity.The Momentum of the Whole CountryI have high hopes for the N.L.D. to win. I don’t think the current leaders in charge would go as far as a coup because the people would not stand for it. If they go as far as spilling blood, people will also spill their blood. It would not be easy for them to stop the momentum of the whole country.Advertisement— Myo Min Soe, 28, MandalayFreedom in the AirYou can really see the change and feel the progress and freedom in the air in Burma/Myanmar.AdvertisementI hope for political stability that allows our country to rebuild the economic and social institutions, eventually lifting the population out of poverty and crucially creating an educated and productive voting population that can thrive in today’s world.I am extremely concerned that the N.L.D. is still running on an any-change-is-good platform with very little articulation of policy and strategy for the future of the country, which is desperately needed. They will attract both the popular and protest votes, but revolutionaries rarely make good governments.We have had six decades of isolation, and severe underinvestment in education and infrastructure. This is a critical moment, and I fear that one more decade will result in the country not being able to recover at all.Instead of perpetuating the isolation and xenophobia through sanctions, I would urge the international community to engage regardless of the election process and result. Intended punishment of the few at the top is resulting in heartbreaking punishment of the entire nation, especially of the many at the bottom.— Thiri Thant Mon, 38, YangonAn End to Civil WarI hope this election will bring a benefit for all ethnic groups in Myanmar. I think the people are ready to vote and choose a leader even though the situation is getting tough for those who live in southern Shan State.Currently, there is a civil war between the Myanmar troops and the S.S.A. (Shan State Army) in Shan. Many children have left school because of the war. I just feel so sorry and sad for those who are not going to be able to vote. I just hope that they could stop the war and come talk to each other.— Nang Nom Kham, 20, northern Shan StateFears of UnrestI am so happy that our country has come this far. Despite some voting restrictions, this free election allows the people to raise their voices, share their opinion on the parties freely and vote for the party of their choice. This is wonderful!Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I hope, from the election, we have a change in system, like new water in a new glass, not old water in a new glass.AdvertisementMy immediate concern is civil unrest. I hope, whichever party wins, the election will end peacefully.We do have many major issues like environmental deterioration, a poor education system, the economy, health and so on. But the civil war is my top priority. I hope there will be more cease-fire agreements soonest, not only on paper but also off paper. I hope the next government, either a new or old one, takes greater and more effective action on this issue.This is my first time voting. I cannot wait to cast a vote for the party of my choice and I cannot wait even more for the result.— Khin Myat Mon, 22, YangonA Commitment to ChangeMy hope from this election is to see real change no matter who wins.The previous years have been a buildup to this moment, but this will be a defining one. This will be a moment when everyone decides that the Myanmar government is committed to change for the better.Of course, this does not come without the fear that civil unrest will follow the election results. If that happens, it is saddening. People as well as officials need to learn the real meaning of democracy.The biggest issues facing this country are tolerance, lack of appreciation for diversity and blind trust. People do not question what they hear or see. These issues can be resolved through education reform and economic reform.Advertisement— Kaungset, 26, YangonOur Eyes Had Been Closed for 50 YearsFor the real change we all will vote for the N.L.D., which is the strongest party in Myanmar, led by Aung San Suu Kyi. She is the only one who can bring democracy for Myanmar.We had our eyes closed for over 50 years. We had poor education for years.We need to open our eyes now. We need a better education. We need good communication with the world’s countries.— Hein Htut Aung, 17, YangonA Hope for Big ChangeAll citizens hope for big change. Today the main issues are health and education.— Khin Ohnmar Aung, 38, YangonA Hope for Honesty I really hope this election will be honest and ethical as the current government has promised. However, we have seen many immoral and unethical actions they have committed (such as voting issues in Myanmar embassies in foreign countries). Additionally, we might also have to question the neutrality of the election council.— Thite Htun Zan, 17, YangonA Fear of RiotsThe N.L.D. will win again. We can’t trust the current government to hand over power. I hope Daw Aung San Suu Kyi will reach an agreement with both the Union Solidarity and Development Party and the army for power-sharing before the election.My biggest fear is state-sponsored riots.— Than Tun, 25, YangonWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.