AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsGen. Czeslaw Kiszczak, who helped crush the Solidarity movement in Poland in 1981 and eight years later presided briefly over the country’s transition to democracy as its last Communist prime minister, died on Thursday in Warsaw. He was 90.His family confirmed his death, according to The Associated Press.General Kiszczak and Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, Poland’s prime minister at the time, insisted that they were imposing martial law to stave off a Soviet invasion in response to the pro-democracy uprising by Solidarity, the Eastern bloc’s first non-communist labor union.But critics said they were doing Moscow’s bidding in a brutal crackdown that included the shooting deaths by the police of nine dissident miners. General Kiszczak was subsequently tried for the killings, but avoided prison. (As recently as this year, a court meted out a two-year suspended sentence for his role in imposing martial law.)“I saved the country from terrible troubles,” General Kiszczak said years later.Czeslaw Kiszczak (pronounced CHESS-wahff KEESH-chahk) was born on Oct. 19, 1925, in the Silesian coal country town of Roczyny, the son of a struggling farmer who was fired as a steelworker apparently because of his Communist affiliation. As a teenager during World War II, Czeslaw was recruited to mine coal for the occupying Germans, then arrested and forced to work in Vienna, where he joined a Communist militia.After the war he entered the Polish Army, where he fought guerrilla groups that were resisting the Communist takeover. Guerrillas beat his father and spared his life only after his mother intervened.He later explained that those struggles had shaped his response to the pro-democracy upheaval decades later.“Experiences linked with that drama, that fratricidal struggle, are among the major reasons that shaped my role in the complicated years of 1980-82,” General Kiszczak said. “I did not want that tragic history to repeat itself.”He later attended the state military academy. He married and had two children. Information on survivors was not immediately available.To some critics, General Kiszczak redeemed himself in 1984 when, as minister of internal affairs, he oversaw the prosecution of the state security officers who had abducted and murdered a pro-Solidarity priest, the Rev. Jerzy Popieluszko. They were convicted.He also weeded out secret police cadres that had remained loyal to a hard-line party faction, which had enjoyed the patronage of the Soviet K.G.B. before Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union.With the economy deteriorating, General Kiszczak negotiated the agreement with the opposition that led to the renewed recognition of Solidarity and the terms for the 1989 elections. Solidarity candidates went on to win all the seats in the Assembly that they were permitted to contest.General Kiszczak was appointed prime minister in 1989, but Solidarity refused to enter a Communist-led government.Within a few weeks, to avert further labor unrest ignited by soaring food prices, he resigned and joined a Solidarity-dominated coalition as deputy prime minister and interior minister. He served until mid-1990, when he retired from political life.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement