While Chinese commentary was resoundingly positive about Saturday’s meeting between President Xi Jinping of China and President Ma Ying-jeou of Taiwan, reactions in Taiwan to the historic encounter were decidedly mixed.On his trip home, Mr. Ma told reporters accompanying him on the plane that he felt most of his goals for the encounter had been accomplished, with the biggest being the meeting itself, bringing together the leaders of the two sides for the first time since the end of China’s civil war in 1949. But he added that he was not satisfied with Mr. Xi’s assertion on Saturday that the Chinese missiles arrayed along the Taiwan Strait were not targeting the island.Tsai Ing-wen, the leader of Taiwan’s main opposition party and the front-runner in the race to succeed Mr. Ma next year, said the meeting left many people in Taiwan disappointed or even angry. The event “only saw President Ma’s immeasurably self-satisfied handshake, but from beginning to end, Taiwan’s democracy was missing,” Ms. Tsai wrote on Facebook. “Further, there was no sign the Republic of China existed,” she wrote, using the official name of Taiwan. Mr. Ma’s party, the Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, began trumpeting the meeting in its campaign for the January vote for the presidency and legislature. Eric Chu, the Kuomintang’s presidential nominee, told Taiwan’s Economic Daily News that only if the party stayed in power would cross-strait relations continue to see heights like the Ma-Xi meeting.Mr. Chu heads to the United States on Tuesday, where he is likely to press further his case that the Kuomintang is better prepared to handle relations with China.The United States said that it welcomed the meeting of Mr. Ma and Mr. Xi. “The United States has a deep and abiding interest in peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait, and we encourage further progress by both sides toward building ties, reducing tensions, and promoting stability on the basis of dignity and respect,” John Kirby, a State Department spokesman, said in a written statement.Marco Rubio, the Republican senator and presidential candidate, said in a statement that he welcomed cross-strait dialogue but that “we must remain cleareyed about China’s intentions.”“We must do more to help Taiwan counter the growing military threat from China,” he added.Polls in Taiwan have generally found support for meetings between the two sides but have also indicated wariness about Mr. Ma’s intentions. During his seven-and-a-half years in office, Mr. Ma has pushed for closer relations between the two sides, which reached more than 20 agreements during his two terms in office.China considers Taiwan to be part of its territory that must eventually be unified and has threatened the use of force if Taiwan pursues formal independence.In Taiwan, many people have worried that Beijing wants to use the growing economic ties between the two sides to help foster its goal of unification.A United Daily News poll of 832 people in Taiwan on Sunday found that 37.1 percent were satisfied with Mr. Ma’s display in Singapore, while 33.8 percent were unsatisfied. The same poll found that two-thirds of respondents would support Ms. Tsai meeting with Mr. Xi if she won the January election.On social media, some of the more awkward moments of Saturday’s meeting were critiqued, including the assertion that China’s missiles weren’t directed at Taiwan:https://t.co/KLOOxBgTXU— ジェームス (@jmstwn) 7 Nov 15Follow Austin Ramzy on Twitter @austinramzy. 