Updated, 7:05 a.m. ET| When it comes to PM2.5 pollution — tiny, grungy particles discharged into the air by factories, boilers and motor vehicles, which damage respiration — the Chinese government says 35 micrograms per cubic meter is a healthy maximum.But over the weekend, Shenyang, an industrial city in northeastern China, endured PM2.5 readings that exceeded 1,000, even 1,400 micrograms, per cubic meter, at some measuring stations, according to Xinhua, the state news agency. Even for a country where chronic smog has inspired superlatives like “airpocalypse” and “crazy bad,” the numbers from Shenyang prompted a kind of awed revulsion.Pictures from the city showed hardy residents plowing on bicycles through a gray atmospheric soup that cut visibility to just a few dozen feet. Ailing people crammed respiratory sections of hospitals. And even Xinhua scolded the city government, accusing it of failing to enforce emergency measures to cut smog and to warn citizens to stay indoors. “Some people have raised questions: In the face of this gross smog and pollution, why was the government’s emergency response plan ‘obstructed?’ ” Xinhua wrote.“A plan seems to have covered every angle, but in practice, how workable is it?” asked Bi Deli, an environmental researcher in Shenyang, according to Xinhua. “Channels of communication are blocked, and instructions aren’t really implemented.”Fairyland or doomsday? Heaviest #smog this year shrouds NE Chinese city of Shenyang, PM 2.5 hit over 1400 https://t.co/GLo82Abk4R— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) 9 Nov 15The smog enveloped much of northeastern China, perhaps puzzling at a time when a slowing economy has reduced industrial production across the region. But the burst of pollution has coincided with the onset of winter, when boilers fire up to heat buildings, and a similar pall of smog arrived at about the same time last year and the year before.But Qiao Xu, the director of the information office of the Shenyang environmental protection bureau, said in a telephone interview that the most likely culprit for the smog was farmers burning off stalks and stubble left after they harvested their crops.Further chemical tests of the smog would give investigators clues to what caused it, but it did not show heavy concentrations of sulfur dioxide, which usually accompanies smog from coal burning, she said.“This pollution was not restricted to Shenyang. The entire northeast has been affected,” Ms. Qiao said. “That shows that Shenyang’s local pollution has not played a decisive role.”But wherever the pollution comes from, Chinese people appear increasingly impatient with these bouts of toxic air. Leaders have repeatedly promised to reduce pollution, and citizens have become much more aware of the threat to health from smog. Heavy masks, once a novelty favored by expatriates, are now common. And on the Internet, people lamented the latest air crisis.“What have you been doing about it?” one commenter wrote on the microblog of the Sheyang Bureau of Environmental Protection. “You just send out a microblog and that’s it? Wait for the wind to blow it away?”“When the smog is off the charts, you, the environmental authorities, can only tell residents to protect themselves,” another wrote. “Incompetent, shameless, useless.”In Changchun, PM2.5 today >800, low visibility creates an apparition: 5 floating neon characters “NE Dumpling King” https://t.co/90vhJU9Xiy— Becky Davis (@rebeccaludavis) 9 Nov 15Ms. Qiao, the environment official, in turn, criticized Xinhua for its report on Shenyang, but she did not deny that the pollution measure had surpassed 1,400.“The Xinhua reporter had the contact information for the Bureau of Environmental Protection, my office and me personally,” she said, adding that she had not been contacted by the reporter. “I will not offer comment on their report.”By Monday, measures of PM2.5 in Shenyang had dropped to below 300, before rising again in the evening, and the city government downgraded its warning to residents.The United States Consulate in Shenyang also issues its own index of air quality there, as do American diplomatic posts in four additional Chinese cities. Over the previous 24 hours, the Shenyang consulate’s index said on Monday morning, pollution was “Beyond Index.”11-08-2015 12:00 to 11-09-2015 11:59; PM2.5 24hr avg; 536.9; 524; Beyond Index— ConGenShenyang (@Shenyang_Air) 9 Nov 15The acrid smog is likely to linger over much of northeastern China until at least the weekend, Luo Yi, the head of the Chinese Ministry of Environmental Protection’s monitoring department, said, according to People’s Daily online. The worst-hit city on Monday morning was Changchun, where PM2.5 pollution reached 860 micrograms per square meter for an hour or more, he said.Mr. Luo said the ministry had demanded that provincial and city officials “do everything possible to reduce the harm and impact of heavy pollution.”Follow Chris Buckley on Twitter @ChuBailiang.
