By MICHELLE INNISNOV. 8, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia —  Parts of an Australian-run detention center on Christmas Island were on fire early Monday amid anger over the weekend death of a Kurdish Iranian refugee.Guards had fled amid reports of a “meltdown” at the facility, where detainees had lit the medical center on fire, a Greens party senator, Sarah Hanson-Young, said Monday in an ABC radio interview.Refugee advocates said that the Iranian, Fazel Chegeni, who was in his early 30s, escaped from the center on Friday and that his body had been found at the base of a cliff by the Australian federal police.“People are very distressed,” said Ms. Hanson-Young, whose staff members had spoken with detainees by telephone. “The reaction to this man’s death has been one of shock and one of horror.”AdvertisementIan Rintoul, from the Refugee Action Coalition, said Mr. Chegeni arrived in Australia in 2010, and had been granted refugee status. But the delay in processing his claim and releasing him had seriously affected him, Mr. Rintoul said. “His mental health problems were well known,” he said. “Detention could only exacerbate those problems.”AdvertisementChristmas Island is a small island, about 220 miles south of Java, in the Indian Ocean. About 203 men are held there.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Australia’s Immigration Department said in a statement that the center had been damaged in a “disturbance in progress” but that no injuries had been reported. Serco Group, which operates the center for the Australia government, declined to comment.Greg Barns, a spokesman for the Australian Lawyers Alliance, said he had spoken Monday with a client on the island. Damage to the center was not widespread, he said, and a small number of detainees had been involved in the riot. “They are all suffering the deleterious effects of being held on a small, hot, wet, remote island, with nothing to do, and limited access to lawyers, no access to family,” Mr. Barns said.He said 50 to 60 New Zealanders were awaiting deportation at the center. The majority of those detained have had their visas to remain in Australia canceled after failing tests of good character.“Fazel should have been treated with decency and respect,” said Daniel Webb, a lawyer from the Human Rights Law Centre in Melbourne. “Instead he has become a victim of a blunt, arbitrary and tremendously cruel system.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Blaze at Detention Center Follows a Refugee’s Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.