AdvertisementSupported byDelhi JournalBy Ellen BarryNEW DELHI — Those wishing to know the secret desires of the people of Delhi can find them here, in petitions pinned to the wall of a 14th-century castle, addressed to supernatural beings created of smokeless fire.The people who pour into Firoz Shah Kotla every Thursday hold a variety of views about the djinn, or genies, wish-fulfilling but capricious creatures described in Islamic cosmology and “The Arabian Nights.”There are those who believe that djinn take the form of talking crows, or airborne fireballs, or bearded men in white robes. Some contend that they number 40,000, and that they have their own prime minister, or that they register their presence with a peculiar scent.Everyone agrees that djinn are very fast readers, which is good, because by sunset on Thursdays, when the humans stream out of the castle onto the Grand Trunk Road and leave the premises to their rightful owners, they are drowning in paperwork.“Oh Allah, my sister should never talk nonsense and should not answer back,” reads one letter, left for a famously magnanimous djinn known as Nanhe Miyan, or “Little Mister.” One female applicant, after some prefatory flattery, asks Little Mister to knock down the charges against her sons so that they can make bail. Another asks the djinn to provide for the construction of a new latrine, and also to do something about her husband’s disposition.“Please seal his lips,” the letter reads. “He spits dirty abuses. He should become gentle and stop consuming liquor. He should not keep bad company. He wastes money like anything.”And so it goes. A woman clad all in white, who estimates her age at 80, or possibly 90, visits every Thursday to petition for improvements in her “three nasty daughters-in-law.” A snub-nosed tailor from Old Delhi visits when he is racking his brain, unable to complete an especially difficult dress, and wondering why he calls himself a tailor at all.“When I go home, I find that I can make the dress,” he said happily. “That happens because of the djinn.”Delhi has been reinvented so many times by so many powers that it can be difficult to know where its heart is — in the edifices left behind by the British or the austere medieval tombs of the Mughals. By comparison, there is nothing so extraordinary about the ruins of the castle, built by the sultan Firoz Shah Tughlaq, now squeezed between a cricket stadium and the Ring Road, except that they have survived the metastasis of the city for 700 years.But if you sit long enough on a Thursday, you can see the past in living people. Anand Vivek Taneja, an anthropologist at Vanderbilt University who is writing a book about djinn veneration here, traces the letter-writing tradition to a form of governance that was common in 14th-century Delhi, when royal guards were removed and subjects were allowed to enter the palace to directly petition the Tughlaq sultan.Journals, a fixture of the international section, allow correspondents to step back from the news and write about places that intrigue them. We hope you enjoy our choices.And it is true: The letters to the djinn are more bureaucratic than worshipful, often requesting action where human governance has disappointed. They include detailed contact information and are often photocopied and deposited in multiple alcoves, as if addressed to the different departments of a modern bureaucracy, Mr. Taneja says. Some petitioners put copies of police reports for the djinn’s reference.Then, after the Thursday crowd has come and gone, the groundskeepers collect the letters into a huge pile and burn them. The crowds seem to swell every year, encountering neither assistance nor interference from the state.Technically, religious practice is forbidden at properties like this one that are overseen by the Archaeological Survey of India, said Praveen Kumar, a caretaker. “But if we tried to stop them ...” He gestured helplessly. “There are so many of them,” he said. “There will be a riot the moment we try to stop them.”Among the most faithful is Shyam Lal, 63, who has been coming on Thursdays for 45 years. He credits the djinn with a series of wondrous occurrences, including the great luck of getting a job with the Railways in 1973 and the blessing of his retirement in 2012. He acknowledged, with a shrug, that he is Hindu, as are many of the visitors.“I know djinn are Muslim, but I have faith,” he said. “I don’t care. The distinctions are meaningless.”Last year, after his son and daughter-in-law were catastrophically wounded in a motorcycle accident, Mr. Lal’s requests to the djinn were reduced to one: That, though his daughter-in-law had died, his son, Deepak, a 34-year-old software executive, should somehow live. To pay for treatment, Mr. Lal sold his house. He lost 37 pounds. He came to the djinn every Thursday.In March, after Mr. Lal had emptied his savings to pay for 10 months of care, Deepak died. Asked if the djinn had failed him, Mr. Lal replied that the thought had not occurred to him. Instead, he noted a piece of amazing luck. On the day of the accident, perhaps because it was so hot, his son and daughter-in-law had left their baby at home.“We see our son in that child,” he said. “We spend the whole day with him.”It was getting late. Shadows were slanting down over the blackened walls of the castle, and in a row of cavernous, smoke-filled alcoves where people go to establish contact with the djinn, bats chirped at frequencies inaudible to the human ear. Mr. Lal stirred and rose to his feet; he was expected home for dinner.“Now I will take my scooter and I will go to my home,” he said. “I cannot say what will happen tomorrow.”Advertisement