AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan LevinTIANJIN, China — Under different circumstances, the emerald-green sod and newly planted ash and peach trees that dominate the view outside Li Junhua’s deserted apartment building would be a welcome sight in Vanke Port City, a sprawling complex of high-rise condominiums in a showcase economic development zone here.But when Mr. Li and many of his neighbors look at the acres of fresh landscaping, installed across the street from the complex in September near the epicenter of one of China’s deadliest industrial accidents, they see something else: the government’s efforts to deflect their questions — and their anger — about the chemical explosions that decimated a large swath of the neighborhood on the night of Aug. 12, killing 173 people.“The grass is a political performance,” Mr. Li, 39, a businessman, said as he yanked a green blade from the turf near his deserted home. “Local officials just want to impress their superiors.”Almost three months after the blasts damaged over 17,000 homes and stunned the nation with apocalyptic scenes, residents say they are struggling to rebuild their lives in the face of a campaign of intimidation by government officials intent on putting the embarrassing episode behind them and on suppressing public criticism of the Communist Party.The government quickly offered cash compensation for homes damaged by the explosions, but residents say that the plan has been tarnished by bureaucratic apathy toward their plight, and that those unwilling to accept the settlements have been harassed and in some cases roughed up by the police.Many residents are worried about the long-term health effects of toxic fallout from the tons of chemicals that were blasted into the air. Some have put off plans to have children. Others are recovering from physical and psychological damage, and wondering how they will earn a living.“I certainly can’t drive a forklift anymore,” said Liu Guigang, 43, who lost an eye in the blasts, which also fractured some of his vertebrae.Before the disaster, Vanke Port City, with its spacious apartments and proximity to private schools, was the bricks-and-mortar embodiment of China’s middle-class ambitions. Many residents were optimistic strivers who worked at companies near the Port of Tianjin or ran businesses that thrived on its operations.But 2,000 feet from the complex was a shipping yard that held as much as 3,000 tons of dangerous chemicals on the night of the blasts. Rui Hai International Logistics had set up the facility in violation of Chinese regulations requiring that hazardous materials be stored farther from residential areas.In contrast to the landscaping across the street, the Vanke complex remains a desolate expanse of broken furniture and abandoned clothing, some of it discolored, apparently by chemicals spread in the explosions. A sea of twisted metal, dismantled bed frames, tattered blankets and discarded toys stretches for acres across once-leafy public spaces. Rusted skeletons of incinerated cars lie just outside a gate to the development.Displaced homeowners are bunking with relatives in distant parts of this northeastern city or renting apartments as they wait for compensation and try to negotiate better settlements.The government has offered to let residents sell their homes to private developers for 30 percent more than what they paid for them, or to keep the homes and take money for repairs based on appraisals by companies approved by the government. Residents can also get a full refund for unusable furniture and appliances.The state-controlled news media have hailed the plan as generous. But residents say that the money would not be enough to buy new homes because real estate prices have climbed considerably in recent years.Those who work for the government or for state-owned enterprises risk losing their jobs if they refuse the settlements, and people who tried to lead group negotiations have been threatened by the police and other officials, residents said.“The officials just closed the door, sat in their office and then inflicted the plan upon everyone,” said Zhu Haipeng, 37, a safety engineer in the Vanke complex.Like many of his neighbors, Mr. Zhu took part in public protests after the explosions, first over thefts at Vanke Port City for which the residents blamed workers hired by the government to do repairs, and then against local officials ignoring their demands for direct negotiations and fair compensation.“Before the blasts, I never thought it would happen to me,” Mr. Zhu said of taking part in street demonstrations. “But afterward I felt so small.”Residents said that they had staged more than 10 protests and that some participants had been detained. The last demonstration took place in late September, when over 100 people gathered outside a government building until 1 a.m., waiting in vain for an official to speak to them.Many Vanke homeowners are upset that the compensation plan is the same for all apartments in the blast radius, even though some suffered more damage than others. “We should get more because we suffered the most,” Mr. Zhu said of residents in Vanke, the neighborhood hit hardest by the explosions.Zhang Xiaoqiang, an official helping to oversee the disaster response, said the government was “doing a fairly good job of handling the aftermath” of the explosions and defended the compensation plan, pointing out that members of over 99 percent of households in the seven most damaged residential complexes had signed the deal or agreed to do so.He denied that the authorities had pressed residents to accept settlements. “This kind of intimidation doesn’t exist,” he said.Displaced residents from different complexes, many of whom met for the first time during the protests, have been using the messaging app WeChat to compare compensation offers, strategize about negotiation tactics and share videos of police officers attacking homeowners.But such activity is risky. A woman who had agreed to act as a negotiator for some Vanke homeowners backed out after officials threatened to revoke her business license, according to residents. Residents also said that local lawyers, including several with apartments in the complex, were unwilling to represent them because they were afraid of angering the authorities.The government has not released a full inventory of the chemicals that were at the shipping yard at the time of the explosions, but the state-controlled news media has said that Rui Hai handled some of the industry’s most volatile and toxic substances. In late August, the authorities announced that 23 government officials and Rui Hai executives who bore some responsibility for the accident had been detained or placed under investigation.Since then, news about the disaster has all but disappeared from the state news media. Officials have not released any information about the status of the investigation or about whether there will be public trials.Zhao Yingmiao, 33, sustained a broken foot when the blasts knocked her down in her apartment. She still has a limp and has been renting a small one-bedroom apartment with her husband since the explosions forced them out of the Vanke condominium they bought a few years ago for $236,000.The couple owns a bakery nearby, but business has plummeted since the blasts and two employees have quit and left town, fearing the effects of the fallout on their health.With its unadorned walls, their tiny rental presents a dispiriting portrait of lives in limbo. Cardboard boxes with the couple’s belongings sit on the living room floor, while clothing they fear is contaminated remains sealed in white garbage bags.“We were actually planning to have a child, but now, no way,” Ms. Zhao said, expressing fear that exposure to the chemicals could complicate a pregnancy. She has difficulty breathing and worries that inhaling burning chemicals on the night of the blasts caused long-term damage.“This accident was the government’s fault,” said Zhang Yue, 34, who sat at the dining room table in a rented apartment across town one recent morning, while her condominium in the Vanke complex sat empty, its walls and ceilings pockmarked from a shock wave that blew off doors and paint. “If they can’t offer fair compensation, at least they could apologize. But they say nothing.”Ms. Zhang and her husband, who both work for an auto manufacturer, said they had also decided against becoming parents.“If I had a child,” Ms. Zhang said, tears rolling down her cheeks, “it would be unfair to let the kid live in a society like this.”Adam Wu contributed research.slide showAdvertisement