By MARLISE SIMONSSEPT. 30, 2015
PARIS —  Prosecutors have for the first time brought a radical Islamist to the International Criminal Court, accusing him of destroying ancient religious monuments in 2012 when his extremist group overran Timbuktu in northern Mali.Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, a citizen of Mali, was handed over to the court last weekend and made his first appearance Wednesday before an international judge.The prosecution described Mr. Mahdi as a “zealous member” of Ansar Dine, an Islamist extremist group linked to Al Qaeda. It said he played a “predominant and active role” in Timbuktu as the head of a self-appointed morality squad, working in conjunction with a new Islamist court.In that role, the prosecution said, he committed war crimes by directing attacks against 10 religious buildings, including widely revered shrines to Islamic thinkers and an ancient mosque. The group deemed much of the culture of Timbuktu, a medieval center of Islamic learning, as idolatrous and in need of cleansing.AdvertisementBut on Wednesday, Mr. Mahdi, standing behind his court-appointed lawyers, said he was a 40-year-old teachers’ college graduate and civil servant.AdvertisementThe case is opening as the question of prosecuting cultural destruction has been pushed to the forefront by attacks on cultural and religious sites in Iraq and Syria. The court’s chief prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, has condemned the widespread destruction of heritage there, but has no jurisdiction in either country.The events in Mali hark back to 2012, when two groups of Islamic radicals overran Timbuktu and other towns in the northern desert. One group was Ansar Dine, or Defenders of the Faith, to which prosecutors said Mr. Mahdi belonged. The other, a splinter group, called itself the Movement for Oneness and Jihad. They imposed an extreme form of Shariah law, meting out punishments like stoning and mutilating local Muslims for infractions.The Islamists gained worldwide notoriety as images filtered out showing such punishments, as well as the smashing of religious buildings and the burning of two celebrated libraries holding unique religious and other manuscripts. The Islamists were chased out in 2013 by a French-led military campaign.But Mali’s government said it was incapable of conducting widespread criminal investigations and asked the International Criminal Court to intervene.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prosecutors have been largely silent on the investigation until now. They have also said little about the handover of Mr. Mahdi, for whom the court issued a warrant on Sept. 18. But last October, news reports from Mali said he had been detained and imprisoned in Niger, where he had fled. This would have given prosecutors time to build their case.The court is dealing with cultural destruction as a war crime for the first time in this case, though the notion is well grounded in international criminal law.The United Nations Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has heard at least 16 cases in which it cited the destruction and plunder of cultural and religious sites as both crimes against humanity and war crimes. In Bosnia during the Balkan wars of the 1990s, more than 1,000 churches and mosques were intentionally destroyed during a so-called ethnic cleansing campaign in which Serbian forces drove non-Serbs from large areas, according to Serge Brammertz, the tribunal prosecutor. Tribunal judges repeatedly found that obliterating religious symbols of Catholics and Muslims was very much a hallmark of that campaign.Human rights groups and some residents of Timbuktu welcomed Mr. Mahdi’s arrest. But others criticized it.AdvertisementFatouma Harber, who said Mr. Mahdi had been a student of hers in 2008, wrote in The Guardian that he was only a “little fish,” and that others, including his father, who served as an Islamist judge, bore greater responsibility for crimes in Timbuktu.Clémence Bectarte, a lawyer for a group of victims from Timbuktu, said in an interview that they filed suit in March against Mr. Mahdi and 14 others in a Mali court. Ms. Bectarte, who works for a human rights group, the International Federation for Human Rights, said that he had played an important role as “the head of the Islamist police” in Timbuktu, but lamented that the charges made no mention of the rape, torture, abduction and forced marriages of hundreds of women in the city.“It is very hard to see that the court is dealing only with the destruction of buildings, and they are forgotten as victims,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Global Court Takes Up Case of Cultural Crimes .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.