By ISABEL KERSHNERNOV. 8, 2015
JERUSALEM — Yitzhak Navon, who took part in the founding of Israel, served as its fifth president, from 1978 to 1983, in a largely ceremonial role, and then returned to politics as a Labor Party legislator and minister of education, died late Friday night at his home here. He was 94.His death was announced by the president’s office.The scion of an old Jerusalem family — his father was a descendant of exiles from Spain who came to the city from Turkey in 1670, and his mother’s family arrived from Morocco about 200 years later — Mr. Navon was one of a fading generation of Israeli state builders.Entering public life immediately after Israel’s establishment in 1948, he began in the foreign service, then served as chief of staff to David Ben-Gurion, Israel’s first prime minister, and to Moshe Sharett when he succeeded Ben-Gurion.“Time after time you were there, at the pivotal junctures, always in a significant position,” Reuven Rivlin, the current president of Israel, said in a eulogy on Sunday as Mr. Navon’s body lay in state at the president’s residence.AdvertisementPrime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu described Mr. Navon as “one of the nation’s finest and among its greatest builders.”Advertisement“With his personality and proficiency in the Arabic language,” Mr. Netanyahu said in remarks at his weekly cabinet meeting on Sunday, “he also worked to bridge between Israel and its Arab neighbors, especially Egypt.”Mr. Navon was also fluent in Ladino, the Judeo-Spanish language of the Sephardic Jews who were expelled from Spain in 1492, and he strove to preserve Jewish Ladino traditions.As a writer and playwright, Mr. Navon created several acclaimed works dealing with Sephardic heritage, including the musical “Sephardic Garden,” which Mr. Rivlin described as “a landmark in Israeli culture.”Mr. Navon became a unifying figure in a polarized Israel, where ethnic tensions ran rampant between Sephardic Jewish immigrants from North Africa and Asia and the state-founding Ashkenazi elite of European origin.For many Israelis, Mr. Navon was also a man of the people who would shop at the market and chat as easily with the vendors as with heads of state.“He represents a bygone era, our parents’ era,” said Hagit Caspi, 63, a Jerusalem resident who came to pay her respects at the president’s residence. “He represents a Jerusalem of old, where people were more innocent, nobody locked their doors and everybody spoke each others’ languages.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Born on April 9, 1921, to Yosef and Miryam Navon, Mr. Navon graduated from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, where he studied Islamic culture, Arabic language and Hebrew literature.During the 1948 war, he headed the Arab division at the Information Section of the Haganah, the pre-state Jewish paramilitary organization.AdvertisementHe married Ofira Erez, a psychologist, in 1963. She died of leukemia in 1993. Mr. Navon is survived by his second wife, Miri Shafir Navon; a daughter, Naama; a son, Erez; and several grandchildren.Mr. Navon was first elected to the Knesset in 1965 as a member of Ben-Gurion’s Rafi Party, which later aligned with other political factions to form the Labor Party.As president he toured Israel extensively, and in 1980, after Israel’s peace treaty with Egypt, he paid a state visit to Egypt as the guest of President Anwar Sadat, who described him as a “friend.” It was the first visit of an Israeli head of state to an Arab country.After the massacre carried out by the Christian Phalange militia in the Palestinian refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila during the Lebanon War of 1982, Mr. Navon demanded that an official commission of inquiry be convened to ascertain the extent of Israeli responsibility. Mr. Rivlin said that Mr. Navon had threatened to resign had the Kahan Commission not been formed.After leaving office as president, Mr. Navon returned to the Knesset and also served as education minister from 1984 to 1990.In an interview with the Hebrew newspaper Yediot Aharonot a few months ago, Mr. Navon spoke wistfully of the city of his birth.“Once there was a time in Jerusalem of brotherhood and peace,” he said, when “cultures and languages lived side by side, and not one at the expense of the other.”He continued, “There was a brotherhood between modest, simple people, and whoever was called to heaven was asked to pray there and act for those who remained. I, too, when I go, will ask for the welfare of those that remain.”A version of this article appears in print on November 9, 2015, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Yitzhak Navon, 94, Dies; President of Israel Who Bridged Divisions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.