AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — Egyptian military intelligence on Sunday detained an investigative journalist who is also the founder of Egypt’s premier human rights group on charges of publishing false news, raising alarms about attempts to suppress domestic dissent as the government grapples with questions about the crash of a Russian passenger jet.The journalist, Hossam Bahgat, 36, founded the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, a highly regarded rights organization, in 2002. Since the military takeover in 2013, however, he has distinguished himself as a unique voice in the Egyptian news media by writing a series of painstakingly researched investigative reports that have called into question government statements.Mr. Bahgat was summoned to military intelligence on Sunday and interrogated for hours before he was allowed to meet with lawyers. He was ordered to spend the night in detention, with his lawyers saying that military prosecutors would most likely decide on Monday whether to formally send him to trial. He also faces charges of insulting the military, his lawyers said.Mr. Bahgat’s most recent report — and apparently the one that set off the ire of the military — investigated the low-key convictions of 26 military officers accused of having plotted a coup against the current government. The report raised questions about possible dissent in the ranks and about potential retribution against officers who had crossed the secret police. The article was the focus of questions by the prosecutor, according to Ragia Omran, a human rights lawyer who attended the interrogation in support of Mr. Bahgat.Mr. Bahgat published his articles in English and Arabic in the independent online publication Mada Masr. He also wrote a pointed daily review of Egypt’s Arabic-language news media, often noting its unanimous support for the government.In his most recent review, on Saturday, Mr. Bahgat poked fun at the news media for its adherence to the government line about a conspiracy to blame terrorism for the Russian jet’s crash, which killed all 224 people aboard.Egyptian news outlets all agree that “the West is conspiring against Egypt and punishing Russia because it is fighting in Syria, and Egypt is the one who is paying the price,” Mr. Bahgat summarized, “through the lies published by Britain and the West generally about the explosion of the plane through terrorism and the negligence of airport security, in order to sabotage our tourist industry.”Mr. Bahgat had recently returned after spending a year as a visiting fellow at the School of Journalism at Columbia University. His friends said he had received a written summons at his home ordering him to appear at military intelligence at 9 a.m. Sunday. He was not allowed to bring a phone, a lawyer or anyone else with him inside.It was after 4 p.m. when he was allowed to call for a lawyer.A military spokesman, Gen. Mohamed Samir, declined to discuss the nature of the charges, or the reason for Mr. Bahgat’s detention. “You can ask him yourself when he gets out,” he said.Asked if Mr. Bahgat would get out, the general said, “I have no idea.”Kareem Fahim contributed reporting.Advertisement