AdvertisementSupported byBy Kareem FahimSHARM EL SHEIKH, Egypt — Egyptian military prosecutors on Monday extended the detention of Hossam Bahgat, an investigative journalist and the founder of Egypt’s leading human rights organization, in a sign that the government is moving to bring him to trial on charges of publishing false news harmful to national security.Mr. Bahgat, 36, was interrogated for hours on Sunday by military investigators about an article he wrote describing the convictions of 26 military officers accused of plotting a coup against the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. On Sunday night, he was moved to a secret detention center, and on Monday, prosecutors told his lawyers he would be held for four more days.The detention of Mr. Bahgat has raised new concerns about the government’s zeal to repress any dissent and prompted an outcry from human rights groups in Egypt and abroad. The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said Monday that he was “concerned” about Mr. Bahgat’s arrest, calling it “the latest in a series of detentions of human rights defenders and others that are profoundly worrying,” according to a briefing by Mr. Ban’s spokesman.A statement on Monday signed by 13 Egyptian human rights groups called for Mr. Bahgat’s “immediate and unconditional release” and said he had been “arbitrarily detained solely for the peaceful expression of his views.”The statement said that Mr. Bahgat’s secret, pretrial detention violated Egypt’s press law and Constitution. The charges he faces, including “deliberately spreading false information,” carry sentences of up to three years, the statement said.Among the groups that signed the statement was the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, which Mr. Bahgat founded in 2002.Since leaving human rights work and focusing on a career in journalism, Mr. Bahgat has quickly distinguished himself as Egypt’s foremost investigative reporter, writing for Mada Masr, an online publication.His arrest came just weeks after Mr. Sisi pardoned journalists from Al Jazeera’s English news network who had been imprisoned for more than a year. Egyptian officials and even Mr. Sisi had strongly suggested that they viewed the international opprobrium over the prosecution of the journalists as an unwanted nuisance.On Monday, international solidarity campaigns geared up in support of Mr. Bahgat, and it appeared that Egypt would be confronted with a new round of international criticism, at a time when the government was already facing questions about the crash of a Russian passenger jet in the Sinai Peninsula.“This is a bellwether moment for Egypt,” Sarah Leah Whitson, the Middle East director at Human Rights Watch, said in a statement by the group on Monday. “Continuing to hold Hossam Bahgat or putting him on trial would be a definitive signal that President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and his government have no interest in rolling back the repression of the past two years.”David Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Cairo.Advertisement