By ANDREW E. KRAMERNOV. 9, 2015
Pyotr Pavlensky, a radical political performance artist, was arrested Monday after setting fire to the entrance of Russia's security service's headquarters in Moscow.MOSCOW —  The artist’s brush was a cigarette lighter, his paint a can of gasoline and the canvas, as it has always been for Pyotr Pavlensky, a symbol of the Russian state.In the early hours of Monday morning, the performance artist best known for nailing his scrotum to the cobblestones of Red Square set fire to an entrance to the headquarters of Russia’s Federal Security Service, the F.S.B.The door to the building known as Lubyanka burst into flames, but quickly burned out, apparently causing only slight charring.Mr. Pavlensky, whose work smudges the boundaries between protest, art and revolutionary activity, called the immolation on Monday “Threat.” His plans apparently went undetected by the F.S.B., which like its predecessor, the K.G.B., is responsible for surveillance of the Russian population to prevent crimes and attacks.AdvertisementThe police charged Mr. Pavlensky, 31, a dropout from one of Russia’s most prestigious art academies, with vandalism, but left open the possibility of additional criminal counts.AdvertisementAs the government of President Vladimir V. Putin has marginalized the political opposition and co-opted or repressed independent media, protest art like Mr. Pavlensky’s remains a rare possibility for dissent, said Marat Guelman, a Moscow art critic and gallery owner.“Authoritarian regimes want classicism, but it transforms into kitsch, and protests movements are more democratic in their influences,” Mr. Guelman said.“We don’t need an artist as a decorator,” he added, saying that artists like Mr. Pavlensky maintain an important “moral authority” in Russia.Mr. Pavlensky comes from a community of protest artists in St. Petersburg, the most prominent of whom made up the art collective Voina, or War, which took aim at what the artists saw as the neo-Soviet side of Mr. Putin’s policies. Mr. Pavlensky considers his work to be in the tradition of subversive street artists, prominent in former Soviet politics, that include the punk protest group Pussy Riot and other artists who played a pivotal role before the 2013 uprising in Ukraine.There, the disrobing by members of the feminist group Femen in protest and actions like frying an egg on the eternal flame in Kiev that memorializes soldiers killed in World War II were part of the movement that helped oust the government of Viktor F. Yanukovych, the former president. The events in Ukraine, and the Kremlin’s intervention there, including the annexation of Crimea, have motivated some dissenting voices in Russia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Art is lucky in Russia,” Mr. Guelman said. “Art is again in the avant-garde.”Mr. Pavlensky, wiry and intense, is missing a quarter inch or so of his right earlobe, having cut it off for an art piece. In 2013 he affixed his scrotum to a crack in the cobblestones of Red Square in Moscow for a piece he called “Fixation.”In an interview with The New York Times this summer, he described his art as consisting of two parts: his own action and the reaction of the government, which he says tends only to emphasize his themes.For example, last year, when he cut off part of his ear sitting naked on the fence of the Serbsky Center, a psychiatric institute that repressed political dissidents in the Soviet Union, he was, as expected, escorted by the police into the building for evaluation.AdvertisementThe action on Red Square, he said, was inspired by Russian prisoners in remote penal colonies where nailing one’s scrotum to a bunk bed or the wooden planks of a barracks floor is an established, if extreme, form of protest against the actions of prison guards. Performing “Fixation” in the glittery, commercial heart of contemporary Moscow was Mr. Pavlensky’s commentary on the voluntary submission of Russian men and likened Mr. Putin’s rule to a penal colony.“Sometimes, you pass a point of no return,” he said of how he felt about this performance, which like all of his actions, ended with his arrest. “I nailed my sack to the chink in the stones.”He has also described his work as a way to act out the behavior that the security state expects from its citizens.That may well include posing a threat, the title of Monday’s act, though Mr. Pavlensky, still in detention hours later, did not comment publicly after setting the door on fire.“The Investigative Committee wants to demonstrate that I am crazy,” he said in the interview, referring to a powerful prosecutorial agency in Russia. “And to show their own craziness, I do what they want, but my way.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: With Russia’s Political Opposition Marginalized, a Protest Artist Takes Up the Cause .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.