By MATTHEW BRUNWASSERNOV. 9, 2015
BELGRADE, Serbia —  Unesco, the United Nations’ cultural agency, narrowly denied Kosovo membership on Monday, handing a sizable political victory to Serbia, which had fought a fierce battle against the bid for months.Kosovo’s candidacy was supported by the major Western countries and was seen as a strategic step toward United Nations membership and full international recognition for the former Serbian province, which separated in 1999 after an American-backed NATO bombing campaign that drove out Yugoslav forces.A majority of members at the agency’s general conference in Paris voted for Kosovo’s membership — 92 to 50, with 29 abstentions. But Unesco rules require a two-thirds majority to accept a new member state.“I congratulate the citizens of Serbia who have had the confidence to defend that which our ancestors have preserved for centuries,” President Tomislav Nikolic of Serbia said in a statement. “This is a just and moral victory under almost impossible conditions.”AdvertisementEarlier in the day, a motion by Serbia to delay the vote until the next general conference in 2017 was rejected 89 to 59. Last month, Unesco’s executive committee recommended extending membership to Kosovo.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was quiet sadness in the streets of Pristina, the capital, where Kosovars were hoping to celebrate the membership of a multiethnic Kosovo in the global cultural organization, said Dren Doli, of the Group for Legal and Political Studies, a nongovernment policy organization in Pristina, in a telephone interview.AdvertisementLobbying by Serbia, Russia and others against Kosovo’s membership, Mr. Doli said, showed that “democratic countries and values cannot always determine how international organizations manage their objectives and expand their reach.”Mr. Doli said he expected Kosovo to try again to join Unesco at the next general conference.Since declaring independence in 2008, Kosovo has been recognized as an independent state by 109 of 193 United Nations member states and is a member of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.Serbia has fought hard against Kosovo’s representation in every international institution where it has sought membership.A version of this article appears in print on November 10, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Unesco Rejects Membership for Kosovo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.