AdvertisementSupported byBy Barbara SurkLJUBLJANA, Slovenia — Slovenia began erecting a razor-wire fence at its border with Croatia on Wednesday to stem the inflow of migrants, as winter closes in and countries to the north tighten their own border controls.A convoy of army trucks carrying barbed wire and construction equipment arrived in the border town of Veliki Obrez at dawn on Wednesday. Soldiers rolled out the wire along the Slovenian bank of the Sotla River, which forms part of the 400-mile border with Croatia.Slovenia is an important country on the migration route through the Balkans because its border with Croatia also forms the southern frontier of Europe’s Schengen area, where passport-free travel is possible.Since Oct. 17, when Hungary closed its border with Croatia and redirected the flow, more than 180,000 migrants from Africa, the Middle East and Asia have entered Slovenia, a nation of two million people.In recent months European nations have worked to block the main route taken by migrants fleeing war and upheaval.Though the new fence threatens to block the route again just as winter is approaching, migrants have largely been able to find their way around such obstacles. Officials are anticipating that asylum seekers may now turn to Albania and Italy as an alternative routes to more prosperous European countries in the north.Most of the migrants moving through the Balkans have gone on to Austria and then Germany. Slovenia has been saying that it could manage the influx of about 6,000 to 8,000 asylum seekers a day as long as roughly the same number moved on each day. But Austria said recently that it could accept only 6,000 people a day from Slovenia, and Germany has started to tighten some controls on arrivals.As a result, the Slovenian prime minister, Miro Cerar, said that it was very likely that many of the 30,000 migrants who were traveling north from Greece could become stranded in Slovenia, which has limited room to accommodate them.“It’s a big number,” Mr. Cerar said at a news conference on Tuesday, after the government approved construction of the fence. “If we don’t act now, we could have a humanitarian catastrophe on the territory of Slovenia,” he said.Mr. Cerar said that even with the fence, the border with Croatia “will remain open.”Nations along the migrant trail are watching Germany’s actions closely. On Wednesday, the German interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, defended the country’s new measures to turn away migrants who are not eligible for asylum, even from Syria, whose four-year war has driven tens of thousands of citizens to flee to Europe.The German migration office agreed a year ago to accept written asylum applications from Syria and forgo the usual personal interview, but the policy was reversed on Oct. 21, Mr. de Maizière told Parliament, because of growing doubts that all the applicants are genuine.“We know that many people say they are Syrians, although they are not,” he said. “Some also come with false papers. Without personal hearings, you can only establish with difficulty what a person’s real origins are. All that troubles us, and that is why we must react. The situation forces us to adapt.”He also said that Germany would be stricter about admitting relatives of refugees already on its soil, and that in many cases would do so only if the family would be assured of a reasonable standard of living.This summer, as the Majid family left Syria for Europe, The New York Times followed the group through weeks of defeat and triumph, disillusionment and determination.“Moving to reunite, only to find unemployment and a lack of prospects, should not occur,” he said, adding, “It is clear that we cannot look to double or even treble our high refugee numbers through family reunion.”Tensions have risen over the migrant crisis among the Balkan countries that once made up Yugoslavia. Slovenia has accused Croatia of dumping thousands of desperate people at random locations on the border and leaving them to find their own way across, while Croatia has complained that the European Union has failed to come up with a common strategy to cope with the crisis. European Union leaders met in Malta on Wednesday for their sixth meeting of the year on the issue.Slovenia’s decision to build the fence drew sharp criticism from humanitarian organizations and human rights activists. Last week, an open letter accused the government of failing the migrants by leaving them out in the open, hungry and cold, while the authorities registered them and processed them.Countries elsewhere in Europe have also been raising barriers against the continued flow of asylum seekers. Sweden imposed temporary border controls on Wednesday and called on the European Union to share the burden of dealing with the crisis more widely, Reuters reported.Meanwhile, on Wednesday, 14 migrants died when their boat sank off the Turkish coast, The Associated Press reported.Alison Smale contributed reporting from Berlin.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement