AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa HadidRAYMUN, Jordan — He was a fierce Jordanian nationalist, following his father and uncles into the military from this village loyal to King Abdullah II. He was also a deeply conservative Muslim, at the mosque most days by 3 a.m. to lead the first and most challenging of the five daily prayers.So relatives of Anwar Saad, 29, were flummoxed at the notion that he could have opened fire on Monday at a police training center in Amman, killing two Americans, two fellow Jordanians and a South African before being fatally shot. It was the first such attack inside a Jordanian security facility, a destabilizing event that brought fears of infiltration by Islamist militants into one of the Arab world’s safest cities.“To kill a Muslim is forbidden in Islam, would he do that?” asked a cousin, Raed Saad, a 32-year-old school principal, as the family tried to make sense of the news here Tuesday.Jordan, a staunch ally of the United States, has been involved in the American-led aerial bombing campaign against Islamic State targets in neighboring Syria and Iraq for the past year. Under a militaristic monarchy, it has struggled to maintain immunity from the chaos around it.From the north, refugees pour over the border fleeing the Syrian civil war. To the east, the Islamic State controls much of the Iraqi province bordering Jordan. To the west is a new Palestinian uprising. And in Egypt, not so far away, Western officials increasingly suspect that it was a bomb that caused the crash of a Russian charter jet last week, killing all 224 people aboard.Monday’s attack came on the 10-year anniversary of one of the darkest days in Jordanian history, when three suicide bombers killed nearly 60 people and wounded more than 100 in synchronized attacks on three Amman hotels.“The Jordanian authorities are in a state of shock,” said an editorial in Tuesday’s edition of the pan-Arab daily Rai Al-Youm. “Jordan is facing extremely difficult circumstances these days due to the deteriorating security condition in all its neighboring countries, whose repercussions and consequences are reaching it in one way or another.”Fayez Duwairi, a retired Jordanian brigadier general, said the training center where the shooting erupted Monday was a particularly sensitive site, having hosted thousands of foreign recruits since it opened in 2005. “There was trust, and overconfidence,” he said of the arrangement. “They will have to limit the carrying of weapons with live fire, and review the participants.”The Jordanian government has not said what position Mr. Saad held in the security forces or what he did at the training center. Mr. Saad’s relatives were not sure how long he had worked there, or what his specific role was; they said that he had studied law at a military academy and then climbed through the ranks to reach Jordan’s preventive security branch. In Raymun, a village nestled between olive orchards north of Amman, there were few clues as to what might have motivated the attack.(Local and international news media erroneously reported the gunman’s surname on Monday as Abu Zaid; his relatives said Tuesday it was Saad, the tribal name much of the village shares.)The young man was seen as a role model, urging loitering children to join him at the mosque to pray, doting on his two young sons, kneeling to kiss his mother’s feet when greeting her.She had raised him and four siblings alone after his father, also a military man, died of cancer 23 years ago. Neighbors said Anwar was religious even as a boy, and had made pilgrimages to the holy cities of Mecca and Medina 11 times in his short life.He married a woman who cloaks herself in a full veil, and they went to the holy places on their honeymoon. The king’s offices paid for another trip to Mecca and Medina because Mr. Saad was accompanying his mother, a military widow. The army paid for a third after he won a Quran-memorization contest, said the cousin, Raed. “Would a man who hates the army and the government accept this?” he asked.Mr. Saad’s vocation was not unusual here. “I mean, 90 percent of Raymun’s sons are in the army!” Raed Saad exclaimed. “We are nationalists.” He said that all of Mr. Saad’s uncles served in the military except one, Suleiman Saad, a former member of Parliament from Jordan’s Muslim Brotherhood.On the unfinished second level of Mr. Saad’s home, parakeets chirped from six cages. “He kept birds,” the cousin noted. “Is that something a terrorist does?”At the Saad clan’s central hall used for family occasions, a large poster of Abdullah II; his father, King Hussein; and their predecessors adorns a wall emblazoned with the words “Loyal Hashemites,” referring to the royal family’s tribe. Fewer than a dozen men gathered in a hall with space for 200 to mourn on Tuesday afternoon.Mr. Saad’s brother Fadi, 32, a teacher, said the family had refused to accept his body for burial until the authorities identified who had shot him.“We want to know, why did you kill him?” Fadi Saad asked. “Why not arrest him and then question him over his acts? Why did you do this?”Mohammed Quweider, who teaches Arabic, interjected: “If he committed any act.”“If,” the brother echoed in a firm tone.Perhaps, suggested the cousin, Raed, he just flipped. Perhaps one of the American trainers insulted Islam, and Mr. Saad snapped, opened fire.“Maybe, maybe, maybe,” he said. “Maybe he was provoked.”videoAdvertisement