AdvertisementSupported byBy Julie Hirschfeld DavisWASHINGTON — Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel made a direct appeal on Tuesday to Democrats still troubled by the public feud over the nuclear deal with Iran, appearing at a leading liberal think tank aligned with President Obama to declare that support for his country in the United States must remain a bipartisan proposition.At an hourlong appearance before the group, the Center for American Progress, Mr. Netanyahu fielded questions and defended his policies in front of an audience of leading foreign policy experts, Democratic operatives and Jewish activists, projecting a benevolent tone even as he countered criticism of his approach to resolving the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.“I know that my visit here has been a source of some controversy, so I doubly appreciate the invitation,” he told Neera Tanden, the group’s president, who has been criticized by some progressive advocates for providing a forum for Mr. Netanyahu despite his bare-knuckled tactics in lobbying against the Iran deal.“I came here,” he added, “because I think it’s vital to understand how important it is for me that Israel remain an issue of bipartisan consensus.”“The relationship with the United States — all parts of the United States — and the American people is a strategic asset to our national security and our future,” the prime minister said, prompting applause from the roughly 200 people in attendance.The visit, coming a day after Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Obama met at the White House for the first time in more than a year, was significant as much for the venue as for the message. In choosing to appear at the Center for American Progress, Mr. Netanyahu, a conservative leader who has spent the past year waging a high-profile fight with Mr. Obama over the nuclear deal with Iran, was reaching out to a group that backed the accord and has an influential voice within the Obama White House.He was also seeking validation from an organization with longstanding ties to Hillary Rodham Clinton at a time when Mrs. Clinton, the leading contender for the Democratic presidential nomination, has made a public effort to embrace Israel and outline a tough stance toward Iran.“It was wise of him to do this because I do think damage has been done to the fabric of our relationship because of the partisanization of these issues over the last year,” said David Axelrod, a former senior adviser to Mr. Obama who attended the event. “After everything that happened with the Iran agreement, there was a need to get together and reset the relationship, and this begins to do that.”Still, Mr. Netanyahu’s appearance — the mirror image of one he made on Monday night, when he spoke to the conservative American Enterprise Institute — set off controversy of its own.Several progressive thinkers, including former staff members of the Center for American Progress, have criticized the group for hosting the prime minister, saying that doing so was tantamount to rewarding a figure who had openly challenged a sitting president, alienated Democrats and put at risk the traditionally bipartisan nature of the United States-Israel alliance.“Unfortunately, the net result will be that he can leave Washington claiming no harm was done by his efforts to sabotage the national security strategy of the president of the United States and that progressives have forgiven him, but that won’t be true,” said Joseph Cirincione, the president of the Ploughshares Fund, which played a leading role in organizing the coalition of liberal and antiwar groups that lobbied for congressional support of the Iran deal.Mr. Cirincione, a former vice president for national security at the center, said he had been invited to the event but refused to attend. “It’s one thing for an institution to recognize him; I didn’t want to contribute to the validation of his position,” he said.Ms. Tanden, who fielded a request from Ron Dermer, the Israeli ambassador to the United States, to invite Mr. Netanyahu, said the organization had debated whether or not to receive him, ultimately deciding that it wanted to play a role in repairing the rifts in the relationship between the United States and Israel that surfaced during the Iran debate.On Tuesday, Ms. Tanden welcomed Mr. Netanyahu cordially but challenged him with some pointed questions about his approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including concerns about Israel settlement activity and violence against Palestinians. She also said that progressives had been “taken aback” by a remark Mr. Netanyahu made on the eve of his re-election that seemed to suggest he wanted to discourage Israeli Arabs from voting.Mr. Netanyahu disavowed the comment, as he has previously, saying that while he had sought to make a point about a particular group that was opposed to him, the statement was “wrong” and “should not have been said.” He said he had personally apologized to Palestinian leaders for it, and told them he considered himself “the prime minister of each of you.”He also pushed back strongly on the notion that he or his government had made it more difficult to reach a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, vigorously defending the right of Israeli settlers to remain in place and expand their communities and chafing at the notion that Israeli violence against Palestinians can be compared to the terrorism his people face.“It’s become an axiom that we are gobbling up land — we’re not,” Mr. Netanyahu said, asserting that no new settlements had been built in the past 20 years in Israel, and that the expansions had not “materially” altered the map. “Google this,” he implored the audience.He insisted that the primary impediment to making peace was not an unwillingness on his part to cede territory to the Palestinians but instead the refusal of the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, to discuss such a resolution, and an underlying fear on the part of Israelis that a Palestinian state would threaten its security.Before leaving, he thanked Ms. Tanden profusely and implored her, “Invite me back.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement