By SIMON ROMERONOV. 10, 2015
In Complexo do Alemão, one of Rio de Janeiro’s largest favelas, surging violence has claimed the lives of children and police officers, calling into question the government’s police pacification strategy.RIO DE JANEIRO — Just seven months ago, this city was stunned by images of the lifeless body of Eduardo de Jesus, a 10-year-old boy fatally shot by a police officer on the doorstep of his home. The authorities promised justice to Eduardo’s parents. Protests flared in Complexo do Alemão, the maze of cinder block homes where Eduardo lived.Then attention to Eduardo’s death subsided, a sign of a crime-weary society somewhat numbed to the thousands of people killed each year by the police. Brazil has far more documented cases of such killings than the United States, where the outcry over such episodes has recently been much more intense.But Eduardo re-emerged in the national consciousness this month. Investigators have concluded that the police officers involved in his killing were acting in self-defense, reacting to gunfire in their direction from an unidentified shooter.This version of events directly contradicted accounts by witnesses who contended that there had been no exchange of gunfire.AdvertisementTerezinha Maria de Jesus, Eduardo’s mother, said in May that she had been threatened by the same police officer who admitted shooting her son. She said this week that she was stupefied by the possibility that the investigators’ findings could allow the officers involved in the episode, whose identities have not been disclosed, to emerge without any punishment.“They need to be tried, sentenced and imprisoned,” Ms. de Jesus, 40, a maid who moved back to her home state of Piauí after her son was killed, told reporters about the police officers in question. “I’ll fight tooth and nail for that to happen.”AdvertisementA New York Times video follows the challenges faced by Ms. de Jesus and other residents of Complexo do Alemão as they grapple with the resurgence of violence following an effort by the authorities to assert greater control over big swaths of Rio. As if in an undeclared war, the number of casualties in Rio is climbing again, including innocent children like Eduardo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.