By MICHELLE INNISNOV. 10, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — The Australian authorities on Tuesday used tear gas and force to quell rioting at a detention center on Christmas Island that began after an Iranian refugee being held there died over the weekend.In a statement, the Australian Immigration and Border Protection Department said that most detainees cooperated with the police after reinforcements were flown to the island overnight.The immigration minister, Peter Dutton, said that tear gas and some force were used on a small number of detainees who had built barricades and were threatening to use weapons.Five men were injured, but it was unclear whether they were hurt during the riots or after the police arrived to retake control of the center, which was extensively damaged after being set on fire.AdvertisementThe unrest began on Monday after the refugee, Fazel Chegeni, in his early 30s, escaped from the center and the Australian federal police found his body at the base of a cliff.A formal investigation into his death will be opened, but human rights advocates said that Mr. Chegeni had been severely affected by his incarceration on the remote island in the Indian Ocean, which is closer to Indonesia than Australia’s mainland. About 200 men are held at the center, which a private company, Serco Group, operates for the Australian government.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, Mr. Dutton described most of the detainees there as criminals. Some are awaiting deportation after serving jail terms. Mr. Chegeni, who had been granted refugee status, was waiting to see whether he would be settled by Australia.Mr. Dutton estimated the cost of the damage to the center at more than 1 million Australian dollars, or $700,000. He said those who caused the damage would be prosecuted.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Australia’s migration policies came under criticism on Monday during a United Nations human rights review in Geneva. The review cited the towing back to sea of rickety boats carrying asylum seekers, accusations that the government had paid smugglers to turn boats around, and the treatment of asylum seekers and refugees held in offshore detention centers on Nauru and Manus Island, a part of Papua New Guinea.“A number of states called on Australia to end abuses related to offshore processing and pushbacks of boats, as well as mandatory detention of asylum seekers,” said Elaine Pearson, director of Human Rights Watch in Australia, after the review.She said that the government was cruel, detaining asylum seekers and refugees, sometimes for years on end, then sending them to countries that have no resources to integrate them properly into the community.A version of this article appears in print on November 11, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Oceania; Australian Officials Bring Rioting on Christmas Island Under Control.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.