She draws crowds, the demure young woman in a sleeveless black dress whose portrait occupies a central position in “The Temperature of History,” the first major exhibition of figurative art from the collection of China’s leading art school.On the exhibition notes, the painting of Peng Liyuan by Jin Shangyi is identified only as “a well-known singer.” But visitors to the exhibition drawn from the Central Academy of Fine Arts collection in the Workers Cultural Palace, at the Forbidden City in Beijing, seem to know who she is. Or, if not, they are quickly told by someone standing next to them: China’s first lady, the wife of President Xi Jinping. “Peng Mama,” as the official news media call her.“She’s so pretty, isn’t she?” said Zhu Yuhua, who traveled to Beijing with her teenage son to tour the city’s sights, two people among the crush of tourists filling the streets, squares and parks of the capital during the weeklong national holiday celebrating the anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic on Oct. 1, 1949. Privately, some people have wondered why the portrait occupies such a prominent place in the show, in the central axis of the Hall of Rest, a position that ensured maximum exposure to the crowd but meant that the oil painting, framed under glass, caught the sun’s glare, creating unwanted reflections.“Well, they couldn’t exactly put her in a corner,” said an older man at the exhibition, who identified himself as a former student of Mr. Jin’s but declined to give his name. Unapproved discussion of China’s leaders and their families is frowned on by the authorities.“I think it’s fine to have her here, in the middle,” Ms. Zhu said, before dragging her son to view other paintings, which included post-1949 revolutionary pageants as well as more intimate and individual works from previous years.In an account also carried by the state news media, the former student said that Mr. Jin stumbled across Ms. Peng in 1984, when she was a student in her early 20s at the China Conservatory of Music, long before she became a household name known for her trilling soprano and married Mr. Xi.“He asked a neighbor of his who worked at the China Conservatory of Music to find some attractive young students for him to paint,” he said.“So he found her and two others, and painted all three of them,” the older man, in a dark blue suit and glasses, continued. “She was paid one renminbi” — about 16 cents — “an hour to sit. She sat for four hours a morning. It was work for her.”Since Ms. Peng, now 52, became first lady in 2013, “Young Female Singer” has replaced Mr. Jin’s acclaimed “Tajik Bride” as his most iconic painting, according to the show’s curators, who described the portrait as Mr. Jin’s “foremost work.”“Tajik Bride” sold at auction in 2013 for more than 85 million renminbi.Both paintings represent a moment in the early 1980s when Chinese artists were extricating themselves from the politically correct tradition of socialist realism — heroic images of laborers and leaders — and introducing more personal styles and subjects in oils and other media.Sitting on a plain black chair before a landscape painting from the Northern Song dynasty, Ms. Peng looks pensive, even solemn, the expression on her face difficult to read.According to Chinese news reports, Ms. Peng tried to buy the painting from Mr. Jin, who instead presented her with a copy, choosing to leave the original in the academy’s possession.“The Temperature of History: The Central Academy of Fine Arts and Chinese Figurative Painting” runs through Oct. 11 at the Workers Cultural Palace in Beijing. Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow. 