During World War I, the European edition of The New York Herald kept an eye on the state of food rations, from essential goods to the more upmarket items. Below are a few examples from 1915:German Authorities Fear Bread Riots LONDON — Owing to the new regulations for the sale of bread in Berlin, special constables, distinguished by a white armlet, are patrolling in front of the bakers’ shops. Their duty is to warn people, who are unable to purchase more supplies, to be peaceable. If these warnings are unheeded the police are summoned. A Berlin message, via Copenhagen, says that the city magistracy, in accordance with the Government’s decision, has issued strict orders as to the consumption of bread. Buying or selling bread for money is prohibited. The authorities will issue red stamps to each individual for a certain quantity of bread, and only in exchange for those stamps will bread be supplied. It is expected that within a few days similar regulations will apply to all German communities. — The New York Herald, European Edition, Feb. 4, 1915Tea Companies May Benefit From WarLONDON — Whatever inroads may have been made in the profits of tea companies by the effects of the war in its early stages are now not only being remedied, but bid fair before long to be more than made up. It may be that there is not much speculative interest in tea shares, but the firmness of stocks and their rising tendency, almost amounting to a boom, created by the great demand for tea arising out of the war, will do much to cheer shareholders for whatever disappointments they may have had over the dividend declarations for the past year — in some cases no dividends at all. Of the total there is an increase of over one and a half million pounds in the fortnight for export alone. The causes are several. The demand for tea, for instance, has grown considerably since the curtailment of the hours for the sale of alcoholic liquors, and there is a constant large despatch of tea for the soldiers at the front. — The New York Herald, European Edition, March 27, 1915R Months Here Again and Likewise OystersOysters again! To-day is the day. Even the war cannot prevent the return of the months with r’s, nor have submarines, mines and other new inhabitants of the deep been able to disturb the placid and philosophic oyster. He has gone right on fattening and making himself edible, for the principal business of an oyster in this world is getting ready to be eaten, and he has stuck to his guns and done his duty during the present upheaval like every other Frenchman. Yes, oysters will be plentiful, and will sell at about the usual prices, the dealers say — that is, most of them will. The outlook for “Marennes,” “Armoricaines” and “Belon” is excellent, but the “Portugaise” has not quite been able to live up to her reputation. The truth is that the soldiers along the coast made such raids on these bivalves last year that the repopulation is as critical an issue among them as among their human neighbors on dry land. They will be few and small in the Paris markets this season. — The New York Herald, European Edition, Aug. 31, 1915 Cosy Dinners Rule At Les AmbassadeursLes Ambassadeurs, one of the oldest restaurants of Paris, has been a favorite rendezvous during the summer for déjeuners, teas and dinners, being among the few high-class restaurants which have given real war prices. Though many of the habitués have begun to complain that winter will soon drive them indoors, they will find the specially arranged salons equally attractive and the dishes for which Les Ambassadeurs has long been famous will be just as delicious, especially the hot chicken pie on Thursdays. The manager told a Herald correspondent that it had been altogether worth while to keep the restaurant open during the war, as it had been particularly popular among the officers, both English and French, who had come from the front from time to time for a few days in Paris. He has had no difficulty in procuring a normal supply of fresh fish and other foods, and he declares that Les Ambassadeurs will continue to serve its renowned dishes during the winter at the same moderate prices which have been charged since the beginning of the war. — The New York Herald, European Edition, Sept. 25, 1915