Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版Last month in a small town in southern China, doctors removed the lungs from an 18-year-old who had just died and placed them in a shipping box. It was a rare moment in a country of nearly 1.4 billion people where hundreds of thousands are waiting for organ transplants, but where officials say only about 1,700 donors provided organs for nonfamily members last year.The lungs safely stowed, the medical team began the 150-mile drive from the town, Cenxi in Guangxi Province, to an airport in Guangzhou to fly to its destination. There, at Wuxi People’s Hospital near Shanghai, a patient was waiting for a double lung transplant.But this is what the highway looked like as they set off in the early morning of Oct. 4, during the weeklong National Day holiday, with cars blocking even the emergency lane. It illustrates the transport difficulties that have exacerbated the acute shortage of organs for transplant: The drive took far longer than it should have. The team did not arrive at the airport until 8:05 a.m., for a flight that was scheduled to depart at 8:20 a.m. Employees at the carrier, China Southern, refused to let the team board — even knowing that the doctors were carrying the lungs.They could not board even though doctors had informed the airline the previous day about the special transport, said Dr. Chen Jingyu, one of China’s leading lung transplant surgeons who was waiting at Wuxi, and even though the flight was delayed and did not take off until much later that morning. The team was able to switch to another commercial flight that morning, but the frustration was immense, Dr. Chen said.China Southern apologized, and Dr. Chen said the publicity had helped improve the attitude of Chinese airlines toward medical teams transporting organs. But it is still a nerve-rattling race against time, nearly every time.“Every minute and every second count,” Dr. Chen said in a post on his personal WeChat account.“Lungs should be transplanted within nine hours,” he told Xinhua Daily, based in Jiangsu Province. “Our team went all out and did the right lung 11 hours later and the left one 13 later. That set a record for China.”This time, the surgeons made it. But often they fail, through no fault of their own.Dr. Chen estimates that about 300 lungs were donated across China in the first nine months of this year, of which only half were transplanted. The rest were discarded because of poor quality, including 50 to 60 that had deteriorated during delays in transport, Dr. Chen said. “They are wasted en route,” he said in an interview.By comparison, in the United States, in the first eight months of this year, 1,344 donors gave lungs, and 1,371 lungs were transplanted, according to the United Network for Organ Sharing, a nonprofit based in Virginia that coordinates organ procurement and distribution.Dr. Chen is calling for China to set up a system to transport donated organs quickly and safely. He has written twice to the National People’s Congress, where he is a delegate, urging the establishment of fast-track channels for organs, to be supported by the Public Security Bureau, local officials, airlines and railways, even shipping companies.Unlike many developed countries, China does not have dedicated organ transport systems, and doctors must rely on commercial transportation. Not only are bottlenecks on the ground common, but civilian flight delays are among the worst in the world, with 80 percent of China’s airspace restricted to military uses.Organ quality issues affect transplants in other countries, too, but China’s high rate of waste appears to be unusual.In the United States, about 8 percent of lungs donated in 2013 were unused, said Joel Newman, a spokesman for the United Network for Organ Sharing. The most common reasons, he wrote in an email, are “either the condition of the organ is found to be unsuitable for the recipient, or the intended recipient’s medical condition changes in such a way that that person can’t be transplanted and another recipient can’t be located in time.”Dr. Chen said in the interview: “We urgently need a national system that the Health Commission, the Transport Ministry, the China Civil Aviation Administration all take part in.” He added: “Air traffic control should give priority to planes that are carrying organs.”“Of course, they need to do this,” said Cong Yali, a professor of medical ethics at Peking University in Beijing, in an interview. “In the United States, they use things like helicopters. In China, they just haven’t worked it out well.”After Dr. Chen’s second appeal to the National People’s Congress, he said he received a vaguely worded response from the China Civil Aviation Administration. It said it supported the idea but noted that any plan would need the cooperation of hospitals, airports, airlines and air traffic control personnel. It did not give a timetable for implementation.Some changes are under way, however. Health Commission officials are setting up a network to create a centralized organ pool and distribution system modeled on those in the United States. They are also trying to encourage citizens to donate their organs after death. In addition to the 1,700 deceased donors who contributed about 5,000 organs to the common pool last year, an additional 2,000 to 2,500 organs were provided by living donors to relatives, according to Huang Jiefu, who leads the commission’s Human Organ Donation and Transplantation Committee.A longstanding impediment to organ donations in China has been a cultural perception that it is unfilial not to keep one’s body intact after death as this is a gift from one’s parents. That has contributed to China’s decades-long practice of harvesting organs from condemned prisoners to make up the shortfall.Health Commission officials announced last year that this practice would end as of Jan. 1, 2015, though they have said they would continue to use organs from prisoners who voluntarily donate them.Despite fears that the announced shift in policy would depress the supply of organs, Mr. Huang said the number of organs donated had not declined. In the first nine months of 2015, he said, about 2,000 donors had provided about 6,000 organs to the common pool, while 2,000 more organs had been donated by relatives to their kin.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow. 