AdvertisementSupported byLetter from IndiaBy Manu JosephNEW DELHI — What do Indians despise more: communal conflict or corruption?The outcome of the recent Legislative Assembly election in the northern state of Bihar, which almost all observers and even pollsters got horribly wrong, may point to an answer.Bihar, which has a population of about 100 million, is among the poorest regions in the world. The kind of politicians who ensured this quality of life were among those in the fray, but this time there was another force at play — Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who was the star campaigner for his Bharatiya Janata Party.The party, and later Mr. Modi, came into political prominence with the resurgence of the Hindu right wing. In the past they have been accused of promoting violence against Muslims. They have tried to soften the image, but the branding runs deep. To counter Mr. Modi, major political parties in Bihar got together to form an alliance that they said was “secular,” which in India these days means something that is B.J.P.-free.On Sunday, when the results were announced, they showed that the alliance had won a majority. The party that had won the greatest number of seats is headed by a man who has been convicted of corruption and is out of prison on bail. Across the nation, well-bred liberals with social media accounts rejoiced as though a host of moral wizards had vanquished a dark lord. Several politicians argued that the average Indian voter had shown that he has a disdain for those who promote intolerance.Prashant Bhushan, a former politician and one of India’s leading public interest litigators, told me: “The lesson is that Indians hate corruption, but that they hate fascist communalism more. Only the loonies in his party would reason that the result should inspire Modi to stop pretending to be a moderate statesman and go all out and become an extremist. That would only destroy the B.J.P., as Modi knows.”The Bihar election was not a simple contest between corruption and disharmony. There were several reasons the B.J.P. lost: People voted for their castes and stayed loyal to the local parties. The parties of the alliance ensured that they would not eat into each others’ votes. Also, the incumbent chief minister of Bihar, Nitish Kumar, is popular for getting things done, such as building roads and reducing corruption.But the Hindu nationalist character of the B.J.P. was a factor in a manner it was not during the general elections in 2014, when Mr. Modi was a beneficiary of a mass anticorruption movement. In recent months, as voters in Bihar were making up their minds, the B.J.P. was promoting a ban on the sale and consumption of beef in India, because the cow is considered sacred to Hindus. As a result, the blame for any acts of violence by a mob or radical Hindus has tended to be placed on the party and Mr. Modi.Indian voters view all political parties as corrupt, but only the B.J.P. as communal. One reason is that the party has traditionally been the beloved of the upper castes, and the prejudices of the strong, historically, have done more harm than those of the weak. This perception of the B.J.P. influences not only Muslims, but every community and caste that feels vulnerable to physical violence by a dominant political or cultural force. And they tend to grow fonder of their own political organizations.In a Facebook post on Saturday, Yogendra Yadav, a political activist, wrote that polls usually overestimate the B.J.P. because of a sampling bias.“The voters who agree to be interviewed tend to be more from powerful social groups,” he said. “The voters from weaker communities are less likely to speak the truth in public.”If some voters are so insecure that they are afraid to speak the truth to a pollster, it is not hard to imagine how much importance they attach to a political guarantee of harmony, and how much they despise anything that the strong adore. The middle class and the rich, who are not vulnerable to mob violence, may consider corruption the greater evil. But for most of the rest, it would appear that politically motivated sectarian conflict is.If the perception of the B.J.P. as communal deepens, what should worry Mr. Modi is that there is no such thing as a majority population in India — only a sum of minorities.Follow Manu Joseph, author of the novel “The Illicit Happiness of Other People,” on Twitter @manujosephsan.Advertisement