By SOMINI SENGUPTANOV. 11, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  A veteran United Nations official who earned his diplomatic credibility in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis will take over the United Nations refugee agency amid the world’s worst migrant crisis in decades.In a statement late Wednesday, the United Nations secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, announced that he would nominate the official, Filippo Grandi, an Italian, to the post of high commissioner for refugees.The nomination requires the endorsement of the General Assembly, but that is largely a formality. Mr. Grandi would succeed António Guterres, a Portuguese diplomat whose term concludes at year-end.Mr. Grandi was nominated over a former Danish prime minister, Helle Thorning-Schmidt, whose candidacy drew criticism because of Denmark’s stance on migrants. Denmark took out advertisements in Lebanese newspapers recently to publicize its new restrictions on benefits.AdvertisementThe executive director of the United Nations environment program, Achim Steiner of Brazil, was among the other contenders, as well as Jasmine Whitbread, a dual citizen of Britain and Switzerland and international chief executive  of Save the Children, the advocacy group.AdvertisementMr. Grandi has worked in the refugee agency for years in various capacities, including as its mission chief in Afghanistan. But he is best known for having served in one of the most politically delicate operations in the United Nations system: United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees. He led that agency from 2010 to 2014, and before that was its deputy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The chief role of the high commissioner today is more necessary than ever: to be the global advocate on behalf of refugees and to give them a voice grounded in international law,” Mr. Grandi wrote in a questionnaire circulated to the candidates by the International Council of Voluntary Agencies, an advocacy group.He wrote that while the influx of migrants to Europe had drawn worldwide attention — he called it “grave and unprecedented” — the problem of refugees and internally displaced people was a larger issue.The high commissioner, he wrote, must “constantly remind public opinion that the bulk of refugee and I.D.P. movements are occurring in the Middle East, Africa, and even regions of relative stability such as East Asia and Latin America.”One of his main challenges will be to raise money for the agency, which is severely underfunded.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Italian U.N. Official Named to Refugee Post.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.