By STEPHEN CASTLENOV. 11, 2015
LONDON —  A lifelong republican and veteran leftist, Jeremy Corbyn, the new leader of Britain’s opposition Labour Party, caused consternation among traditionalists in September when he failed to sing the national anthem, “God Save the Queen,” at a ceremony to commemorate World War II.On Wednesday, he again risked the wrath of royalists when he swore an oath of loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II, but apparently not — as some would have preferred — on bended knee.Mr. Corbyn’s latest brush with the British establishment took place at its apex, Buckingham Palace, when he was admitted formally to the Privy Council, an ancient but now largely ceremonial group of advisers to the monarch. Membership allows privy counselors to use the title Right Honorable and should give Mr. Corbyn, as leader of the opposition, access to some confidential security briefings.Last month, Mr. Corbyn spurned an earlier opportunity to take part in the Privy Council induction ceremony, pleading a prior engagement, which a British newspaper later revealed to be a walking vacation in Scotland.AdvertisementBefore his arrival at Buckingham Palace, Mr. Corbyn visited a school in Crawley, south of London, and announced to a television reporter that he would not be kneeling in front of the queen — a version of events not contradicted by any officials after the event. But he took part in the rest of the ceremony, which involves taking an oath of allegiance and making a gesture which is traditionally to kiss the queen’s hand.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Quite how much hand-kissing took place was unclear, though protocol dictates that even supporters of the monarchy do not make much lip contact, according to the diaries of a former Conservative Party minister, Alan Clark, which recount his Privy Council induction in 1991.“Knelt awkwardly on the stool (bloody difficult), held up the testament in my right hand,” Mr. Clark wrote, adding that, after saying “I do,” he then “rose, advanced about ten feet diagonally to another stool, bowed, took the Monarch’s hand and ‘brushed it with my lips.’ ”AdvertisementAfter Mr. Corbyn’s ceremony, the Labour Party said only that its leader was now a member of the Privy Council. Buckingham Palace also refused to provide further details.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Labour Leader Pledges Loyalty To Queen, if Not to Tradition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.