AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneIsaac Herzog, head of the political opposition in Israel, reserved judgment on Wednesday about Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s visit this week to Washington, saying the outcome was unclear despite what appeared to be an improved atmosphere created by the trip.“The proof of the pudding is in the eating,” Mr. Herzog, leader of the Labor Party, told reporters at a meeting in New York organized by the Israel Policy Forum, a group that advocates a diplomatic solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.Mr. Herzog, whose own visit to the United States partly overlapped with Mr. Netanyahu’s, said the success of the prime minister’s meeting with President Obama and other administration officials would be determined partly by improvements in American military assistance to Israel and whether there was “any commitment on behalf of the prime minister to make a change on the peace front, on the Palestinian front, and this, I don’t know.”Mr. Netanyahu’s meeting with Mr. Obama, their first since the Iran nuclear agreement was reached in July, had been widely anticipated as an opportunity for both to move past their bitter disagreement over that accord and to soothe other tensions in the relationship, including over Israeli settlement expansion and the stalled Israeli-Palestinian peace process.Both sides described the meeting as cordial and pragmatic, and Mr. Netanyahu restated his support for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.The prime minister, the head of Israel’s conservative Likud-led coalition, also sought to appease anger toward him from American Jews who support Mr. Obama and the Democratic Party. Many thought Mr. Netanyahu took a politically polarizing approach to the Iran issue by having aligned himself with Mr. Obama’s Republican adversaries.Mr. Netanyahu made an unusual appearance in Washington on Tuesday before the Center for American Progress, a leading liberal think tank, and said support for Israel in the United States must be bipartisan.Mr. Herzog, who lost a race against Mr. Netanyahu to be prime minister last March, has repeatedly criticized him over collapsed peace negotiations with the Palestinians. Mr. Herzog has blamed him, as well as the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, for the heightened tensions in recent months, which have exploded in deadly violence between Israelis and Palestinians in Jerusalem and elsewhere.“All I can say is that I’ve been advocating, staunchly, that despite the fact that we’re in a terror wave of stabbings and throwings of stones and casualties, and another painful moment between Jew and Arab in the Holy Land, despite all of that, we must look beyond that, and take steps that can change the course of history in the region,” Mr. Herzog said Wednesday.“We cannot go on just managing the conflict,” he said.Mr. Herzog also sought to quash what he described as repeated speculation in the Israeli news media that he might work with Mr. Netanyahu in a government of national unity.“I made it clear time and again that we are an alternative to Netanyahu,” he said, “and I also made clear in some very harsh speeches that I feel that Netanyahu has been prime minister for almost 10 years, and he bears a responsibility and he has to make a historic change.”“We will be there to help him from the outside or from the inside, depending on how far he goes,” Mr. Herzog said, “but I’m not negotiating in any way, and I made it clear to everybody that we are the opposition, and we are the alternative.”Mr. Herzog was in New York to attend an event at the United Nations commemorating a speech made 40 years ago by his father, Chaim Herzog, a former Israeli president and United Nations ambassador, inveighing against a resolution that equated Zionism with racism. Sixteen years later, that resolution was repealed.Advertisement