By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM and WILLIAM NEUMANNOV. 11, 2015
Two nephews of the wife of President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela were arrested this week in Haiti and flown to the United States where they will face drug trafficking charges, according to a person with knowledge of the matter.The arrests are sure to roil already tense relations between the United States and Venezuela and could tarnish the Venezuelan government’s image as it heads into crucial legislative elections scheduled for next month.The two men, Efraín Antonio Campo Flores and Francisco Flores de Freitas, are nephews of Cilia Flores, the wife of Mr. Maduro, the person with knowledge of the matter said. Mr. Maduro, a leftist, calls Ms. Flores the country’s “first combatant” rather than its first lady. Ms. Flores is one of the most powerful people in the upper echelons of government and is frequently seen at her husband’s side.The two men were arrested Tuesday in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, at the request of the American authorities and handed over to agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration, who put them on an agency plane and flew them to the United States, the person said. They are expected to appear in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Thursday.AdvertisementOvernight, Mr. Maduro posted a defiant message on Twitter that seemed to refer to the arrests obliquely, saying “neither attacks, nor imperial ambushes, will effect the People of the Liberators, we have only one destiny...Victory...”AdvertisementThe two men were charged in a sealed indictment accusing them of conspiring to ship 800 kilograms of cocaine to the United States, to be sold in New York, according to the person with knowledge of the matter. The arrests were first reported Wednesday by Reuters and The Wall Street Journal.In October, the two men approached a D.E.A. informant in Honduras and discussed moving the narcotics through that country, the person said. They later met with the informant in Venezuela and provided a kilogram of the cocaine as a sample of the drugs they intended to provide, the person said, adding that agents had made video and audiotapes of at least one of the encounters.The investigation was conducted by the federal Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force in New York, which is made up of agents from the D.E.A., the Department of Homeland Security, the New York Police Department, the New York State Police, the United States Marshals Service and the Internal Revenue Service.American officials say that a large amount of the cocaine produced in Colombia is shipped through Venezuela before it heads to the United States and other parts of the world.Investigators have long contended that high-level Venezuelan officials are involved in the drug trade and several officials in the armed forces and government have been publicly identified by the American authorities as having links to traffickers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officials said this year that the powerful head of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, was being investigated on charges of trafficking. Mr. Cabello has strongly denied any connection to the drug trade.Last year, a former head of the Venezuelan intelligence apparatus, Hugo Carvajal, was arrested in Aruba at the request of the American authorities, who unsealed indictments accusing him of being on the payroll of Colombian traffickers and of investing in and coordinating drug shipments. But Mr. Carvajal was allowed to return to Venezuela rather than being sent to the United States to face the charges.Mr. Maduro has angrily responded to the American allegations, calling them false and part of a conspiracy by Washington to undermine his government.AdvertisementAsked about the arrests, the chargé d’affaires of the Venezuelan Embassy in Washington, Maximilien Sánchez Arvelaiz, said, “I don’t have any information about it.” Venezuela and the United States do not have ambassadors in each other’s capitals and Mr. Sánchez Arvelaiz is the top Venezuelan diplomat in Washington. Officials in Caracas did not immediately respond to word of the arrests.Mr. Maduro and Ms. Flores were together on Wednesday during a visit to Saudi Arabia. Mr. Maduro was scheduled to be in Geneva on Thursday to speak before the United Nations Human Rights Council.Voters in Venezuela will go to the polls on Dec. 6 to elect a new National Assembly.Patricia Torres contributed reporting from Caracas, Venezuela.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Is Holding Relatives Of Venezuelan Leader .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.