By ELISABETH MALKIN and KEVIN RANDALLNOV. 11, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  The leader of Mexico’s governing party has said it will stop hiring neuroscience consultants to register voters’ brain waves and read their facial expressions, responding to a political outcry over its use of the tools of neuromarketing to shape its campaign and governing messages.Manlio Fabio Beltrones, a longtime political boss who in August became leader of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, said last week after The New York Times reported on the methods that the party would stick to tried and trusted campaign tools, like polls and political intuition, “the old-fashioned way,” in its future campaigns.The Times reported last week that the party, known in Spanish as the PRI, had hired neuromarketing experts during President Enrique Peña Nieto’s 2012 campaign to measure potential voters’ brain waves, skin arousal, heart rates and facial expressions. One company, Neuropolitika, said it was asked to assess opposing candidates and the best way for Mr. Peña Nieto to connect emotionally with voters.Dan Hill, a facial coder in the United States, was paid by a Mexican market research firm to analyze the expressions on voters’ faces during a presidential debate. He reviewed data from 100 voters and presented his findings to campaign strategists in the early morning hours after the debate, he said.AdvertisementOpposition politicians quickly pounced on the news, arguing that the party’s campaign accounts showed no record of the spending. Mr. Peña Nieto was widely accused of mounting a presidential campaign that far exceeded spending limits, although federal election officials found no wrongdoing.Advertisement“The PRI should clarify how much it cost and if there was any interference in people’s privacy,” Senator Alejandro Encinas, of the left-wing Democratic Revolutionary Party, said last week.Senators from the conservative National Action Party were less concerned about any violation of privacy than they were about the transparency of the PRI’s spending.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The PRI shouldn’t have any objection to informing how much it paid for this, in using a science for this purpose,” Senator Victor Hermosillo said.Receipts furnished by Neuropolitika showed that the PRI continued to use the techniques, hiring the company in 2014 to analyze responses to government measures and again this year to review proposed campaign messages in midterm elections.But Mr. Beltrones, who took over the party leadership as it prepares for a slew of races for governor next year and the presidential campaign in 2018, said Friday that he believed the company did work for the PRI only last year. The PRI did not confirm the 2012 spending.“Personally and as president of the national executive committee, we don’t need instruments of that nature in the future,” Mr. Beltrones said.Another company, Emotion Research Lab, based in Spain, says it has recently been working for the PRI using facial coding analysis.Maria Pocovi, the firm’s founder, said the technology was not invasive. “We cannot read minds and of course we cannot change them,” she added.Elisabeth Malkin reported from Mexico City, and Kevin Randall from Chicago.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexican Party Vows to Drop ‘Neuropolitics’ .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.