By JAMES KANTERNOV. 11, 2015
VALLETTA, Malta — The European Union was closing in on a deal Wednesday to return more migrants to Africa, but there was skepticism that the plan would meet the goal of reducing the numbers of refugees arriving in Germany, Scandinavia and other destinations.Europe sends less than 40 percent of migrants who do not qualify for asylum back to their countries of origin. The draft deal being hashed out at a meeting of European leaders here is aimed partly at raising that figure.Faced with its largest migration challenge since World War II, Europe is increasingly trying to draw a distinction between people who are coming primarily for economic opportunity and those fleeing war and persecution. Yet as the summit meeting began, African leaders appeared set on reminding their European counterparts just how tricky that distinction can be.Accepting returned migrants “is a difficult subject” for Africans, said President Macky Sall of Senegal. “We have people who have often taken chances with their lives in terrible conditions, who have crossed deserts and the Mediterranean,” and there had been “thousands of deaths,” Mr. Sall told reporters.Advertisement“We have to have a frank discussion,” said Mr. Sall, who emphasized that there also needed to be a focus on allowing Africans to stay in Europe.AdvertisementEven so, more than 60 leaders of European and African nations were expected to give their preliminary approval to the deal, which would not prevent African migrants who qualify for asylum from staying in Europe. Eritreans are among those who often meet those criteria.“This action plan will fight illegal immigration and it will do more for legal possibilities to work in Europe,” Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany told reporters. She said Europe had “clear demands and expectations” for Africa.But the focus on Africa sidestepped some of the larger challenges associated with the flow of people into Europe. Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan are currently among the main sources of migrants reaching Europe, and many of them are coming through Turkey and the western Balkans rather than across the Mediterranean Sea from North Africa.Leaders from Africa and Europe meet in Malta to discuss the wave of migrants coming to Europe, which is struggling to cope using the Dublin regulation governing which country is responsible for a refugee.The plan has raised deep concerns from human rights groups over the welfare of migrants.“You have to ask how accelerating procedures to return people can be effective,” said Iverna McGowan, the acting director for Amnesty International’s European Institutions office. “Of course, when you think how desperate these people must be to risk that voyage, then they and a lot of others in need of protection will just keep trying,” she said.The deal is likely to provide for €1.8 billion, about $1.9 billion, from the European Union budget to help pay for the initiative, and to help address the root causes of migration. More money would come from national donations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If successful, the plan to deport more migrants who fail to qualify for asylum could have an impact on migrants from Syria, Afghanistan and other war-torn countries by creating more capacity to accommodate them in Europe, according to some experts.“Europe wants to show that people who deserve international protection will have a clear right to it, and that this right is not diluted by economic migration,” said Ralph Genetzke, the head of mission in Brussels of the International Center for Migration Policy Development.Before the meeting here, there was skepticism among Africans about plans to issue special documents to allow migrants to be returned to their countries of origin. The lack of such documents is often the main obstacle to putting migrants on airplanes back to their homelands.AdvertisementThe latest draft of the deal on Wednesday evening called for more efforts to address the absence of identification documents, rather than create additional ones.There should be a strengthening of “the capacity of authorities of countries of origin to respond in a timely manner to readmission applications, including through support to modernize civil registry systems and fingerprints digitalization,” according to the draft deal.In a concession to the African delegates at the meeting, the draft states that the procedures for deporting migrants should “give preference to voluntary return.” An earlier draft foresaw “both voluntary and forced returnees.”The draft also calls for the creation of “return pilot projects” between the European Union and African countries that come with “a tailor-made package of support.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.