By SEWELL CHANNOV. 11, 2015
A South African court on Wednesday sentenced eight former police officers to 15 years each for the 2013 torture and murder of a taxi driver from Mozambique.LONDON — A South African judge on Wednesday sentenced eight former police officers to prison for the murder of a taxi driver from Mozambique who was handcuffed to the back of a police van, dragged about a third of a mile and then placed in a police holding cell, where he was beaten.The case drew worldwide attention after a bystander’s video of the arrest and dragging was widely shared on social media. It highlighted the xenophobic violence that many migrant workers face in South Africa, which is struggling with high rates of violent crime and a troubled legacy of police brutality two decades after the end of apartheid.The eight men were convicted on murder charges in August after the judge, Bert Bam, ruled that the victim, Mido Macia, 27, had died after sustaining blunt force injuries, from both the dragging and a further assault in the holding cell. At the sentencing hearing on Wednesday, at the North Gauteng High Court in Pretoria, he called the murder “barbaric and totally inexplicable,” adding, “What made their conduct more reprehensible was their cowardly attack in the cell on a defenseless and already seriously injured man.”Judge Bam sentenced each of the former officers to 15 years in prison. He said he decided against the maximum penalty, 25 years, because the killing was not premeditated and because the men did not have records of misconduct. The men were dismissed from the police force in a hearing last year.Advertisement“We are happy with the sentence,” the prosecutor, Charles Mnisi, said in a telephone interview. “We can only hope that it sends a message to all other police officers in South Africa, and helps to revive the respect our society used to have for the police.”AdvertisementBenedict Ndaba, a lawyer for the former officers, told reporters that he planned to file an appeal.Mr. Macia’s arrest and death occurred on Feb. 26, 2013, in Daveyton, a township about 25 miles east of Johannesburg. He had been suspected of parking illegally. According to the former police officers, the crowd turned hostile after Mr. Macia resisted arrest; Judge Bam found that the crowd’s anger unnerved the men, but said it did not excuse what followed.“This was a barbaric act committed by the police, who are there to protect the community, and not to kill the community,” a lawyer for Mr. Macia’s family, Jose Nascimento, said in a telephone interview. “I do understand, and feel very sorry for, policemen in South Africa, who put their lives at risk on a daily basis and are killed at an astronomically high rate. But one cannot accept rogue policemen. This was just madness.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Macia was supporting his parents, two nephews, a girlfriend, Biuda Mazive, and their young son, Sergio, who all live in Mozambique. The family has filed a lawsuit against the South African government, seeking 6.5 million rand, about $457,000. Government officials have said that they intend to settle the case, but that they are negotiating the level of compensation.About 5 million migrants work in South Africa — most of them from nearby countries, like Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Malawi — but precise figures are hard to come by. Caroline Wanjiku Kihato, a sociologist who studies migrants in South Africa, said the government has tended to overestimate the number of migrants.“It makes migration a hot political issue and turns migrants into a scapegoat for the lack of transformation, the lack of jobs, the lack of socioeconomic equity that South Africa faces,” she said in a telephone interview, adding, “This was a landmark case, showing that the law does indeed punish heinous crimes of xenophobic violence.”In the past, many came for jobs in the mining industry, but today a large number run small businesses, often in the underground economy, or provide basic services like driving a taxi, as Mr. Macia did. It is rare, though not impossible, for the migrants to seek and attain citizenship.On several occasions, anti-immigrant sentiments have turned into collective violence: in May 2008, when an estimated 60 migrants died, and again in April of this year, when the army had to be called in to quell the unrest.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Africa; South Africa: Police Officers Sentenced in the Murder of an Immigrant Cabby.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.