By JAVIER C. HERNÁNDEZNOV. 11, 2015
BEIJING —  President Xi Jinping’s sweeping crackdown on corruption has claimed senior officials in China’s two largest cities, the latest indication that Mr. Xi’s effort to consolidate power and sideline political enemies shows no signs of abating.The officials included Ai Baojun, 55, a vice mayor of Shanghai who oversaw a prominent economic zone, and Lu Xiwen, 60, a senior Communist Party official in Beijing.Mr. Ai, a former steel executive, led an experimental free-trade zone in Shanghai that Chinese leaders, including Prime Minister Li Keqiang, had praised for its efforts to promote investment. Mr. Ai also helped oversee several high-profile projects, including the construction of a Disney resort expected to open next year.Ms. Lu, a deputy party secretary, was head of the Communist Party school in Beijing for training and indoctrinating government officials.AdvertisementThe Chinese authorities did not detail the charges against Mr. Ai and Ms. Lu, saying only that they were being investigated for “serious breaches of discipline.”AdvertisementSince taking office in 2012, Mr. Xi has embarked on a far-reaching campaign against graft, vowing to take down both “tigers and flies,” or prominent officials and low-level bureaucrats alike. He has gone after party heavyweights, military generals and local politicians.As growth in China’s economy has slowed in recent months, government investigators have turned their focus to the financial sector.The inquiry into Mr. Ai, vice mayor since 2007, was disclosed Tuesday, making him the highest-ranking official in Shanghai to be investigated since 2012. This year, a former deputy chief of the Shanghai free-trade zone, Dai Haibo, was also placed under investigation on suspicion of corruption.In Beijing, Ms. Lu’s colleagues were quick to distance themselves from her case, which was announced Wednesday. Guo Jinlong, the secretary of the Communist Party in Beijing, said at a meeting that party members should learn from the case. According to a notice from the Beijing city government, Mr. Guo said the case “seriously harms the party’s image, authority and capabilities.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Mr. Xi approaches the end of his first five-year term as president, he is moving quickly to consolidate power and promote allies, experts said. In 2017, Communist Party officials will meet to determine a slate of crucial personnel appointments.“The tragedy of the authoritarian regime is that you have leaders in place, but you don’t have your own team in place,” said Fu Hualing, a professor of law at the University of Hong Kong. “You need to spend your entire term to make room for your supporters so you can carry out your policies.”Mr. Fu said Chinese leaders should focus on putting in place a permanent system to guard against corruption that is shielded from political whims.“You have removed the fat cats from power and replaced them with skinny cats,” he said. “But are you confident that your boys will behave in the long term, or will they behave like their predecessors?”Zhang Tiantian contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Corruption Battle Claims 2 Senior Officials in China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.