

      By SOMINI SENGUPTA

NOV. 13, 2015

“Momentum” is the buzzword for talks in Vienna on Saturday, rolling off the tongues of diplomats who are seeking to end the war in Syria, though they have also tried to limit the expectations for success. There has been another kind of momentum on the ground, as fighting has intensified in recent weeks, subjecting civilians to ever greater bloodshed and misery. The various combatants have been jockeying for an edge on the battlefield before the participants arrive at the negotiating table. Neither the government of President Bashar al-Assad nor any of the militias trying to overthrow him will be represented in Vienna, at least not directly; their powerful international backers will be there, along with the top diplomats of more than a dozen countries. What do these countries want, and what are they doing to get it? Here is a rundown.The Kremlin has more skin in the game now than before it intervened militarily on the side of the Assad government. Russian airstrikes, mounted against American-backed rebel groups as well as the Islamic State, have significantly shifted the dynamics on the ground. One crucial Russian objective in Vienna is to pin down which rebel groups will be considered “terrorists” and which “moderate”; the distinction will govern which groups will be allowed to take part in a postwar transitional government. It will not be easy: Western leaders have already signaled that what they mean by “moderate” may include some hard-line Islamist groups. Though Russia has staunchly backed Mr. Assad, its ultimate allegiance to him is unclear. A proposal Russia circulated to diplomats last week would exclude Mr. Assad from any role in writing a new constitution, though it left open whether he could contest future elections — a nonstarter for Mr. Assad’s opponents.The White House has said that Mr. Assad can have no long-term role in Syria’s future, though it has stopped saying that he must step down immediately. The attacks in Beirut on Thursday and in Paris on Friday, however, are likely to add greater urgency to the call to tackle the Islamic State. Still, the United States will want to limit how long Mr. Assad can be a part of a transitional government and ensure that he cannot run for election again.Mr. Assad is a vital ally of Iran, which needs access to Syrian territory to support Hezbollah, its powerful Shiite client in Lebanon. Iran has sent ground forces and senior officers to fight alongside Mr. Assad’s troops, and has sustained casualties in Syria. It never agreed to a 2012 communiqué reached in Geneva calling for Mr. Assad to yield power to a transitional government. Iran’s leaders will want any deal reached in Vienna to satisfy its hard-liners at home and maintain Tehran’s influence in Syria. Iranian diplomats will want to apply the “terrorist” label broadly, including the Sunni groups supported by its regional rivals. Diplomats from the Sunni Arab kingdom are not likely to be pleased to face their Iranian rivals across the table in Vienna. They are likely to press for assurances on two fronts: that the hard-line Sunni groups they support in the war will have a hand in Syria’s future, chiefly to counterbalance the influence of Shiite groups, and that Mr. Assad does not. Syria’s northern neighbor shares Saudi Arabia’s antipathy for Mr. Assad and wants him gone. But with two million refugees on its hands, Turkey also wants a swift end to the war and its effects, and is under pressure from its Western allies to agree to a compromise settlement. What Turkey can be offered in exchange remains unclear. It wants an American-enforced “safe zone” in Syrian territory along its border, an idea that has also found at least some backing in Western Europe. Turkey also wants to defeat the Kurdish insurgents who take refuge in areas of Syria and Iraq. President Obama is scheduled to meet with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey on Sunday in Vienna. The European Union’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, is scheduled to attend the Vienna talks, along with envoys from several member states. They are all reeling from an influx of refugees, many of them from Syria, and are all eager to end the conflict. European leaders have sought to curry favor with Iran and Saudi Arabia in recent weeks.No Syrians will be at the table in Vienna, and so far the United Nations has failed to bring rival Syrian factions together to discuss things like access to humanitarian aid. The International Committee of the Red Cross urged the Vienna negotiators on Friday to respect international humanitarian law. “The suffering of the Syrian people must be at the heart of these talks,” the group’s president, Peter Maurer, said in the statement.Advertisement