By JOSH KRONNOV. 12, 2015
KAMPALA, Uganda —  The Kenyan military, a partner of the United States in eastern Africa and a force in fighting Islamist militants in Somalia, has been making money on smuggling alongside those militants for years, according to a new report.The report, published by the Kenyan watchdog group Journalists for Justice, accuses the Kenya Defense Forces of earning millions of dollars as its cut in an illegal trade network involving up to $400 million per year in sugar. The revenues are shared among local administrators, the army and the Islamist militants, known as the Shabab, the report says.It highlights recent growth in the illegal smuggling of up to 150,000 tons of sugar per year into Kenya from Somalia through the Somali port Kismayo, facilitated by the Kenyan forces. The accusations follow reports by United Nations investigators alleging similar cooperation in the illegal export of charcoal from the same port to the Persian Gulf.The Journalists for Justice report follows revelations of dizzying corruption within Kenya. A parliamentary committee was given details this month on government spending for items like a $16,000 television and $85 ballpoint pens. On Thursday, a consortium of Western aid donors warned that graft was pulling down the country.Advertisement“Corruption is undermining Kenya’s future,” the American ambassador to Kenya, Robert F. Godec, said Thursday on Twitter. “Time to end it now!”AdvertisementDonors, including the United States, said they would consider travel bans on those implicated in graft. But the Kenyan watchdog group asserts that the corrupt behavior crosses the border and that the illicit trafficking network was the reason for the Kenyan Army’s presence in Somalia.“Rather than taking the fight to the Shabab,” the report said, the Kenyan forces were “in garrison mode, sitting in bases while senior commanders are engaged in corrupt business practices with the Jubaland administration and the Shabab.” Kismayo is the commercial capital of the Jubaland region.Kenya’s government rebutted the accusations on Thursday. One official told Reuters that the report was “absolute garbage.” Defense Secretary Raychelle Omamo portrayed the findings, as well as previous United Nations reports, as “consistent fabrication” written in “bad faith” and said Kenya’s soldiers had “paid the ultimate price” in helping defend Western interests in Somalia.In recent years, the United States has donated over $100 million toward the African Union peacekeeping mission in Somalia, which includes Kenyan troops.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When Kenya’s army and a proxy militia ousted the Shabab from Kismayo in 2012, it represented a significant shift. The Shabab — a militant group affiliated with Al Qaeda and believed to be responsible for the deadly 2013 attack on the Westgate mall in Nairobi, Kenya, among other violence — have long made their money in part by exporting illicit goods from Somalia.But the report says the Kenya Defense Forces, which has had a professional reputation, and has been seen as an ally of United States defense interests in Somalia, stepped in and kept the trade going. Its militia partner, the Ras Kamboni movement, settled in as part of the local administration.Successive reports from United Nations investigators have found Kenya’s forces involved in an illicit charcoal trade from which the Shabab and local administrators shared revenues.Now, the Journalists for Justice report says that when it comes to sugar, the Kenyan forces and the Shabab are virtually working side by side.AdvertisementThe report did not say that the leadership of the Shabab was communicating directly with Kenya’s military leaders on the smuggling network but identified a tacit cooperation.In the sugar trade, the report describes a network facilitated by the Kenyan forces and involving nearly 1,000 trucks per month: “K.D.F. and Jubaland officials levy a tax of $2 per bag on imported sugar, an income of around $250,000 a week, or $13 million a year. Al-Shabab taxes the trucks as they leave Kismayo at the rate of $1,050 each” — and that is before they are taxed again by Jubaland authorities.It said that the illicit charcoal trade had dipped in volume recently but remained a linchpin of revenue for the Shabab, earning it roughly $100 million a year.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Report Ties Kenyan Army to Militants’ Smuggling .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.