AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini SenguptaUNITED NATIONS — Secretary of State John Kerry sought on Thursday to play down expectations for peace talks this weekend on the Syrian civil war, signaling that there remained a vast gulf among world leaders on the future of the Syrian president but a shared commitment to defeating the Islamic State.“I cannot say this afternoon that we are on the threshold of a comprehensive agreement,” Mr. Kerry said at the United States Institute of Peace in Washington, referring to the negotiations that start Saturday in Vienna.The talks, to be held amid intensifying airstrikes in Syria by Russian and American forces, are the second in two weeks to bring together world powers to thrash out the prospects of a political transition, including the critical question of whether the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, can run in future elections. On that, the United States and Russia — as well as Saudi Arabia and Iran, which will also attend — remain far apart.What started as a popular uprising against the Syrian government four years ago has become a proto-world war with nearly a dozen countries embroiled in two overlapping conflicts.A draft Russian proposal, discussed with diplomats here in recent days, left Mr. Assad’s political future vague; Western diplomats rejected that approach.Mr. Kerry did not specifically address the other critical point of tension looming over the Vienna talks: determining which rebels are legitimate opposition groups and which are, instead, terrorists. He acknowledged the difficulty only by saying, “There are bad guys all around and good guys who are not accustomed to working with each other.”Mr. Kerry’s speech seemed designed to reassure the Obama administration’s Persian Gulf allies of its commitment to Mr. Assad’s eventual exit, though the United States has long since stopped insisting on his immediate departure. “Asking the opposition to trust Assad or to accept Assad’s leadership is simply not a reasonable request; it’s literally a nonstarter,” he said. He repeated the longstanding United States position that Mr. Assad and the Islamic State have a “symbiotic relationship” and that Syria needs a future that includes neither.Mr. Kerry said the Obama administration’s goals were to crush the Islamic State, end the war in Syria and stanch the spread of violence in the region. On Thursday, suicide bombings in Beirut, Lebanon, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility, killed more than 40 people. Two members of a United Nations commission of inquiry on war crimes briefed members of the Security Council, nudging them not to sacrifice justice in their quest for a political settlement. “We say it’s important not to put accountability in the back seat,” Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, the chairman of the commission, told reporters on Thursday.The commission has published 10 grisly reports detailing war crimes in Syria by government forces, pro-government forces and rebel groups.“Unfortunately, we have seen a grave escalation of the conflict over the past two months, resulting in a devastating impact on civilians,” Mr. Pinheiro said. “External interference has exponentially increased over the past few months.”Advertisement