AdvertisementSupported byBy William Neuman and William K. RashbaumIn the eyes of many Venezuelans, Cilia Flores, the wife of President Nicolás Maduro, represents a special kind of family values.When she held the powerful post of head of the National Assembly under former president Hugo Chávez, she was accused of placing as many as 40 relatives in jobs in the legislature, a nepotism scandal that had even some red-blooded adherents of Mr. Chávez’s socialist-inspired revolution denouncing her.Now, with Ms. Flores wielding more influence than ever as first lady, she and her husband are finding that another set of relatives is causing them headaches.Two of Ms. Flores’ nephews were arrested this week in Haiti and flown to the United States to face federal narcotics charges.The two men were identified in an indictment unsealed on Thursday in Federal District Court in Manhattan as Efraín Antonio Campo Flores, 29, and Franqui Francisco Flores de Freitas, 30. Two people with knowledge of the case said the men were nephews of Ms. Flores.A government official in Caracas, the capital of Venezuela, said that Mr. Campo Flores was the son of one of Ms. Flores’ sisters, while Mr. Flores de Freitas was the son of one of the first lady’s brothers. The Venezuelan government did not confirm the relationships independently.There has been no suggestion from the American authorities that Ms. Flores or Mr. Maduro knew of or had any involvement in the suspected drug trafficking plot. But the family connection could cause problems for Mr. Maduro as his government approaches crucial legislative elections scheduled for Dec. 6, serving as a potent reminder to voters of widespread concerns about corruption, ties to drug traffickers and privileged treatment of family members at the top levels of the government.The accusations against Ms. Flores’ nephews are just the latest in a series of drug investigations involving those close to Mr. Maduro and his predecessor, Mr. Chávez.A former head of the government intelligence apparatus, named by Mr. Maduro to be consul in Aruba, was indicted last year by prosecutors in the United States for being on the payroll of Colombian traffickers.Earlier this year, American officials said they were investigating possible narcotics charges against Diosdado Cabello, the powerful head of the National Assembly. Mr. Cabello denied having any link to traffickers, and in both cases Mr. Maduro forcefully defended the men and accused the United States of seeking to undermine his government.Nepotism is another heated topic. Mr. Chávez, who was president for 14 years until he died in 2013, placed a brother at the head of the national electricity company and a cousin in a top post at the government-run oil company. Another brother was education minister before being elected governor of their home state.But one of the most salient accusations of favoritism involving relatives in recent years came when Ms. Flores was president of the National Assembly, from 2006 until 2011.In 2008, the leader of a pro-government union representing employees of the legislature accused Ms. Flores of evading normal procedures to place the 40 or so relatives in government jobs, sometimes passing over more qualified applicants.He released a list of family members in government posts that included a sister, at least two brothers, a daughter-in-law, and many others.Ms. Flores strongly denied that she had given her relatives special treatment, saying that they had received their jobs based on merit.One commentator at the time of the scandal joked that there were so many of her family members working in the National Assembly that if you uttered the name Flores, everyone turned around.Government records online indicate that several of the first lady’s family members named during the scandal continue to hold government jobs.Ms. Flores and Mr. Maduro have been living together for years but they only married shortly after Mr. Maduro was elected president in April 2013, with the president saying he wanted to set an example for Venezuelans. He also called Ms. Flores the “first combatant,” saying that was more apt than “first lady” for her role as a revolutionary leader.She began hosting a Sunday evening television program this year, “With Cilia and Family,” which Mr. Maduro said was meant to reinforce “true family values” within socialism.Since becoming first lady, Ms. Flores has widened her influence and is considered one of the most powerful people in government. And she is once again a candidate for the National Assembly in the coming election.Among her relatives and close associates in positions of power is another nephew, Carlos Erik Malpica Flores, who was named national treasurer a few months after Mr. Maduro’s election. Mr. Maduro later placed him on the board of the government-run oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela, and he was also given the job of vice president of finances at the company.Mr. Maduro does not have the same reputation as his wife for placing close family members in positions of power, with the exception of his son, Nicolás Maduro Guerra. In 2013, he placed his son at the head of a group of special inspectors whose job was to evaluate the effectiveness of government policies and fight corruption. He was also put in charge of creating a national school of filmmaking.Ms. Flores frequently accompanies her husband during his public appearances and travel. This week, she was with him during a visit to Saudi Arabia to discuss oil prices, and on Thursday she sat in the audience and listened as he addressed the United Nations Human Rights Council.Mr. Maduro did not mention the arrests of Ms. Flores’ nephews in his speech, in which he defended his government’s human rights record, although he did criticize Washington.“For almost two decades Venezuela has been hounded incessantly by the imperialist powers of the United States,” he said.In a videotaped statement played with Mr. Maduro present before he began his speech, the United Nations High Commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Husein, sounded a critical tone, saying that membership of the Human Rights Council carried an obligation to promote and protect human rights at home and abroad.“It’s my sincere hope that Venezuela will strive to make concrete progress on both fronts,” he said.He also mentioned some high profile cases that have brought Venezuela harsh criticism from human rights advocates, including the recent conviction of Leopoldo López, an opposition leader who was sentenced to more than 13 years in prison in a trial in which his lawyers were barred from presenting evidence or calling witnesses. A prosecutor in that trial is now seeking asylum in the United States and claims that Mr. López was convicted with false evidence.Ms. Flores’ nephews were arrested on Tuesday in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, and then turned over to the Drug Enforcement Administration and flown to the United States.The indictment unsealed on Thursday in Federal District Court in Manhattan charges them with conspiring to transport cocaine to the United States.A law enforcement official said that once he was in American custody, Mr. Campos Flores told agents that he was like a son to Ms. Flores and that he had been raised by her. The Venezuelan government official in Caracas said that, according to people close to both Ms. Flores and Mr. Campo Flores, he had not lived with her and Mr. Maduro.American officials say that a large portion of the cocaine produced in Colombia passes through Venezuela before being shipped to the United States or other countries.Mike Vigil, a former head of international operations for the D.E.A. who spoke about the case with federal officials, said that the two men were lured to Haiti by investigators. The men expected to meet there with a man they hoped would help them transport cocaine to the United States, not knowing that the man was an informant, he said.“There’s people at all levels of that government that are engaged in the drug trade,” Mr. Vigil said of Venezuela. “Maduro is unlike most leaders in the world, where if there’s allegations of corruption or involvement in the drug trade you would think that those allegations would be investigated rather than denied.”Nick Cumming-Bruce, Eli Rosenberg, Patricia Torres and María Eugenia Díaz contributed reporting.Advertisement