AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — Catalonia’s three-year drive for independence was thrown into turmoil on Thursday when Catalan lawmakers voted against reinstating Artur Mas — the politician who has led the push to secede from Spain — as head of the regional government.The vote, 73 to 62, was the second time this week that Mr. Mas had failed to persuade lawmakers to back his leadership, which has been troubled by corruption scandals, and it revealed deep divisions within the separatist movement.His thwarted re-election now further complicates the independence drive just a day after Spain’s Constitutional Court suspended a Catalan parliamentary resolution passed on Monday that called for Catalonia to set up its own institutions as an independent republic.Mr. Mas and other separatist leaders still have two months to overcome their differences and agree on who should lead their government and the drive toward independence. But if no deal can be reached before Jan. 10, then new regional elections will have to be held.It was only in September that Catalans last voted, in parliamentary elections that Mr. Mas tried to turn into a de facto plebiscite on independence. He and an alliance of other separatist parties won a majority of seats — though fell short of a majority of votes — and appeared poised to push the secession issue to a head over the next 18 months.But one of the separatist parties, known by its Catalan acronym of CUP, which has not joined the alliance, has insisted on replacing Mr. Mas and his Convergence party because of scandals that have enveloped them.Even though the CUP still voted against Mr. Mas, the party’s parliamentary spokesman, Antonio Baños, insisted that its opposition to Mr. Mas should not be interpreted as evidence that the movement for Catalan separatism was falling apart.He also left the door open for an 11th-hour deal with the embattled Catalan leader. “The debate doesn’t end this morning,” Mr. Baños said.Mr. Mas was a late convert to the secessionist cause. Three years ago, after failing to win tax concessions from Madrid, he essentially turned a fiscal dispute with Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy into a full-blown challenge to Spanish sovereignty, also amid a growing Catalan civic movement that has been coordinating huge pro-independence rallies.While Thursday’s vote highlighted political divisions within Catalonia — a region that accounts for a fifth of Spain’s economy — Spain’s monarch also waded into the debate, warning against any attempt to flout the Spanish Constitution and law.“The Constitution will prevail, nobody should doubt it,” King Felipe VI said in a speech at a ceremony in Madrid. “The king, as head of state, will always stand by the side of all Spaniards.”But it is arguably Mr. Rajoy who has recently sought to gain the most as the standard-bearer of Spanish unity, ahead of general elections on Dec. 20. He has also recently urged Spain’s main opposition parties to back his efforts to block the Catalan challenge — even as they hope to oust him from office next month.The elections could result in a rare coalition government, as neither Mr. Rajoy’s Popular Party nor any other is expected to gain a parliamentary majority, according to the polls.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement