By ANDREW E. KRAMERNOV. 12, 2015
MOSCOW — An Uzbek detainee sometimes called the world’s longest-serving political prisoner by rights groups was released on Thursday, having spent 21 years behind bars on various pretexts and trumped-up charges.The prisoner, Murod Juraev, got his start in politics during the late-Soviet thaw, becoming an opposition member of Parliament. But he wound up in prison after Uzbekistan used its newfound independence to reverse course and crack down on opponents.“The last 21 years have been a living hell that Murod Juraev and his family should never have had to experience,” Steve Swerdlow, a researcher for Human Rights Watch, said in a statement. He added that the Uzbek government should now investigate allegations that Mr. Juraev, 63, had been tortured in prison, and release other detainees.Mr. Juraev had been imprisoned since Sept. 18, 1994. A court initially sentenced him to nine years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government and his term was subsequently extended for violating prison rules, including improperly peeling carrots and failing to take off his shoes when entering a barracks.AdvertisementMr. Juraev’s long ordeal traced the arc of Central Asian politics, which defied expectations that independence would be accompanied by a march toward greater freedom and democracy in the region, which borders Afghanistan to the north. Instead, in two of the five post-Soviet Central Asian states, the Soviet-era leaders remain in power: Islam Karimov in Uzbekistan and Nursultan Nazarbayev in Kazakhstan. In Tajikistan, Emomali Rakhmonov has served as head of state since 1992. The five states were known as autonomous republics of the Soviet Union.AdvertisementTheir political stability has provided some bulwark against the spread of Islamic militancy from Afghanistan, while their authoritarian policies have drawn criticism from rights groups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In September, Tajikistan outlawed the country’s largest opposition party, the Islamic Renaissance Party, and arrested and drove its leaders into exile, raising the risk of renewed cycles of repression and revolt.Also in September, a high-ranking Ministry of Defense official affiliated with the Islamic party mutinied and fled the capital with followers, engaging in firefights with security forces. A senior Tajik police commander defected to the Islamic State in Syria.Uzbekistan has aided the United States by providing supply routes to Afghanistan, but has also come under pressure for rights abuse.Mr. Juraev’s release came after a visit to Uzbekistan by Secretary of State John Kerry, who said he raised the issue of abuses with the Uzbek authorities.While in prison, Mr. Juraev had been forced to work in a brick factory, lost all his teeth and contracted tuberculosis. In November 2013, the United Nations Committee Against Torture included Mr. Juraev in a list of dozens of Uzbek dissidents and human rights campaigners who had been arbitrarily imprisoned for their work or their criticism of the government.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Uzbekistan: Political Prisoner Is Freed.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.