By ELISABETTA POVOLEDONOV. 12, 2015
ROME — Two Italian journalists who wrote tell-all books about financial mismanagement in the Roman Catholic Church are now facing the wrath of the Vatican.A Vatican spokesman, the Rev. Federico Lombardi, said this week that the journalists, Gianluigi Nuzzi and Emiliano Fittipaldi, were under investigation for “possible participation in the dissemination of reserved information and confidential documents,” which is “a crime under the Vatican City criminal code.”The news came as a surprise to the authors, who in separate interviews on Thursday pointed to the long journalistic tradition of reporting on leaked documents, and noted that freedom of the press was guaranteed under the Italian Constitution.Vatican City, recognized as an independent state under a 1929 treaty with Italy, has its own laws. But the practical significance of the criminal investigation was unclear. Mr. Nuzzi and Mr. Fittipaldi said they had not been formally notified of the investigation, and in any event, it was not clear if they would stand trial in Vatican City if they were charged.AdvertisementBoth journalists relied extensively on leaked documents for two books, released this month, that detail alleged incompetence and greed within the Curia, as the Vatican’s administrative hierarchy is known, as well as widespread resistance toward Pope Francis’ attempts to change it.AdvertisementLast week, two members of a commission appointed by Francis to review the Vatican’s vast financial holdings were arrested on suspicion of leaking confidential documents to the journalists. One of them, Francesca Chaouqui, a laywoman and public relations specialist, was released after she cooperated with the Vatican’s judicial authorities. The other, Msgr. Lucio Ángel Vallejo Balda, a high-ranking church official, remains in detention.In a statement on Wednesday, Father Lombardi said the church was also investigating the conduct of other people who had access to the documents.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Vatican made the leaking of documents a crime two years ago, after a cache of Pope Benedict XVI’s private papers found their way into a 2012 best-selling exposé, by Mr. Nuzzi, of Vatican infighting and ineptitude.The Vatican described the two latest books as misguided attempts to assist Francis in his efforts to reform church governance.But instead of damaging sales, the two arrests and a surge of coverage in the news media have provided much unintended publicity for the books. Mr. Nuzzi’s book — titled “Merchants in the Temple” in English and already in its second edition in Italian — and Mr. Fittipaldi’s book, “Avarice,” have been selling briskly.Mr. Nuzzi said Thursday that news of the Vatican’s investigation created a “Kafkaesque” situation. “They’re complaining about leaked documents even as they leak confidential information,” Mr. Nuzzi said of the church, pointing out that the names of people under investigation in a criminal case are not supposed to be made public. “Instead, here you have the press office of a state making the announcement.”Mr. Fittipaldi also seemed unfazed. “What’s the crime, getting a scoop?” he asked in an interview. “I was only doing my job. It’s clear that if you go uncovering secrets, raising embarrassing incidents, those in power will respond.”He added that “the church should concentrate more on cleaning up the scandals we’re raised,” instead of pursuing journalists for doing their job.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; The Vatican: Leaks Prompt an Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.