AdvertisementSupported byBy William K. Rashbaum and William NeumanFederal prosecutors in New York on Thursday charged two men — identified by a person briefed on the case as nephews of the wife of President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela — with conspiring to ship cocaine to the United States.The two men, identified in an indictment unsealed in Federal District Court in Manhattan as Efraín Antonio Campo Flores and Franqui Francisco Flores de Freitas, were arrested in Haiti on Tuesday at the request of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration and handed over to its agents. They were then flown to New York to face charges, according to the person with knowledge of the case.They were expected to make a brief court appearance on Thursday.According to the indictment, the two men took part in a meeting in Venezuela last month to discuss shipping the cocaine through Honduras and on to the United States. The person familiar with the case said that agents made video and audio recordings of the meeting.The men are both nephews of Cilia Flores, the influential wife of Mr. Maduro, the person said. Mr. Maduro, a leftist, calls Ms. Flores the country’s “first combatant” rather than its first lady. She is one of the most powerful people in the upper echelons of government and is frequently seen at her husband’s side.The case is being prosecuted by the Terrorism and International Narcotics unit in the office of the United States attorney in Manhattan, Preet Bharara.In October, the two men approached a D.E.A. informant in Honduras and discussed moving the narcotics through that country, the person said. They later met with the informant in Venezuela and provided a kilogram of the cocaine as a sample of the drugs they intended to provide, the person said, adding that agents had made video and audiotapes of at least one of the encounters.American officials say that a large amount of the cocaine produced in Colombia is shipped through Venezuela before it heads to the United States and other parts of the world.Investigators have long contended that high-level Venezuelan officials are involved in the drug trade and several officials in the armed forces and government have been publicly identified by the American authorities as having links to traffickers.Officials said this year that the powerful head of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, was being investigated on charges of trafficking. Mr. Cabello has strongly denied any connection to the drug trade.Last year, a former head of the Venezuelan intelligence apparatus, Hugo Carvajal, was arrested in Aruba at the request of the American authorities, who unsealed indictments accusing him of being on the payroll of Colombian traffickers and of investing in and coordinating drug shipments. But Mr. Carvajal was allowed to return to Venezuela rather than being sent to the United States to face the charges.Mr. Maduro has angrily responded to the American allegations, calling them false and part of a conspiracy by Washington to undermine his government.Patricia Torres contributed reportingAdvertisement