By ISABEL KERSHNERNOV. 12, 2015
JERUSALEM —  About two dozen men wearing bulky jackets, woolen caps, hoodies and checkered kaffiyehs barged into a hospital in the West Bank city of Hebron before dawn on Thursday, pushing what appeared to be a very pregnant woman in a wheelchair.But they were not headed to the delivery ward.The people caught on the hospital surveillance cameras were, in fact, undercover Israeli security officers. About 10 minutes later, the Israelis were on their way out, leaving behind a Palestinian man whom they had fatally shot in the raid and wheeling out his cousin, a wounded patient whom they had come to arrest, according to hospital officials.The raid at al-Ahli Hospital was the latest in a string of Israeli incursions into Palestinian hospitals during the recent upsurge of violence, and proof, according to Israeli officials, that there will be no safe haven for Palestinian suspects. Hospital officials were livid.“Hospitals are supposed to be the safest places on earth,” Jihad Shawar, the hospital director, told the official Voice of Palestine Radio. He said the relatives of the two cousins were “very angry.”Advertisement“They want to know how their sons could be killed and arrested while in our hospital,” Mr. Shawar said. “But what can our security men do when guns are pointed in their faces?”AdvertisementThe Israeli military said in a statement that officers had arrested Azzam Azat Shaaban Shalalda, 20, a resident of the village of Sair, near Hebron.Mr. Shalalda, they said, stabbed an Israeli civilian in the chest in the West Bank last month, severely wounding him. As he tried to flee, Mr. Shalalda was shot and wounded by his victim, but he managed to reach the Ahli Hospital, where he was taken in for treatment. He was in the surgery ward on the third floor when the raid occurred.Referring to Mr. Shalalda’s cousin, Abdallah Shalalda, 27, the military said that during the hospital raid, “a suspect attacked the force, which responded to the assault and fired at the attacker.”The military described Mr. Shalalda’s family as “known Hamas operatives,” referring to the Islamic militant group.Bassem Natshe, the hospital’s public relations director, said by telephone that he did not know whether Abdallah Shalalda had assaulted the Israeli forces before he was shot; there is no indication that he was armed. But, he said, there were at least 10 armed Israelis in the room who should have been able to subdue and arrest him.“They had their fingers on the trigger,” Mr. Natshe said of the Israelis. “They terrorized the hospital, shooting in the department. We are talking about a hospital here, not a nightclub.”Closed-circuit surveillance footage released by Al-Ahli hospital in Hebron shows Israeli undercover forces conducting a raid late Wednesday.According to hospital officials’ accounts, the first Israelis arrived about 2:40 a.m. Four people came in saying they had a pregnant woman in labor and were directed to the obstetrics department on the second floor. A minute later, the officials said, about 25 security officers disguised in civilian clothes rushed in and went straight to the third floor, where Azzam Shalalda was recovering in the surgery ward.AdvertisementMr. Shalalda’s brother was asleep in the bed next to him, and he was immediately handcuffed to the bed frame. Abdallah, their cousin, came out of the bathroom and was shot five times in the head and chest. The hospital staff tried unsuccessfully to resuscitate him.Then the forces whisked away Azzam Shalalda. Hospital officials said that he had arrived last month in critical condition, having been shot several times in the neck and stomach, and that he had undergone several operations. Abdallah Shalalda and Azzam’s brother were not patients, but had been staying overnight with Azzam in the hospital room, officials said, possibly to protect him.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The “pregnant woman” was presumably a male officer in disguise. From the surveillance camera footage, it appeared that at least two more of the Israelis were disguised as women, one of them enveloped in a flowing black robe and veil.The arrest raid was a joint operation of the Israeli military, the Shin Bet security agency and special police forces. Shin Bet said in a statement after the raid, “The security establishment will not permit safe refuge for terror operatives, anywhere.”In a similar raid last month, undercover Israeli forces entered a hospital in Nablus, in the northern West Bank, and snatched a suspect in a fatal shooting that killed an Israeli couple, Eitam and Naama Henkin, as they drove with their four children in the West Bank. The suspect was accidentally shot and wounded by another gunman at the scene of the attack.In addition, Israeli police and special forces have repeatedly raided al-Maqassed Hospital on the Mount of Olives in East Jerusalem and have searched other Palestinian clinics in the city, mostly looking for files and information on patients wounded by the security forces during the recent wave of violence, or those accompanying them, according to medical officials.In one case, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Jerusalem, a standoff between the hospital staff at Maqassed and security forces seeking to re-enter the hospital culminated in the use of tear gas and rubber bullets. A staff member and a patient were injured.After a Red Cross team visited the Ahli Hospital on Thursday, a spokeswoman said it was “pursuing the matter with the Israeli security services at the appropriate level.”Special units of the Israeli military and the police have long resorted to disguise to carry out undercover operations in Palestinian cities and villages, and for other special missions.When they were in the services, former Prime Minister Ehud Barak and the incumbent, Benjamin Netanyahu, helped foil the 1972 hijacking of a Sabena airplane dressed in mechanics’ overalls. Mr. Barak famously led a revenge killing operation against Palestinian guerrillas in Lebanon while dressed as a woman.AdvertisementIn a more embarrassing episode for Israel, the police in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, released closed-circuit TV footage of people they said were Israeli Mossad agents who assassinated a senior Hamas commander, Mahmoud al-Mabhouh, in a Dubai hotel in 2010. Some of the agents were captured on camera wearing ill-fitting wigs, dressed in sports clothes and holding tennis rackets.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Palestinian Dies as Undercover Israelis Raid a Hospital .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.