By EDWARD WONGNOV. 12, 2015
BEIJING —  Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader of the House of Representatives, visited Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, this week and met with the Communist Party chief of the region, according to a Foreign Ministry spokesman and a report published on Thursday by the official Tibet Daily.Ms. Pelosi, who represents California, and her colleagues are on an official trip to China, and Chinese leaders have allowed her the rare opportunity to make a tightly controlled visit to the Tibet Autonomous Region, which is usually off limits to foreign officials and journalists. The administrative region includes Lhasa and the central Tibetan plateau, as well as areas bordering Nepal.On Thursday afternoon, Hong Lei, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, confirmed at a regularly scheduled news conference that Ms. Pelosi and her delegation had gone to Tibet before traveling to Beijing. He did not give details of the Tibet trip but said the delegation had been invited to China by the standing committee of the National People’s Congress, a legislature set up to approve policy and regulations made by the Communist Party.Ms. Pelosi has met on multiple occasions with the Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader vilified by China, including in Dharamsala, India, where he lives. She has spoken out strongly against Chinese repression in Tibet.AdvertisementTibet Daily said that Chen Quanguo, the party chief, told Ms. Pelosi in a meeting on Tuesday that the United States should not support any separatist activities and should bar the Dalai Lama from visiting the United States.AdvertisementThe article also said that Ms. Pelosi had “highly praised” the “progress” in Tibet as well as the Chinese government’s efforts in “guaranteeing religious freedom, protecting ethnic culture and protecting the ecology and environment.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As printed in Tibet Daily, Ms. Pelosi’s remarks are a sharp contrast to many of her earlier, critical statements on the situation in Tibet. Ms. Pelosi was attending official meetings in Beijing on Thursday and could not be reached for immediate comment.In the past, official Chinese news organizations have incorrectly quoted prominent foreigners or selectively quoted them for propaganda purposes.The party has demonized the Dalai Lama, 80, since he fled to India from Lhasa in 1959. The party accuses him of plotting Tibetan independence, though he has repeatedly said that he wants only autonomy for the Tibetans.In 2008, a widespread uprising on the Tibetan plateau provoked anxiety among party leaders and resulted in a harsh crackdown.Mia Li contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 13, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Top Democrat in U.S. House Visits Tibet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.