AdvertisementSupported by11 PhotosView Slide Show ›Bryan Denton for The New York TimesBy Michael R. Gordon and Rukmini CallimachiMOUNT SINJAR, Iraq — Sweeping down in hodgepodge convoys of trucks and buses, Kurdish forces and Yazidi fighters opened their offensive against Islamic State militants in northern Iraq on Thursday with a burst of initial success: The forces cut off the main highway the jihadists used as a supply line, and they moved in to begin fighting for the town of Sinjar.The fall of that town to the Islamic State last year was the start of a wave of atrocities — the killing, enslavement and rape of thousands of people from the Yazidi religious minority — that led the Obama administration to step up its use of air power against the jihadists. And it was with heavy American airstrikes that the fight to retake Sinjar began early Thursday morning.More than 7,000 fighters — mostly Kurdish forces, but also Yazidi fighters seeking revenge against the jihadists — raced toward an important supply road, Highway 47, coming from different directions to try to cut off as many as 700 Islamic State militants believed to be waiting in and around Sinjar, flanked by thick fields of improvised bombs.Trying to achieve some element of surprise, the Kurdish commander of one of the assault’s main forks, Maj. Gen. Aziz Waisi, had directed some fighters to head to the south on a rugged and serpentine route over Mount Sinjar, following a dry river bed. After a breakfast of watery soup, under clear morning skies as American airstrikes softened the defenses ahead, his men set out.The advance was stop and start, at times violently rugged, careening over steep pitches. Other times, the convoy halted completely, a long line of vehicles waiting as earth-moving equipment was brought in to reshape the rocky terrain ahead.Later, one fighter who was keeping watch for Islamic State suicide attackers along the highway said his nervousness about a potential jihadist counterassault was nothing compared with the nightmare of the twisting drive down Mount Sinjar.“We were ordered to take the road,” said the pesh merga fighter, Hamid Khudir Ahmed, 24. “Otherwise, I would never have taken it.”The vehicles made a motley fleet: sport utility vehicles, jeeps, buses, motorcycles and light trucks with jury-rigged heavy machine gun mounts in the back. The Kurdish flag was prominently displayed.The pesh merga fighters themselves were lightly equipped, most with AK-47s and small arms, and many without any body armor. And they were all fighting, in effect, without pay; the Kurdish government was so low on cash that it was three months behind in paying pesh merga salaries.The Kurds had managed to acquire a small number of armored American Humvees, picked up after the Iraqi Army abandoned them as soldiers fled last year’s rapid offensive by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. But the pesh merga were having less luck with another piece of captured American equipment: a heavily armored personnel carrier. It broke down and had to be towed as the other vehicles carried on.Simply reaching the base of the mountain turned into a cause for celebration. Blasting Kurdish music, some pesh merga fighters got out of their vehicles and danced. But after a hasty meal of bread and canned fish, they were on the march again.As they approached Highway 47, the scream of military jets — A-10 attack planes and B-1 heavy bombers, according to the American command — and the thud of explosions grew closer.American forces were involved on the ground as well. Roughly two dozen United States Special Forces members were serving as advisers to pesh merga forces away from the immediate fighting, American officials said. Half of them were with the main headquarters at the foot of Mount Sinjar, and the other dozen were spread along the long mountain ridge to advise Kurdish airstrike spotters as they chose targets, according to one senior American official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss details of the operations.General Waisi’s Kurdish force, known as the Zeravani Force, spread out to secure a broader swath of the highway west of Sinjar. But other forces working in parallel were at work on different stretches. By midday, Kurdish officials said they controlled about 22 miles of Highway 47, stretching both east and west of Sinjar, effectively cutting off one of the main supply routes for the Islamic State between Syria and the vital jihadist-held city of Mosul in Iraq.Beyond the tactical division of the forces, there were political influences at work. After months of tension among rival Kurdish factions, which some analysts said played a part in delaying the start of the offensive, the main body of pesh merga forces out of Iraqi Kurdistan was taking the lead on Thursday. It included a unit of Yazidi fighters, as well as some volunteers, including some fighters from Syria.But fighters from the Syrian affiliate of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or the P.K.K., listed as a terrorist group by the United States and some of its allies, were also fighting ISIS on a different stretch of road. Even though most of the Yazidi fighters were accompanying the government forces, they tend to favor the P.K.K. over the Kurdish government, crediting the group for helping many escape ISIS last year as the jihadists swept over Mount Sinjar.Capt. Chia Zaki, a pesh merga officer in charge of an artillery position behind a hill on the western flank of Sinjar, said he and his men saw at least 20 vehicles ferrying P.K.K. fighters to the front line over the course of the day.Captain Zaki said his pesh merga superiors were at first vexed by the P.K.K.’s insistence on pushing toward Sinjar and had tried to get the militia to agree to a more limited battlefield role.Instead, from his vantage, he said he could see that the P.K.K. remained in the vanguard in some areas, stretching up into the outskirts of Sinjar by nightfall. But he said he was willing to accept that as long as ISIS was beaten as a result. “When we face the same enemy,” Captain Zaki said, “we need to put our political differences to the side.”The ease of creating roads through the desert could limit the effectiveness of the offensive to cut off a key ISIS supply route.As the various forces started moving toward Sinjar, they faced more hazardous ground, laced with improvised bombs.At one point, General Waisi’s pesh merga force detected explosives. “TNT!” one fighter called out, using the force’s catchall nickname for the bombs. But without any sophisticated mine-clearing equipment, the force had to redirect its vehicles across a rocky hillside. It was easier to forge a new route then clear the planned one.In the afternoon, one of the other threats posed by the Islamic State became clear. A huge fireball erupted when a suicide car bomb exploded on the eastern outskirts of Sinjar, enveloping the pesh merga’s vehicles in a thick dark cloud.One pesh merga fighter said Kurdish fighters had blown up the vehicle with a German Milan antitank missile, though the details of that engagement could not be independently confirmed. Black plumes of smoke rose from the outskirts of Sinjar.General Waisi’s men began fortifying the stretch of highway they had claimed, piling up dirt mounds and berms. One team set a 106-millimeter recoilless rifle on top of a mound, leveled to fire on any vehicle bearing down on them from the direction of the Islamic State’s fighters.Progress halted as night fell and a deep chill set in. The pesh merga began making small fires and settling in.American and Kurdish officials described the offensive as an important step to pressure the Islamic State and make it harder for the group to move supplies. But it is just one front in a far-flung and protracted war against the Islamic State, which holds crucial areas across western Iraq and eastern Syria. Even as Kurdish and Yazidi forces were savoring an initial day of success, questions emerged about whether the Islamic State would keep up heavy fighting to retain Sinjar now that it was mostly cut off.On the hills above the western edges of Sinjar, the commander of the pesh merga’s First Special Forces Brigade, Rawan Barzani, looked down on the city through binoculars. As clouds from American airstrikes rose over the city, he and an aide said they could see small groups of Islamic State fighters leaving on foot.“They couldn’t escape by vehicle. They escaped separately so that the airstrikes wouldn’t hit them,” said the aide, Hoshyar Disko. “Some dropped their weapons and put on clothes like civilians.”Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.Advertisement