AdvertisementSupported byBy Joe CochraneJAKARTA, Indonesia — The new Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, made a half-day visit to Indonesia on Thursday to hold talks with President Joko Widodo, a meeting intended to help mend diplomatic relations that plummeted this year over issues including human smuggling, refugee boats and the executions of Australian drug offenders.“The geographic proximity of our two countries is a fact,” Mr. Joko said before the leaders began their closed-door meeting. “The closer the distance means the higher the intensity of the interactions, which means that there will be higher potential for friction.”Mr. Turnbull, who took office in September, and Mr. Joko discussed increasing trade and tourism, possibly having Australia invest in infrastructure and cattle breeding in Indonesia, and countering violent extremism, the leaders said in brief prepared remarks after the hourlong meeting at the presidential palace in Jakarta.They had “frank and exciting discussions about the great future for our two countries,” said Mr. Turnbull, who is on the first leg of a five-nation tour through Europe and Southeast Asia.“We had a productive and warm meeting,” Mr. Joko said.But it is the fate of other issues facing the two leaders, who did not take questions from journalists, that will determine whether relations are back on track.The neighbors have had diplomatic tension for decades over issues including democracy and human rights, the breakaway of the former East Timor, and even the treatment of live imported Australian cattle at Indonesian slaughterhouses.The origins of their current strained relationship date back more than two years, when Tony Abbott, Mr. Turnbull’s predecessor, introduced a policy after he took office in September 2013 of forcing boats carrying asylum seekers who sought to reach Australia back into Indonesian waters. Two months later, relations deteriorated further after news reports that Australia’s embassy in Jakarta was part of an international spying effort, including against Indonesia, led by the United States.In April, the Indonesian government executed eight drug convicts, including two Australian men, as part of an antitrafficking policy by Mr. Joko, who ignored Australia’s calls for clemency. Both nations briefly recalled their ambassadors after the executions.A month later, after rickety boats with thousands of refugees from Bangladesh and Myanmar began arriving in Indonesia, Mr. Abbott bluntly refused to resettle any of them in Australia. In June, Mr. Abbott declined to confirm or deny claims that his maritime security forces paid smugglers to turn a boat full of migrants back to Indonesia after intercepting it at sea.The countries lie only about 125 miles apart at their closest point, but the differences are stark: Australia is a wealthy, progressive Christian country, while Indonesia, which has the world’s largest Muslim population, is a developing nation with small but vocal radical Islamic groups promoting jihad against the West.Analysts, however, say that the countries share too many interests to let relations remain sour. The countries are major trading partners, and Australia is one of the largest bilateral donors to Indonesia.Mr. Joko expressed hope that Australia would invest in Indonesia’s digital economy, which he said one report estimated would grow to $130 billion in 2020, from around $13 billion this year.Advertisement