By VICTORIA SHANNONNOV. 14, 2015
Here is the latest:• How many people died?Most of the 129 confirmed fatalities resulted from the mass shooting at a rock concert in the center of the city around 9:20 p.m. local time Friday. Other deaths came after suicide bombings and shootings around the same time in five other locations, including restaurants and a soccer stadium.More than 350 people were wounded, with at least 99 of them in critical condition, Paris officials said. Hospitals are full today, and people are lined up to give blood.It is the worst terrorist attack in Europe in 11 years, since the coordinated bombings of commuter trains in Madrid killed 191 and wounded 1,800 in 2004.The assaults were carried out by three coordinated teams that included a 25-year-old Syrian terrorist, French officials said.• Was the Islamic State responsible?France’s president, François Hollande, says yes, and a statement from the Islamic State militant group concurs.Secretary of State John Kerry, in Vienna for talks with other foreign ministers over the Syria conflict, condemned the attacks but did not name the militant group, also called ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, an Arabic acronym.American officials in Washington on Saturday did not dispute the French president’s conclusion.The authorities identified one of the assailants as a 29-year-old French national with a criminal record who had been “radicalized.”• What is Paris like?The capital is under a heavy police presence, and checks at France’s borders have been reinstated. Air travel continues but with significant security-related delays.Public protests — a constitutional right in France — are prohibited in Paris and some of the surrounding departments until Thursday.Many events are canceled. Schools with classes or activities, cultural places and other venues (the Eiffel Tower, movie theaters, Disneyland Paris, department stores) are closed.The French president declared three days of mourning, and officials are advising Parisians to stay home. A memorial Mass is set for the Cathedral of Notre-Dame on Sunday evening.• Where is the investigation leading?The police made a number of arrests in Brussels on Saturday in connection with the attacks. A Greek official said that a Syrian passport used by a migrant who passed through Greece was found near an assailant’s body.And in Germany, the police were exploring whether a man they arrested last week with weapons in his car and his GPS navigator set for Paris was linked to the attacks.• Other recent terror activity?On Thursday, more than 40 people were killed in Beirut, Lebanon, in a bombing that targeted Iran’s Hezbollah allies. Earlier this month, more than 200 people died in the explosion of a Russian charter jet over Egypt.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Islamic State claimed responsibility for both, and, now with Paris, the events suggest that the regional war has transformed into a global one.In January, Paris suffered another massacre, when 17 people were killed at the French satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo and in related attacks around the French capital.• Why Paris?The Islamic State claimed the attacks were a response to France’s campaign against its fighters and insults against Islam’s prophet. The group warned that France would remain one of its top targets.Far-right politicians were already stoking xenophobic sentiment, especially Marine Le Pen, the leader of the National Front party, who vowed to close borders. Regional elections are Dec. 16.Bomb threats in Paris have become almost routine: Friday had begun with one at the German soccer team’s hotel and one at the Gare de Lyon train station.• What’s next?Angela Merkel, chancellor of Germany, and David Cameron, prime minister of Britain, separately held crisis talks with their ministers Saturday.The French president is sending his foreign minister to Turkey on Sunday for the Group of 20 summit meeting in his stead.Terrorism became the main topic for Saturday’s debate of the candidates for the Democratic nomination for U.S. president.On social media, people are using the hashtags #prayforparis, #parisattacks and #MuslimsAreNotTerrorists. Facebook turned on its “Safety Check” tool so people could let friends and family know they were safe.The France 24 television channel has live online video coverage in English.The European Union called for a minute of silence to be held at 1100 G.M.T. on Monday.Were you an eyewitness to any of the attacks? Our reporters want to talk to you about what happened. Please email sources@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the regular weekday Morning Briefing delivered to your inbox. For feedback, contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.