AdvertisementSupported byBy Ceylan YeginsuANTALYA, Turkey — Just to the west, the flood of migrants from Turkey to Greece continues, with deaths at sea almost daily. To the east is the raging civil war of Syria, the brutality of the Islamic State and the violence of Turkey’s own conflict with Kurdish militants.But this resort town on a strip of Mediterranean coastline known as the Turkish Riviera that will host world leaders, including President Obama, this weekend for the Group of 20 summit meeting is a world apart from the nearby turmoil. Last year, the governor evicted Syrian refugees because he worried they would hurt tourism. This year, the city has been spruced up and, in recent days, locked down.For the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who came here this week to inspect the city’s preparations, the event is an opportunity for Turkey, whose reputation has been tarnished among the international community amid a crackdown on free expression and a growing sense that the government has become more authoritarian, to restore some of its luster on the world stage, if even for just a couple of days.A 16-mile highway from the airport to the area of the summit meeting was cordoned off this week, as empty buses escorted by the police conducted drills. New traffic lights were installed and tested, hundreds of cameras with facial recognition software were set up and sidewalks were adorned with flowers. The golf course at the Regnum Carya Golf and Spa Resort has been manicured, in the hope that Mr. Obama will play a round.“Thanks to Obama, Antalya has had a face-lift and looks like a first-world city,” said Mehmet Kibar, who drives a cab in the Belek area of town, where the meeting will be held. “It feels more like Florida; I can barely recognize it. The roads were full of potholes and they would flood in the rain, but thanks to Obama they have been smoothed out and my wheels now glide as if they are spinning on caramel.”The stepped-up security operations underscore the challenge of hosting such a high-powered event in a city that is nestled in a region convulsed by war, and in a country that has faced rising turmoil and instability.That was punctuated last month by the worst terrorist attack in Turkey’s history, when more than 100 people were killed in Ankara, the capital, by suicide bombers linked to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Last week, dawn raids in Antalya netted 20 suspected Islamic State militants, and operations have continued across the country, including one Thursday morning in Istanbul that included helicopters and led to the arrest of 11 alleged members of the Islamic State.As the Group of 20 meeting approached in recent weeks, many expected it to be potentially awkward for Turkey: For months the country was in the throes of political instability after an election in June that cost Mr. Erdogan’s Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party, known by its Turkish initials A.K.P., its majority in Parliament. But early elections on Nov. 1 reversed that outcome — contrary to nearly every poll beforehand — and now Mr. Erdogan and the A.K.P. have secured their power for the next four years.“Until the election, everyone was concerned about the timing of the G-20 because they expected a similar result to June, which would mean hosting the summit with a government in limbo,” said Emre Deliveli, a Turkish economist and columnist. “But after the A.K.P.’s astounding victory, both the party and President Erdogan are likely to use the environment as a platform to show off.”Analysts say world leaders will face an emboldened Mr. Erdogan, fresh from his party’s stunning victory, who will probably be aggressive in trying to reassert himself on the international stage. Customarily, Group of 20 meetings are focused on economic issues, but this year the war in Syria and the migrant crisis — two issues with Turkey at the center — are likely to dominate.Speaking in Ankara on Wednesday, Mr. Erdogan said, “The result of the Nov. 1 election completely removed political uncertainty in Turkey and gave us the opportunity to take stronger steps on regional issues.”Mr. Erdogan has long pushed for a safe zone in northern Syria, and in advance of the meeting this week, he said he believed that Western allies were moving closer to agreement, even though there has been little indication that the Obama administration, long opposed to the idea, has changed its calculus.Verda Ozer, an analyst and columnist for the Turkish newspaper Hurriyet, said that Mr. Erdogan and Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu “now have the upper hand in the international arena since they hold the golden key to solve the migrant crisis, making Europe dependent on Turkey.”She added, “The political agenda of the G-20 will be two-dimensional, and Turkey is the only common denominator of these two fronts: On the one hand European countries will try to make progress on the migrant crisis, whereas the U.S., Russia, Saudi Arabia and Turkey will focus on Syria.”With all the turmoil in Turkey over the past several months, tourism has suffered as countries have issued warnings to their citizens against travel there. Antalya, long a sunny playground for tourists of all stripes but especially Russians, has seen tourism revenue decline roughly $5 billion, according to a local trade organization.In an area so dependent on visitors for its economy, hosting the world’s most powerful leaders — even if they are protected by a no-fly zone and 12,000 security officers — could help restore Turkey’s image as a safe place for tourists, locals say.“Many Western countries issued travel advisories to Turkey, which curbed the healthy flow of tourists,” said Geylan Dursunoglu, the general manager of the Regnum Carya Golf and Spa Resort. “But now world leaders from those countries are all coming to Turkey, and their presence will restore confidence among tourists.”Although most local businesses will be locked out of the security zone — which includes 28 five-star hotels and is accessible only to those credentialed for the summit meeting — locals say the summit meeting will restore prestige to the city, and to Turkey.“I can’t even see past the barriers in front of my shop, but people tell me it’s like Las Vegas inside with bright lights and state-of-the-art technology,” said Kerem Edemen, who owns a market near the security zone. “I’m so grateful to God that the A.K.P. is back in power. Erdogan is the only one capable of representing us in front of the world. This is a test for Turkey, and I know he won’t let us down.”Tim Arango contributed reporting from Istanbul.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement