By THOMAS ERDBRINKNOV. 13, 2015
TEHRAN —  Iran’s president was sharply criticized by hard-liners during Friday Prayer and again on television on Friday in what is becoming an increasingly tense standoff over the future of Iran after the signing of the nuclear deal during the summer.The president, Hassan Rouhani, is insisting that the nuclear agreement can be the start of new relations with the Islamic republic’s traditional ideological enemy, the United States. He repeated on Thursday that each country could even open an embassy in the other if the United States would apologize for mistakes it had made in the 36 years since the Iranian revolution.In a speech last Sunday, Mr. Rouhani sharply criticized the conservative news media, saying they acted as “undercover police” and enjoyed near impunity from the judiciary. He also called for more press freedom.During Friday Prayer, the hard-liners struck back, with the prayer leader in Tehran, Kazem Sedighi, criticizing government officials for their failure to create a “resistance economy” in Iran and end the country’s “dependence on foreigners.”AdvertisementMr. Sedighi, who gets his talking points from a central committee, accused Mr. Rouhani, of being too friendly to foreigners. “He uses a different tone when he wants to attack people on our side, believers and those who serve the people,” Mr. Sedighi said. “It is a shame if he gets entangled in this issue. We also think that this kind of language does not befit a president.”Also Friday, conservative-dominated state television broadcast a report on Mr. Rouhani, criticizing him for attacking hard-line media outlets and the recent arrests of activists and journalists by intelligence agents.AdvertisementThe hard-liners, a loose alliance of clerics, politicians and military commanders, have been insistent that the nuclear deal has changed nothing in relations between Iran and the United States.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Hard-Liners in Standoff With Iran’s President .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.