AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa HadidJERUSALEM — An Israeli father and son were killed and five other members of their family were wounded in a drive-by shooting near a Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank on Friday.The Israeli authorities locked down a wide area as they searched for the assailants, who they believed were Palestinians, the Israeli military and local news outlets reported. Yehuda Glick, an official at Otniel, the settlement close to where the attack occurred, said witnesses had identified the slain men as a father and son, 45 and 18. The men were from Kiryat Arba, another settlement, Mr. Glick said. They were on their way to the nearby Israeli town of Meitar to attend a pre-wedding meal for a daughter in the family.Five other members of the family were wounded in the attack, according to Dr. Tzvi Perry, a physician at the Soroka Medical Center in the nearby city of Beersheba, where the wounded were treated, The Associated Press reported. The mother and three young girls were slightly hurt, and another son was shot in the leg.No group had claimed responsibility for the shooting by Friday evening, though the militant group Hamas and the smaller Palestinian group Islamic Jihad both praised it as “heroic.”Israel’s Channel 10 News reported that the assailants had been waiting in a vehicle at a bend in the road and spotted the victims’ van. They followed it, overtook it and opened fire, first killing the father, the broadcaster reported. The van went off the road, and the son phoned for an ambulance. It appeared that the attackers then opened fire again, killing the son.The voice of a man said to have been one of the victims was recorded pleading for help in a call to Israeli emergency services, according to Channel 10, which broadcast the recording. The authenticity of the call could not be immediately verified independently.The attack appeared to be similar to one on Oct. 1 near Itamar, a Jewish settlement in the northern West Bank, in which a couple were killed in front of their four young children. That attack is widely seen as one of the first in the recent unrest, which has mostly taken the form of demonstrations, stabbing attacks against Israeli soldiers and civilians, and attempts to hit them with vehicles. Shootings have been more unusual — at least seven since the latest violence began in October, compared with 65 stabbings, according to Israel’s Foreign Ministry.The shooting on Friday took place near Hebron in the southern West Bank, which has emerged as a locus of the uprising, alongside a surrounding belt of villages. The attack raised the number of Israelis killed in the latest surge of violence to 13.During the same time, at least 85 Palestinians have been killed. Some were attacking or trying to attack Israeli soldiers and civilians; others were killed during violent demonstrations. The latest were two Palestinian men killed in demonstrations on Friday, local news media reported. A third Palestinian died on Friday from wounds sustained in clashes the previous day, the Palestinian Ministry of Health said. More than 70 people were wounded in demonstrations in the West Bank and on the Gaza border, mostly from live fire on Friday.Advertisement