By ALISON SMALENOV. 13, 2015
Investigators confirm the remains of what appeared to be seven babies were found in an apartment in Bavaria and the search is ongoing to find the mother.BERLIN — The authorities in Germany have opened an investigation after making a grisly discovery this week: the decomposing remains of what appeared to be eight babies in a vacant house.It was not clear how or when the infants died.Seven sets of remains — some in plastic bags, others wrapped in cloth — were found on Thursday afternoon after a woman contacted the police in Wallenfels, a town of 2,800 in northern Bavaria. On Friday, the authorities said an eighth set of remains had been discovered in the house.Jürgen Stadter, a spokesman for the police in the Upper Franconia region of northern Bavaria, would not identify the woman, but said that she had called an emergency doctor after coming across some of the remains. Autopsies on the remains, which were in varying states of decay, began on Friday, but the results were not expected until Monday, he said in a phone interview.The house where the remains were found was inhabited by an elderly woman, her son, his partner, and four children, neighbors said. The couple split up a short while ago, and the younger woman moved out.AdvertisementMartin Dippold, a prosecutor in the city of Coburg, told reporters: “The whereabouts of the suspected mother are not known at present, and the investigating authorities are searching for her.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Elisabeth Köstner, who lived next door to the family, said in a phone interview, “I lived wall-to-wall with them and heard nothing.”AdvertisementThe town’s mayor, Jens Korn, told reporters: “Wallenfels is bewildered and shocked by what we have learned. Added to that is, of course, the grief for the children who died, who were not allowed to live.”Mr. Korn described Wallenfels as “a small community where everybody knows each other, a community where everyone helps each other when help is needed.” He added, “That’s why many wonder if, with some help, this tragedy could have been prevented, and that is of course an aspect that adds to the bewilderment and dismay.”The deaths were the latest in a series of gruesome discoveries involving infants in Germany.The newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung reported that a man near the Bavarian town of Landshut found the body of a baby in the trunk of his daughter’s car on Wednesday. The daughter, 22, reportedly concealed her pregnancy and killed the infant after birth.Claire Barthelemy contributed reporting from London, and Katarina Johannsen from Berlin.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.