By PETER BAKERNOV. 13, 2015
WASHINGTON —  On the eve of a long trip to Asia, President Obama mounted a bipartisan effort on Friday to promote his new trade agreement with 11 other Pacific Rim nations, arguing that it would not only bolster the American economy but also enhance national security in a fast-growing and strategic region.Surrounding himself with cabinet secretaries and generals who had served presidents of both parties, Mr. Obama presented what has long been the establishment Washington consensus in favor of free trade against the surging tide of populist outrage from the political left and right against an agreement that critics call a bad deal for American workers.The Trans-Pacific Partnership, as the agreement is known, is the economic cornerstone of Mr. Obama’s drive to refocus American foreign policy on Asia. It would set rules of the road for trade and investment between the United States, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam, countries that together represent about 40 percent of the world economy.“If we are going to be a serious player in this critical region of the world, then we’ve got to get the economics right and we’ve got to get the national security right,” Mr. Obama said in an appearance with former national security officials in the Roosevelt Room of the White House. “That’s why all of us agree that the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that we have forged is so important and that it is critical for Congress to act.”AdvertisementThe president has made the pact the focus of sustained attention this week in advance of his departure on Saturday for the Group of 20 summit meeting in Turkey, followed by stops in the Philippines and Malaysia. The government of the Philippines has indicated that it wants to join the trade bloc. China is not part of the pact.AdvertisementTo promote the accord, Mr. Obama in recent days published an op-ed article in The Financial Times, a column on Bloomberg View and a letter to online business owners who use eBay. He also invited national security figures from both parties, led by four former secretaries of state — Henry A. Kissinger, James A. Baker III, Madeleine K. Albright and Colin L. Powell — to join him at the White House on Friday to talk up the merits of expanding trade with Pacific Rim nations.Others who joined him on Friday were three former national security advisers, Brent Scowcroft, Stephen J. Hadley and James L. Jones; a former defense secretary, William S. Cohen; and several former four-star admirals, including Mike Mullen, Samuel Locklear and James A. Winnefeld Jr.“One of the things that we all agreed on, as we’ve discussed the issue here today, is that if we fail to get the Trans-Pacific Partnership done, if we do not create the architecture for high-standards trade and commerce in this region, then that void will be filled by China; it will be filled by our economic competitors,” Mr. Obama said. “They will make the rules, and those rules will not be to our advantage.”The gathering was reminiscent of President Bill Clinton’s campaign to pass the North American Free Trade Agreement, when he recruited presidents of both parties, including Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter and the first President George Bush, to lobby on its behalf. But the environment in Washington has changed significantly since the early 1990s, and the power of bipartisan accords has frayed amid outsider revolts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The agreement has come under fire especially from liberal activists, labor unions and congressional Democrats who complain that it would not do enough to enforce high environmental and workplace standards overseas and would result in the exporting of more manufacturing jobs to low-wage countries. Among those opposing it are the leading Democratic presidential candidates, former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Republican congressional leaders have been more supportive, pushing through fast-track authority last summer so that Mr. Obama could submit the final pact for an up-or-down vote rather than subject it to possible amendments.Still, since the text of the trade agreement was released last week, congressional Republican leaders like the new House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, have withheld judgment, and some Republican presidential candidates, led by Donald J. Trump, have denounced it.“The T.P.P. is a horrible deal,” Mr. Trump said at this week’s Republican debate. “It is a deal that is going to lead to nothing but trouble. It’s a deal that was designed for China to come in, as they always do, through the back door and totally take advantage of everyone.”AdvertisementHe added that he was “a free trader, 100 percent,” but that “we don’t have smart people making the deals.”Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, one of his opponents on the debate stage, suggested that Mr. Trump did not fully understand the agreement, noting that China was not part of it. “There is an argument that China doesn’t like the deal because in us doing the deal, we’ll be trading with their competitors,” he said.Mr. Obama defended the trade pact against critics on Friday, saying it would lower tariffs, protect intellectual property and open up markets. Moreover, he argued that it would address the very issues critics raise.“We’re making sure that labor standards and environmental standards are observed there just like they are here,” he said, “so that we create a level playing field and they don’t have the ability as effectively to undercut U.S. workers and U.S. businesses who are following higher standards by using child labor, for example, or dumping their pollution in the oceans in ways that U.S. businesses can no longer do.”Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Showcases Bipartisan Support, Past and Present, for Pacific Trade Pact.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.