

      By LIAM STACK and 
    
PALKO KARASZ

UPDATED March 23, 2016

The attacks in Brussels on Tuesday have refocused attention on the Belgian capital as an incubator of radicalism and center for terrorist plots.
Related Article
The attacks in Brussels on Tuesday that killed dozens of people highlight the terrorist threats that have been born or carried out in Belgium in recent years.The country has earned a reputation it could do without: It has become Europe’s biggest per capita contributor of fighters to Syria, and its capital has become an incubator for radicalism.A number of terrorist plots in Europe and abroad have been connected to Belgium, including the attacks in Paris in November.  Two Belgian brothers with criminal records — Ibrahim el-Bakraoui, 29, and Khalid el-Bakraoui, 27 — have been identified by the authorities as two of the men who detonated suicide bombs in the attacks in Brussels on Tuesday. Khalid carried out a suicide attack at the Maelbeek subway station about an hour after his brother, Ibrahim, and another man blew themselves up at the main international airport near Brussels. The Belgian police continued to search for a man who was recorded by a security camera at the airport. A taxi driver directed the police to a home in the Schaerbeek section of Brussels where he said he had picked up three men. The police found explosives in the house and a laptop in a nearby trash can that appeared to contain Ibrahim’s will. In the document, he said that he no longer felt safe, did not know what to do and feared he would end up in jail “next to him in a cell.” It was not immediately clear if he was referring to Salah Abdeslam, the Paris suspect who was captured on Friday.What Happened at Each Location in Brussels AttacksBrussels Attacks Underscore Vulnerability of Open European SocietyA Blurry Photo Hints at ISIS TradecraftOn Friday, Mr. Abdeslam was shot and captured by the police in Brussels after a raid in Molenbeek, a district in the Belgian capital known as a haven for extremists.Mr. Abdeslam, 26, a Belgian-born French citizen of Moroccan ancestry, was the most-wanted man in Europe and had evaded law enforcement for four months. His arrest raises the possibility that the attacks on Tuesday were conducted in retaliation.The authorities accuse him of having driven the car that carried a team of terrorists to the French national soccer stadium outside Paris on Nov. 13. Investigators say he may have dumped his suicide vest in a trash can after the attacks and then left.Mr. Abdeslam’s brother Ibrahim blew himself up as a member of a separate team of attackers.The brothers, who both had criminal records, owned a bar together in Molenbeek. In Suspects’ Brussels Neighborhood, a History of Petty Crimes and Missed ChancesThe Arrest of Salah Abdeslam Ends Manhunt, Not QuestionsIn the wake of the November attacks, Jan Jambon, the interior minister of Belgium, said that the government did not “have control” in Molenbeek, a heavily immigrant neighborhood in Brussels connected to several past terrorist plots.Belgian authorities conducted a number of raids in the capital in the months after the Paris attacks, often drawing criticism for their tactics and, at time, their missteps. They may have been close to apprehending Mr. Abdeslam, who may have been hiding in a house in Brussels two nights after the Paris attacks, but he could have escaped because of a law banning police raids on private homes from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m.Mr. Abdeslam was captured last week in the Brussels neighborhood where he had lived, barely a 10-minute walk from his mother’s home.Terrorism Response Puts Belgium in Harsh LightBelgium Says Law Limiting Raids May Have Allowed Suspect in Paris Attacks to EscapeSpeaking at an event hosted by Politico Europe three days before the Paris attacks, Jan Jambon, Belgium’s interior minister, explained why he thought that his country has struggled to respond to groups that plan terrorist attacks or recruit for extremist causes. Part of the problem, he said, was the complicated structure of the Belgian state and the fragmentation between Flemish speakers and those who speak French. The capital region of Brussels has six separate police departments and 19 municipalities with 19 different mayors, who often do not communicate with one another or share information.“The approach is too divided between different local authorities here in Brussels,” he said.Another challenge is the fact that most Belgians who join terrorist groups are not immigrants, but rather are citizens whose families have lived there for several generations, making it difficult for the authorities to withdraw their passports or identity cards to keep them from traveling to Syria.The French authorities said that Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a 27-year-old Belgian citizen who fought in Syria for the Islamic State, was the mastermind behind the Nov. 13 Paris attacks. The Belgian police suspected him in a terrorist operation that was thwarted in January 2015 by police raids on an extremist hideaway in the in the eastern town of Verviers and other homes in Molenbeek. The police action was one of several moves against suspected terrorists that unfolded across the country in the weeks after the attacks on the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo.Two suspects, who the authorities said were Belgian citizens who had gone to Syria to fight before returning to Europe, were killed in the raids.Both the dead suspects came from the area as does Mr. Abaaoud. His family told the authorities that they had not seen him since he had recruited his 13-year-old brother to fight in Syria.In November, the authorities said at least three of the suspects in the Paris attacks that killed at least 129 people were three French brothers living in Belgium. One, Ibrahim Abdeslam, died during the course of the attack while another, Mohamed, was detained the next day in Molenbeek, a working-class neighborhood of Brussels, the Belgian capital. On Friday, law enforcement officers shot and captured the third brother, Salah, 26, after a raid in Molenbeek.Belgium’s complicated relationship with jihad can be traced back over a decade to the death of Muriel Degauque, a convert to Islam who died when she detonated her explosive vest amid an American military patrol in Iraq in 2005. After several years of drinking and drug use, Ms. Degauque married an Algerian man who introduced her to Islam. Her radicalization came years later when she married her second husband, Issam Goris, a Belgian citizen. The Belgian police said that Ms. Degauque had fallen in with a group of Islamists focused on recruiting European Muslims to fight with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi’s terrorist network in Iraq. That network eventually evolved into the Islamic State.Amedy Coulibaly killed four hostages in January 2015 in a kosher supermarket in Paris and shot a police officer in the days after terrorists linked to the Islamic State killed 12 people in an attack on the office of the satirical French magazine Charlie Hebdo. Mr. Coulibaly is believed to have bought the weapons used in those attacks in Molenbeek. Mr. Coulibaly had declared his allegiance to the Islamic State and said he planned the attack on the supermarket to support the attack on Charlie Hebdo. He was killed by the police, but Hayat Boumeddiene, a romantic partner that the French police have said was his accomplice in the attack, escaped. She is believed to have fled to territory in Syria controlled by the Islamic State.Mehdi Nemmouche, a Frenchman who opened fire at the Jewish Museum in Brussels in May 2014, killing four, is also believed to have bought his weapons in Molenbeek. The authorities said that Mr. Nemmouche used a .38-caliber revolver and a folding-stock Kalashnikov assault rifle in the attack. He was arrested one week later during a routine customs check as he arrived in the French city of Marseille from Brussels. He had brought the Kalashnikov and the revolver with him on the bus.Mr. Nemmouche was born into poverty in Roubaix, an industrial French city near the border with Belgium, and he was convicted seven times of crimes including driving without a license and violent robbery. A former lawyer for Mr. Nemmouche said that he had been moved “from foster home to foster home” as a child, and became homeless at age 17.Ayoub El Khazzani, a 26-year-old of Moroccan origin, who tried to carry out a terrorist attack on a high-speed train traveling between Brussels and Paris last August, also lived in Belgium for a time, officials said. Mr. Khazzani emerged from a bathroom on the Thalys train brandishing a Kalashnikov assault rifle, a pistol and a box cutter but his attack was thwarted by three American men — one college student and two enlisted servicemen — who were in Europe on vacation. European officials said that Mr. Khazzani had lived in Spain, France and Belgium and was believed to have traveled to Syria in 2014. The Spanish authorities had warned France that he had joined “the radical Islamist movement.” The authorities have said that Sharia4Belgium has played an important role in the spread of jihadism in the country. The group was set up in 2010 to promote Islamic law in Belgium but eventually turned its efforts toward recruiting fighters for Syria. The group was led by Fouad Belkacem, a 32-year-old militant preacher with a record of petty crimes including theft and assault. Under his guidance, members in Belgium burned Americans flags on Sept. 11, harassed openly gay Muslims and watched video footage of battles in Afghanistan and Chechnya.He went on trial in September 2014 alongside more than 40 members of the group on charges of membership in a terrorist organization. Most of the defendants were tried in absentia, though, because they were in Syria. The court ruled that the group was a terrorist organization in February and Mr. Belkacem was sentenced to 12 years in prison.An earlier version of this article misidentified one of the two main languages spoken in Belgium. Besides Flemish, most Belgians speak French, not Walloon.The French Defense Ministry said a raid led by 12 French aircraft had destroyed two Islamic State targets in Raqqa, the group’s self-proclaimed capital.AdvertisementThe French Defense Ministry said a raid led by 12 French aircraft had destroyed two Islamic State targets in Raqqa, the group’s self-proclaimed capital.