AdvertisementSupported byBy Victoria ShannonFrench warplanes struck Islamic State militants in Syria, two days after Islamic State terrorists killed at least 129 people in Paris. The airstrikes appeared to be focused on Raqqa, the self-proclaimed capital of the Islamic State.More than 190 people were still hospitalized today in Paris hospitals — 42 in intensive care; a total of 415 had been injured, hospital officials said.• What is the status of the investigation?French authorities were on a manhunt for Salah Abdeslam, a 26-year-old-man identified today as a possible suspect in the Friday attacks.Belgian officials said that Mr. Salah’s brother Ibrahim died in the attacks on Friday and that another brother, Mohamed, was detained on Saturday in the Molenbeek area of Brussels. Seven arrests so far in Belgium opened the possibility that the plot had roots there.In the eastern Paris suburb of Montreuil, the authorities found three Kalashnikov rifles in an abandoned vehicle, a sign that some of the attackers may have escaped.The Paris prosecutor said authorities identified two more suspects, whom they did not name, as French-born men who were living in Belgium. Investigators were also hunting down information about Ismaël Omar Mostefaï, 29, a French citizen who was one of three hostage takers at the Bataclan concert hall.A complete rundown of what’s known about the attackers is here.Fundamental questions remain unanswered: How did the terrorists, who acted in three synchronized teams, pull off the deadliest terrorist attack in Western Europe since 2004?Officials on both sides of the Atlantic say the attackers had communicated with the Islamic State in Syria, suggesting that the attackers might have received direction from the group’s leaders there, who until now had not taken responsibility for a large-scale attack in the West.• What’s happening in Paris?Paris is still somewhat subdued, even for a Sunday, and France remains under a state of emergency.Museums and other cultural centers are closed for a second day. A star-crossed movie opening about a terrorist attack in France was canceled.But small crowds congregated at the Place de la République — as they did after the Charlie Hebdo massacre in January — to show solidarity on Saturday, ignoring government advice to stay home. And French flags are appearing in Parisian apartment windows.The archbishop of Paris officiates at a Mass at the Cathedral of Notre-Dame today. Schools and museums are to reopen on Monday.• What about elsewhere?From Vatican City to Seoul, law enforcement authorities are on heightened alert.Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari of Iraq said his country’s intelligence services obtained information indicating that, besides France, the United States and Iran were among countries being targeted for attack. We don’t know the basis or strength of that intelligence.• What’s next for policy makers?As France deals with the aftermath in Paris, global attention turns to policy and politics. President Obama and other world leaders are in Turkey for a Group of 20 summit meeting today, where the terrorist attacks are already a focus.Migration is, too, because one of the assailants may have entered the European Union through Greece with other refugees last month and then passed through Serbia, where he sought asylum.We don’t know how that will affect the vexing problem of how to handle the unceasing flow of people from Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere in Europe. Jean-Claude Juncker, the head of the European Commission, said today that Europe should not react by rejecting refugees.European Union justice and interior ministers will hold a special meeting on the Paris attacks Friday.• How is Paris playing in the U.S. presidential campaign?Candidates for the Democratic nomination, in their debate Saturday night in Des Moines, agreed that America is determined to fight terrorism, dedicated to responsibilities to refugees and devoted to diplomacy.But Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont sought to tie the rise of the Islamic State to Hillary Rodham Clinton’s vote as a senator to authorize the American-led invasion of Iraq in 2003.By contrast, leading Republicans like Donald J. Trump, Ben Carson and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas called on the Obama administration to halt plans to accept 10,000 Syrian refugees next year.Although they broadly agreed that the Paris attacks should be the catalyst for a new military strategy against the Islamic State, we don’t know if the Republicans would commit more American ground troops to that effort.• Who were the victims?Little seemed to tie the dead at the six attack sites, except that they were all out having fun. And that was the point for the Islamic State militant group, which said that it struck France’s symbols of “perversity.” We don’t yet know the identities of at least 30 of the fatalities.“Bars, a concert, a great game,” Bernard-Henri Lévy, a French author and philosopher, wrote on Twitter. “This is the French art of living together that has been targeted.”Several foreigners, including people from Belgium, Britain, Germany, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United States, were killed in the attacks.An American student from California State University in Long Beach, Nohemi Gonzalez, 23, died in the Paris attacks. She was spending a semester at the Strate School of Design in Paris.Valentin Ribet, a 26-year-old lawyer, was killed at the Bataclan. Guillaume B. Decherf, 43, a music critic at a French magazine and a father of two, was killed as well. Three employees from Universal Music France also died, as did Nick Alexander, a British citizen who sold merchandise for the band, and Aurélie De Peretti, 33.“Yesterday, the victims weren’t journalists or famous. They were civilians,” Maxim Ferron, manager of a Paris tea shop, said on Saturday.You can sign up here to get the regular weekday Morning Briefing delivered to your inbox. For feedback, contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.Advertisement