By SIMON ROMEROOCT. 4, 2015
SÃO PAULO, Brazil —  For decades, the authorities transformed this megacity into a case study of dystopian sprawl, razing tree-lined plazas, demolishing architectural gems, underinvesting in public transportation and blighting wide swaths with an elevated highway and colossal Eastern bloc-style apartment complexes.The middle class largely retreated behind gated communities, and some in the elite opted to commute by helicopter rather than set foot on São Paulo’s mazelike streets.But now, a sweeping movement led by the city’s leftist mayor is achieving something once thought impossible here: challenging the supremacy of the automobile.The mayor, Fernando Haddad, a 52-year-old scholar with a doctorate in philosophy, has carried out the equivalent of urban shock treatment in an effort to ease São Paulo’s congestion. His efforts have unleashed a fierce debate over mobility, the use of public spaces and the limits of political power in a metropolitan area with 20 million people.Drawing inspiration from policies in New York, Bogotá, Paris and other cities, Mr. Haddad has embarked on the construction of hundreds of miles of bicycle lanes and corridors for buses to blaze past slow-moving cars, while expanding sidewalks, lowering speed limits, limiting public parking and occasionally shutting down prominent avenues entirely to cars.Advertisement“I thought I’d never see a moment like this in my lifetime,” said Renata Falzoni, 62, a pioneering bicycle activist.AdvertisementWhile Mr. Haddad’s actions have drawn scorn from some in São Paulo because of their breadth and hasty implementation, Ms. Falzoni counts herself among his defenders, contending that emergency measures were needed to deal with generations of policies producing epic gridlock across the city.“You need to fix things now,” she said. “The crisis is extremely urgent.”Still, the overhaul of mobility policies has opened Mr. Haddad, as well as some here who are trying to use the city’s new bicycle paths and sidewalks, to attacks from his opponents, reflecting resistance to just about any proposal from the scandal-plagued Workers’ Party to which Mr. Haddad belongs.“Haddad is only making people here unhappier,” said Adriana Fernandes Paisano, 48, a dentist and die-hard motorist. She fumed about finding fewer parking spaces, contending that allowing bicycle lanes to function one day a week, on Sundays, would be an acceptable compromise instead of squeezing cars from the streets throughout the week.Mr. Haddad, for his part, is forcefully defending his measures, rejecting claims that they are being imposed without much consultation.He said in an interview that his mobility proposals were “exhaustively” discussed in his 2012 campaign, and he pointed to statistics published in recent days showing that traffic-related fatalities in São Paulo, including episodes in which pedestrians are hit by cars and killed, fell 18.5 percent to 519 in the first six months of the year from 637 in the same period of 2014.“How can someone be against the reduction of deaths in the city of São Paulo?” Mr. Haddad asked. Describing São Paulo as a “tense city,” he acknowledged that resistance among some residents to his policies remained entrenched, which he attributed in part to a campaign by some prominent media figures who are seeking to roll back his initiatives.Mr. Haddad also argued that motorists were benefiting from his policies, in addition to bicyclists, users of public transportation and pedestrians. For instance, traffic is flowing faster in recent weeks along highways where Mr. Haddad lowered the speed limit to 70 kilometers per hour (about 43 miles per hour), after which a 23 percent decline in accidents occurred.AdvertisementPondering what to do about dangerous driving has long been a fixture of life in this city.“The Brazilian chauffeur appears to believe that it is his business, like the matador’s, to reduce to its narrowest the margin between life and death,” the British author Peter Fleming wrote in “Brazilian Adventure,” an irony-soaked 1933 book that unfolded partially in a booming São Paulo.FRENCHGUIANAVENEZUELA400 milesAmazon  BRAZILBrasíliaRio de JaneiroBOLIVIASãoPauloPARAGUAYAtlanticOceanARGENTINAOCT. 4, 2015
Indeed, some here still contend that the best approach is to simply let drivers have their way.Mr. Haddad’s speed-limit measure has drawn broad criticism, including a lawsuit against its implementation from the São Paulo chapter of the Brazilian Bar Association, which argues that pedestrians hit by cars on highways are suicidal and breaking the law. (Some impoverished residents scrape by in slums found near these roads.)“Millions of people in São Paulo should not be blamed for the death of irresponsible pedestrians,” the group said in its lawsuit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Despite such resistance, Mr. Haddad, a former education minister in President Dilma Rousseff’s cabinet who still occasionally lectures at the University of São Paulo, is taking heart from surveys that show relatively high levels of support for his policies.Fifty-nine percent of residents expressed support for building and expanding bicycle lanes, while 64 percent are in favor of shutting down prominent avenues on Sundays to cars, according to a poll by Ibope. The survey, conducted from Aug. 28 to Sept. 5 with 700 people, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.Still, supporting bike lanes and daring to use them remain two different things. Only 7 percent of the city’s residents say they ride bicycles almost every day, the poll found. Some who do, like Paulo Zapella, 32, a graphic designer who commutes to business meetings by bike, tell harrowing stories.Mr. Zapella described an episode in September while bicycling through Jardins, an exclusive residential district, when a motorist pulled up beside him and began spewing expletives, berating him for riding a bicycle and for supporting Mr. Haddad, before accelerating as if threatening to run him down.“I was in disbelief,” said Mr. Zapella, whose post on Facebook about the incident drew thousands of shares, along with comments from others who described similar confrontations with irate motorists. Mr. Zapella said he had not even voted for Mr. Haddad, though he supports the expansion of bike lanes.Others contend that Mr. Haddad’s measures are still too timid, with much of São Paulo still reasonably navigable only by car or on crowded trains and buses, especially in poor areas. But some Paulistanos say the policies are opening the way for a broader discussion of improving the city’s quality of life, building on earlier efforts like a ban on outdoor advertising and boosting the bus system’s efficiency with smart cards.AdvertisementIndeed, a vertical garden has started to sprout on the facade of a high-rise overlooking the elevated highway called the Big Worm. Parts of Avenida Paulista, the city’s most prominent thoroughfare, evoked the beaches of Rio de Janeiro with sunbathers sprawled on blankets when authorities closed the route to cars on a recent Sunday.“We were raised believing that leisure in São Paulo involved getting into a car and driving to a shopping mall,” said Laura Sobral, an urban planner who describes the current mood of change in the city as a “São Paulo Spring.” “Finally, we’re no longer the vanguard of backwardness.”Others go even further in contemplating the city’s flux.Marcelo Rubens Paiva, 54, a writer and columnist for the newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo, listed changes like opening Avenida Paulista to pedestrians, improvements in public transportation, street parties on weekends and the invigorating effect of new immigration from Africa, Asia and other parts of Latin America.“A time traveler from the ’70s,” he said, “wouldn’t recognize the city today.”Paula Moura contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on October 5, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Fighting Resistance, a Mayor Strives to Ease Gridlock in a Brazilian Megacity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.