AdvertisementSupported byBy Celestine BohlenPARIS — Tony Balet came to work on Saturday with a ribbon pinned on his shirt. It was red, white, blue and black.“I decided to wear it today because I am a Frenchman, and because people are dead,” said Mr. Balet, a 57-year-old stylist, standing by rolls of fabric in the Dreyfus store at the Marché Saint-Pierre.“And they died because they were innocent and they were young,” he said. “They had nothing to do with anything; they were just out to have fun. And they were killed, one by one.”Like many old European cities, Paris has a history of violence, and each time, the city has absorbed it, and in some ways, even managed to forget it.Parisians and tourists typically walk through the city’s famous sites with little thought for the earlier carnage — the Protestants massacred at the Louvre on St. Bartholomew’s Day in 1572, the aristocrats guillotined on the Place de la Concorde during the French Revolution, or the Tuileries palace burned during the Commune of 1871. Paris was spared during the Nazi occupation, but many of its citizens were not, with many of them commemorated on laconic plaques scattered through the city.But the killings on Friday night came just 10 months after the massacre at Charlie Hebdo and the attack on a kosher grocery store, and seemed to many people here to be deliberately targeted at their way of life and their young people in particular, provoking fear and new concern about France’s ability to manage the gulf between Muslims and non-Muslims here.On Jan. 7, on the night of the killings at the editorial offices of Charlie Hebdo, thousands of Parisians spontaneously came out on the streets, bearing candles. Following the shooting later at the kosher grocery store, which resulted in more deaths, that mood of defiance and resilience grew until Jan. 11, when millions of people joined an official march of unity and solidarity in Paris.This time, most people agree, the mood is different; the “spirit of January 11th,” so often cited by politicians, seems a distant memory. The city on Saturday was somber and subdued as people absorbed the news.“Last time was the first time,” said Jurgen Maillet, who ducked under a cafe awning for shelter from a slight drizzle. “This is the second time. It’s different.”Many stores — including the “grands magasins” like Printemps and Galeries Lafayette — were shut; so were the museums, movie theaters and swimming pools, some with signs that said simply that the closings were because of “events.” A popular park, the Buttes Chaumont in the north of Paris, closed midday because of what it referred to as “rumors.”Traffic was slow and shoppers at the Marché Saint-Pierre were scarce, nothing like the usual Saturday crowds that come looking for discounts, mingling with the tourists heading up the hill to the Basilica of Sacré-Coeur.“It feels as though everything has come to a halt,” said a sales clerk at another fabric store. “Look, it’s empty today. We would have stayed home if our boss would have let us, out of respect for those who died.”This time, the police cautioned against any mass gatherings and urged people to stay home. A Chinese restaurant near the Opera Garnier had to shoo customers away, after the police told them to shut down.This time, as Mr. Balet noted, it seemed to be young people who were targeted, a fact that resonates with a generation that has no memory of past events. One retired couple said their children were more shocked than they were. “We remember the terrorist attacks in the 1990s,” said Françoise, who was afraid to give her last name. “Our children don’t have any recollection of that.”Paris, with a population of 2.2 million inside the city limits, can feel very small at a time like this. Many young people have been to concerts like the one that was targeted at the Bataclan on Friday night. The neighborhood where the attacks took place is typically packed on weekends. That familiarity only brings the events closer to home.Mr. Balet has a 24-year-old friend who was at the Bataclan concert, and emerged safe but “traumatized,” he said. Another friend of his watched horrified from her window as people were gunned down in her street. Down the road, a woman at a minimarket said a friend of her son’s had been wounded in the attacks, and was now between life and death at a nearby hospital.“Parisians are not very talkative,” said Maxim Ferron, the 30-year-old manager of Love Organic, a trendy tea shop in the 9th arrondissement. “They keep things, their thoughts to themselves. But this time, the shock is greater: Charlie Hebdo was a target, a symbol. Yesterday, the victims weren’t journalists, or famous. They were civilians.”People talk about the need to show solidarity but they worry that the scale of the massacre will only divide society even further.Some people of immigrant background, who declined to give their names, worry that people will conflate France’s large Muslim population with radical Islam.Mr. Balet is not sure that solidarity was the reason so many stores and restaurants stayed shut today. “I think it is fear,” he said.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement