By DIAA HADIDNOV. 14, 2015
RAMALLAH, West Bank —  Israeli forces on Saturday destroyed the family homes of three Palestinian men charged with carrying out a drive-by shooting last month that killed a couple in front of their four children, and the forces also demolished the home of a man accused of fatally shooting an Israeli in June.It was the most sweeping use of a controversial antiterrorism measure since a wave of unrest escalated last month, mostly through demonstrations, stabbing attacks against Israeli soldiers and civilians and attempts to hit Israelis with vehicles.Israel’s Supreme Court approved the demolitions, all in the West Bank, on Thursday after days of debate. Hawkish Israeli politicians and bereaved relatives had accused the court of dragging its feet after it delayed a decision on Oct. 30. An Israeli human rights group, HaMoked, lost an appeal trying to prevent the demolitions.Israeli military forces surrounded the homes, three in Nablus and one nearby in Silwad, early Saturday morning. They were destroyed with explosives after the families cleared out, local news media reported.AdvertisementHome demolitions were a tactic widely used against the families of Palestinian suicide bombers during the second intifada, which erupted in 2000. But the practice was largely halted in 2005 after a commission found that it rarely worked as a deterrent, and often inflamed hostility. It was revived as a punitive measure last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are all too many incentives to encourage people to commit terrorist crimes,” said Mark Regev, a government spokesman. “People who commit these terrorist crimes are not afraid to die. So the fear that the house that they lived in will be destroyed after they are gone provides an effective deterrence and saves lives.”Sarit Michaeli, of the Israeli rights group B’Tselem, denounced the demolitions.“The authorities have never accused the relatives who are losing their homes of any crimes,” Ms. Michaeli said. “The notion that it’s acceptable to punish people for other people’s actions is an affront to the law.”AdvertisementSome news outlets and activists offered an example of how home demolitions might be inflammatory rather than working as a deterrent. On Oct. 13, Alaa Abu Jamal drove into a group of civilians and then attacked others with a cleaver, killing a rabbi. A week earlier, his cousin’s home was demolished. His own home is now scheduled for demolition.Rami Nazzal contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 15, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Israel Demolishes Family Homes of 4 Palestinian Suspects .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.