AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick Gladstone and Thomas ErdbrinkTensions between the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, and more conservative authorities over the country’s nuclear agreement and its future are turning increasingly bitter, punctuated by public exchanges and growing signs of an anti-American backlash, including arrests. Mr. Rouhani is insisting that the nuclear deal signed in July not only will create the basis for an end to Iran’s prolonged economic isolation, but could be the start of new relations with the United States under certain conditions. Yet even his cautious statement of optimism has provoked a stormy reaction.The tensions, which political analysts foresee lasting into next year at least, are in some ways an expected outcome of the nuclear agreement, which rolls back Iran’s atomic program in exchange for a broad lifting of sanctions. Many hard-liners opposed the accord as a submission to foreign powers, especially the United States. With the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, endorsing the agreement, they turned their criticism directly on Mr. Rouhani and his aides.The losing side’s reaction has been harsh, as seen in a series of arrests of Iranian journalists and at least one Iranian-American accused of collaborating with Western powers or worse. Even some prominent conservatives who mistrust the United States but see practical benefits in having a better relationship with it have been criticized.The reaction has been stoked in some ways by Ayatollah Khamenei, who while endorsing the accord has also warned of what he calls an American desire to infiltrate Iran’s culture, economics and politics.“Khamenei is pre-empting any possible attempt to improve the official image of the U.S., which would threaten his and the regime’s identity,” said Cliff Kupchan, an Iran specialist and chairman of the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy in Washington, in an advisory to clients emailed last week. Mr. Kupchan said in the advisory that, at least for the next several months, he expected that “the surge in arrests, anti-U.S. rhetoric and possible new discrimination against U.S. consumer goods will hurt Iran’s investment climate.”The Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, the powerful Iranian paramilitary force that has thrived under the era of Western nuclear sanctions by amassing a wide range of businesses and stakes in industry, is seen as particularly threatened by the agreement. The advent of more imports and foreign competition, expected after many sanctions end, could jeopardize the corps’ economic power and influence.“There are a lot of entities that have a vested interest in the status quo,” said Farhad Alavi, managing partner of the Akrivis Law Group in Washington, which specializes in trade sanctions law and has received many client inquiries about doing business in Iran once the nuclear agreement takes effect.Gary G. Sick, a Middle East scholar at Columbia University who was the White House’s principal Iran aide during the 1979 Islamic Revolution and American hostage crisis that led to severed diplomatic relations, said he was not surprised by the heightened tensions.The Revolutionary Guards and other conservative elements that control the media, judiciary and the police, he said, “are really terrified that this agreement between the United States and Iran is a precursor to a breakdown in the old revolutionary leadership.”Many of the figures who were in positions of power three decades ago, Mr. Sick said, are still around today, and they embrace anti-Americanism as a fundamental tenet.“This has become their dominant ideology they live by, and it’s been very generous to them,” he said. “Let’s face it. The Revolutionary Guard has a huge financial portfolio.”The political standoff created by the nuclear agreement, Mr. Sick said, “is really very nasty.”A major test of political will is expected in the February parliamentary elections, when supporters of Mr. Rouhani’s approach will have an opportunity to express their preferences at the ballot box.Mr. Rouhani, elected two years ago on promises to end Iran’s prolonged isolation and create a more open society, is regarded as a shrewd politician who knows his boundaries in the Iranian system. At the same time, perhaps sensing a showdown, Mr. Rouhani has become increasingly vocal in his criticism of the other side as the elections loom.In a speech on Nov. 8, Mr. Rouhani rebuked the conservative news media, saying its members acted as “undercover police” and enjoyed near impunity from the judiciary. He also called for more press freedom.This past Thursday, speaking to journalists from the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera, in his first interview as president with a European newspaper, Mr. Rouhani expressed optimism for improved relations with Italy and other European countries as he prepared for a visit. Mr. Rouhani also said he could envision normalized relations with the United States one day, if the Americans apologized for what he called mistakes made since the 1979 revolution.His remarks were quickly denounced by hard-line adversaries.The Friday Prayer leader in Tehran, Kazem Sedighi, criticized government officials for their failure to create a “resistance economy” in Iran and end the country’s “dependence on foreigners.”Mr. Sedighi also accused Mr. Rouhani of inappropriate friendliness to foreigners. “He uses a different tone when he wants to attack people on our side, believers and those who serve the people,” Mr. Sedighi said. “We also think that this kind of language does not befit a president.”In a sign that Mr. Rouhani’s critics are widening their net, they have also unexpectedly targeted Ali Larijani, the Parliament leader, long considered a hard-liner himself.Mr. Larijani, who visited the United States in September to attend a conference, was among those who have suggested a possible prisoner exchange with the Americans that would free at least three Iranian-Americans, including Jason Rezaian, The Washington Post’s Tehran correspondent.On Thursday, protesters painted an American flag on the street in front of Mr. Larijani’s office.Mr. Alavi, a lawyer of Iranian-American descent, said he had received “all kinds of inquiries” about doing business in Iran once the nuclear agreement takes effect and sanctions tied to the nuclear issue are lifted. He advised caution, partly because many other American sanctions limiting business with Iran will remain in place.The mood of anti-Americanism in Iran does not help, either.“I’m a little surprised at the severity of it,” Mr. Alavi said. “I didn’t expect ‘Death to America’ to stop, but I did expect the supreme leader to be a little less anti-U.S. He has a patent mistrust of the United States.”Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran.Advertisement