By RICK LYMAN and ALISON SMALENOV. 15, 2015
Refugees in central Paris have heightened fears about their security and their future in France following Friday's attacks.WARSAW —  With hundreds of thousands of migrants pouring across its borders, and economic and political pressure growing to enact tighter controls, Europe has nevertheless stayed fairly steady in its response to the humanitarian emergency.But after the attacks on Friday in Paris, fears that Islamic terrorists might infiltrate the migrant flow have deepened across the Continent, and the talk has shifted sharply to security over compassion.Officials across Europe were calling for even stronger border controls, stricter screening of those arriving and some way to persuade people to stay in the Middle East.So far, it is mostly talk. But in recent weeks, European countries from Sweden to Slovenia have been enacting new border controls, erecting border fences and discussing ways to better screen and register the migrants.And since the attacks by militants, and the discovery of a passport of a recent Syrian migrant near the scene of a suicide bombing, the rising antimigrant sentiment seems poised to substantially shift the conversation. Perhaps it could even change both policies and attitudes toward the migrants, as they arrive, make their way across Europe and land in the countries where they hope to make their homes.In the short run, this shift in tone could complicate the only significant plan that the European Union now has to slow down or bring order to the resettling of more than a million people: its plans to relocate 160,000 migrants across Europe. It could also affect future attempts by the bloc and others to fashion a more comprehensive and unified approach to the crisis.Germany, which has accepted the largest number of migrants and is the destination of choice for many of them, is crucial to any solution to the crisis. But even there resistance is growing.“The days of uncontrolled immigration and illegal entry can’t continue just like that,” insisted Markus Söder, the finance minister of Bavaria and a leader of its Christian Social Union, in an interview on Sunday with the Welt am Sonntag newspaper. “Paris changes everything.”Much of the harshest language is coming from Eastern European leaders, who have never been warm to the arrival of thousands of largely poor and Muslim migrants. Since the attacks in Paris on Friday, leaders have stepped up their criticism.Karl Erjavec, Slovenia’s foreign minister, warned that the Paris attacks made it clear that hiding among the throngs of migrants are some “with bad intentions.”“This atrocious act confirms that we are entering difficult times,” said Milos Zeman, the president of the Czech Republic. “We cannot fight international terror with protests and demonstrations anymore.”Andrej Babis, the Czech finance minister, said that Europe was at war and that concrete steps needed to be taken — including, perhaps, closing the open borders of the Schengen group, which made passport-free travel possible among 26 nations, one of the Continent’s proudest achievements.The concerns were not limited to government officials.“Along with refugees, there are also terrorists coming,” Mariana Koleva, 40, said on a shopping trip to Edirne, Turkey, from her home in Bulgaria.“I don’t want Romania now to receive migrants, especially after what happened in Paris,” said Gabriela, 38, a bank analyst in Bucharest who declined to give her last name because her employer would not approve. “We could also be in danger in the future.”Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, who made an impassioned speech this summer urging a unified bloc response to the migrants, again urged tolerance.“Those who organized these attacks, and those who carried them out, are exactly those who the refugees are fleeing,” Mr. Juncker told reporters Sunday at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Antalya, Turkey. “And so there is no need for an overall review of the European policy on refugees.”Marie Hermanova, the spokeswoman for a team of Czech volunteers who have been working with the migrants, said her group was bracing for a rising anti-migrant mood.“What happened in Paris on Friday night is happening in Syria every day, and it is exactly why those people are running away,” she said. “Our volunteers are extremely unhappy about the wave of hate this will likely release.”Tereza Novak, the director of Slovenska Filantropija, a humanitarian organization that has worked with migrants for two decades, echoed those concerns. “It’s unfortunate that such violence gives wings to those who spread fear and loathing of refugees,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Barbora Petrova, a political campaign strategist in Prague, said the attacks had created a sense of solidarity among Europeans at the expense of solidarity with the migrants.“People are alarmed, and the space for compassion with the refugees has dramatically shrunk,” she said. “The migrants’ problems have been overshadowed.”In Poland, already quite cool to the idea of allowing hundreds of thousands of migrants into Europe, the attacks in Paris further hardened attitudes.“If you look at what Polish commentators are saying on Facebook, the position has grown much stronger since the attacks,” said Pawel Poncyljusz, a former conservative politician who went into private business. “Opinions vary from those who want to admit no migrants to those who want to revise the system to make it more secure.”Mr. Poncyljusz, who said he shared the concerns, said almost no one was arguing to keep the doors open for humanitarian reasons. There might even be support for Poland’s taking part in a military coalition to defeat the Islamic State, he said.In Germany, for weeks Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Bavarian allies have been calling for an upper limit on the number of migrants the country can handle.In his interview with Welt, Mr. Söder, the Bavarian finance minister, said, “It would be good if Angela Merkel acknowledged that the opening of the border for an unlimited period of time was a mistake.”Ms. Merkel, however, was giving no indication that she was thinking of shifting her stance. And, said Klemen Groselj, a security and defense analyst in Slovenia, that is the stance that most matters.“No matter what happens anywhere in Europe, when it comes to the migrant crisis, all eyes immediately turn to Germany and what the chancellor will do,” he said. “While countries on the Balkan route from Greece to Slovenia and Austria are doing a lot of posturing on sovereign decision-making and protecting their national interests, the fact of the matter is there is so much codependency that any talk of an individual country doing something original, security-wise, following the attacks is simply not feasible.”The Paris attacks, Mr. Groselj said, have reduced the number of questions facing European officials about the migrant crisis to one: “Do they allow the migrant flow to continue or do they stop it?”Pressure may ease on Germany — and other nations — simply because the number of migrants passing into Europe has been slowing, driven by worsening weather and other factors.On Friday, 5,700 migrants entered Germany at the five crossing points most often used, said Angelika Kaltenbacher, a spokeswoman for the federal police. On Saturday, the total was 5,830.Those are substantial numbers, but well below the 8,000 a day or more who crossed in September and October.The answer to the Paris attacks, said Peter N. Bouckaert, the emergencies director for Human Rights Watch, is not to shut the door on those desperately fleeing war in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan, including many fleeing from the Islamic State.“The answer is to put in place a coherent E.U. asylum policy that provides those fleeing war and repression with safe and legal alternatives to get that asylum, without having to risk their lives,” Mr. Bouckaert said in a Facebook post.Standing outside the French Embassy in Riga, Latvia, Marcis Zitmanis, 35, watched his daughter light a candle in an array of flowers and letters of condolence.“We should not blame the migrants,” said Mr. Zitmanis, a construction engineer. “If we help them more, the risk of a terror attack happening again would be less.”Rick Lyman reported from Warsaw, and Alison Smale from Berlin. Reporting was contributed by Barbara Sulk in Ljubljana, Slovenia; Kit Gillet in Bucharest, Romania; Hana de Goeij in Prague; Miroslava Germanova in Bratislava, Slovakia; Boryana Dzhambazova in Edirne, Turkey; and Richard Martyn-Hemphill in Riga, Latvia.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Attacks Change Europe’s Migrant Focus From Compassion to Security.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »