By ISABEL KERSHNERNOV. 15, 2015
JERUSALEM —  The Israeli authorities announced on Sunday the arrest of a Palestinian man suspected of carrying out a deadly drive-by shooting against Israelis in the West Bank, and said the suspect’s father had informed the military about his son’s involvement in the hope of preventing the demolition of their family home.Israeli officials identified the suspect as Shadi Ahmed Matua, 28, a resident of the West Bank city of Hebron, and described him as an operative of Islamic Jihad, a militant group. Mr. Matua is accused of killing Rabbi Yaakov Litman, 40, and his son Netanel Litman, 18, as they drove in a van with five other members of the Litman family near the Jewish settlement of Otniel, south of Hebron, on Friday. Mr. Matua escaped before emergency services and security forces arrived at the scene.Early Saturday, Israeli forces destroyed the family homes of three Palestinian men from Nablus charged with killing an Israeli couple in front of their four children in a similar drive-by shooting in the northern West Bank last month. They also demolished the home of a Palestinian man from the village of Silwad accused of fatally shooting an Israeli in June.Israel revived the controversial tactic of house demolitions after a decade-long hiatus, arguing that it was a necessary deterrent aimed at curbing a recent wave of violence. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel pledged to expedite the legal process for approving demolitions. Human rights organizations have denounced it as a form of collective punishment.AdvertisementMr. Matua, the suspect in Friday’s attack and a married father of two, first told his brother Majdi that he was the perpetrator, according to the Israeli security agency Shin Bet. Majdi immediately told their father, and, fearing that their house would be destroyed, the two decided to give Mr. Matua up to the authorities, the agency added in a statement. The father then went to a military checkpoint in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and reported his son to the soldiers.AdvertisementTelevision images showed Mr. Matua being taken from his home. Shin Bet said that Mr. Matua had admitted his involvement in the shooting and that the weapon and the car he used in the attack had been found.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Apparently disturbed at the lack of international condemnation of Friday’s attack in the West Bank, Mr. Netanyahu sought to connect it to the carnage later that night in Paris.“In Israel, as in France, terrorism is terrorism, and standing behind it is radical Islam and its desire to destroy its victims,” Mr. Netanyahu said Sunday at the start of the weekly cabinet meeting in Jerusalem.“The time has come for the world to wake up and unite in order to defeat terrorism. The time has come for countries to condemn terrorism against us to the same degree that they condemn terrorism everywhere else in the world,” he added.Mr. Netanyahu said that Israel’s “aggressive policy against terrorism,” including the demolition of the assailants’ homes, had often led to the foiling of more serious disasters.A version of this article appears in print on November 16, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Israelis Arrest Palestinian in Shooting in West Bank .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.