AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael D. ShearANTALYA, Turkey — President Obama and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met face-to-face here on Sunday, broaching once again their longstanding disagreement about how to confront the Islamic State and deal with the civil war in Syria.The two men huddled for 35 minutes on a pair of couches during a reception for world leaders gathered here for the Group of 20 summit meeting, just days after the terrorist attacks in Paris.American officials described the conversation as “constructive” and emphasized that the two leaders had agreed on the need for a cease-fire in Syria and a political transition to a new government.“The conversation lasted approximately 35 minutes and centered around ongoing efforts to resolve the conflict in Syria, an imperative made all the more urgent by the horrifying terrorist attacks in Paris,” an American official said.But Russian officials described the meeting in less glowing terms, saying that Mr. Obama and Mr. Putin remained at odds over how to achieve those goals.“The strategic goals concerning the battle with ISIS, in principle they are very close to each other,” Yuri V. Ushakov, a foreign policy adviser to Mr. Putin, told reporters. “But on tactics, the two sides are currently diverging.”That would leave the two leaders in essentially the same place they have been for years when it comes to Syria. Mr. Obama has criticized Mr. Putin’s deployment of Russian forces in Syria, while Mr. Putin has defended the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, in the face of American calls for his departure.The meeting between the two leaders had not been planned, but aides to Mr. Obama had suggested that they would probably try to find time to talk informally. The scene Sunday afternoon was captured by a closed-circuit television camera and shown to reporters in a nearby hotel.The conversation appeared to be animated, with both men leaning in as they used their hands to punctuate their discussion.They sat on dark-colored couches and were joined by Susan E. Rice, Mr. Obama’s national security adviser, and another man who appeared to be acting translating the conversation.The relationship between Mr. Putin and Mr. Obama has grown increasingly tense, especially since the Russian president began an air campaign in Syria just days after a tense conversation with Mr. Obama during the United Nations General Assembly in New York in September.Advertisement