Before he boarded a flight to the Philippines on Monday for a meeting with other Asia-Pacific leaders, Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, read a statement to reporters explaining the purpose of his trip. Bilateral talks. Trade agreements. More bilateral talks.Then the first question came: “Which team are you rooting for?” Mr. Leung shifted his weight and blinked. “It’s a pity,” he said, “that when we arrive in Manila – we’ve inquired – we won’t be able to watch the game.”It might have been an easy question for Mr. Leung had the game on Tuesday, a qualifier for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, not pitted his city against his country. Local media had described the match as the “Great China-Hong Kong Battle.” To many fans, it was as much a political as a sporting contest. That it ended in a scoreless draw, ensuring that Hong Kong still has a slim chance to advance, was embraced by the Hong Kong side as a victory. “The draw proved that Hong Kong wouldn’t take it lying down,” said Oscar Lau, a 30-year-old legal professional. “It speaks to our defiance of China both politically and athletically.” Political slogans were not allowed inside the stadium, but some Hong Kong fans brought signs printed with individual letters and combined them to display the message “Hong Kong is not China.” Outside the stadium, Sammer Wong, a 36-year-old civil servant, was holding a poster featuring the same slogan. “This match represents a culmination of the dissent we have with China over years,” he said, watching it in a nearby playground where fans had set up a screen.In Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese territory since British colonial rule ended in 1997, resentment of China has mounted since last year, when Beijing agreed to allow a popular vote for Hong Kong’s next chief executive, but only from a slate of closely vetted nominees. That set off weeks of street protests that paralyzed several sections of Hong Kong and at times erupted in clashes. In October last year, streets just a few blocks from Mong Kok Stadium, where Tuesday’s match took place, turned into a battlefield between demonstrators and the police trying to move them off the streets. Mr. Leung, who was selected in 2012 by a 1,200-member committee mostly loyal to Beijing, had adhered strictly to the Chinese government’s line, showed no sympathy for the protesters and blamed, without naming names, foreign forces for exacerbating the unrest. More than a year later, political tensions have persisted. Soccer has not been spared. When the national anthem – “March of the Volunteers” – began ringing through the stadium Tuesday evening, many of the roughly 4,000 Hong Kong fans booed, drowning out the 500 or so fans of the Chinese national team who were singing the lyrics. This happened despite the fine FIFA imposed last month on the Hong Kong Football Association after the Hong Kong fans had booed the anthem in three previous home games. FIFA had threatened more severe penalties, such as requiring future games to be played behind closed doors, if that happened again. It was not immediately clear whether further disciplinary actions would be taken. China’s national anthem is also Hong Kong’s, though an increasing number of Hong Kong people express aversion to the song, according to a poll by the Chinese University of Hong Kong.“It’s wishful thinking to say there’s no politics in this game,” said Billy Wong, 37, a Hong Kong fan. “It’s a manifestation of the conflict between the two places. It’s a matter of our pride.”Mark Sutcliffe, chief executive of Hong Kong Football Association, who had called Tuesday’s game “the biggest and most important match to be held in Hong Kong for decades,” said he had expected the jeering.“We’d do what we can to control it, but at the end of the day, those people were voicing their opinion,” he said in an interview. “It’s a minority of people making a political point, it’s not as if they were disrespecting another country, they’re disrespecting their own country. I think FIFA will take that into account.”CCTV 5 just cut the live sound from Mongkok Stadium and played a dubbed version of the national anthem instead for Hong Kong v China— Wild East Football (@wildeastfootbal) 17 Nov 15The Hong Kong police planned to deploy about 1,200 officers for the night, according to local media, amid fears of clashes between fans of the two teams. The two sides were also segregated to minimize physical contact. They were kept separated by rows of empty seats and given separate entrances, food kiosks and even toilets. If the political animosities weighed on the players, it didn’t show on the field Tuesday evening. After a minute of silence to mourn the victims in the Paris terrorist  attacks on Friday, the stadium erupted into chants in different languages: Cantonese, spoken by most Hong Kong people, and Mandarin, the official language of the Chinese mainland. Often, however, the Hong Kong fans shouted in English. “We are Hong Kong,” they called out repeatedly through the game. Game ends – #HKGvCHN 0:0 but #HongKong fans are celebrating like it’s a victory. #China #hkfight #hkfootball https://t.co/t8bchyEYut— Fion Li (@fion_li) 17 Nov 15While the Hong Kong fans dominated the sound waves, the Chinese team set the pace of the game, getting more shots on goal than their Hong Kong counterparts. The first half ended with goals saved by the crossbar more often than by the goalkeeper of either team. Hong Kong reinforced its defense as China made a few last-ditch rushes upfield 10 minutes before the end of the match.Then the whistle blew, prompting a sprint from Hong Kong players on the benches, while the mood was somber in China’s box. By the time the section with Chinese supporters had emptied, fans on the Hong Kong side were still shouting, “We are Hong Kong.”Hong Kong cheered at all four corners. That empty bit is where China fans were. #HKGvCHN https://t.co/KooiQJYYbE— James Porteous (@JamesPorteous) 17 Nov 15The two sides met for the first time in a World Cup qualifier in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen in September, when Hong Kong, ranked 145th in FIFA’s world rankings, held 84th-ranked China to an unexpected tie.Only the top team from each of the eight groups in the qualifying rounds and the four best of the runner-up teams can advance to regional knockout games. Neither China nor Hong Kong, in Group C, has secured a place in the next round.Mr. Sutcliffe said that though it would be a “very very long shot” for Hong Kong to advance, he was pleased with Hong Kong’s performance so far.“We played a team 61 places higher than us in the rankings,” he said. “We played them twice and they haven’t scored a goal.”Hong Kong, ranked second in the group with 14 points, has one game left to play, against Qatar, the group leader with 18 points. China is in third place with 11 points, with two games left against Qatar and the Maldives.Follow Alan Wong on Twitter @alanwongw. 