By DAN BILEFSKYNOV. 16, 2015
PARIS — A few months ago, when Annabel Mouraud, a waitress, was feeling depressed after losing an uncle to cancer, Guillaume Le Dramp, a fellow waiter, arrived at the restaurant where they worked with a small gift and a wide smile: a children’s book titled “Little Miss Lucky.”“It was typical Guillaume,” she said. “He was a very attentive friend and always there to cheer up everyone else. He said he hoped it would bring me luck and happiness.”On Friday, Mr. Le Dramp, 33, who hoped to become an elementary school teacher, decided to take the night off from his usual shift at Chez Janou, a convivial restaurant in the Marais district, known for its heaping portions of chocolate mousse. Instead, he went to a friend’s birthday party on a terrace at the nearby La Belle Équipe bistro.Minutes into the party, which was thronging with waiters from across the neighborhood, several Islamic State militants armed with assault rifles sprayed the restaurant with bullets. Mr. Le Dramp was among 19 people killed there.AdvertisementThe attacks in Paris on Friday left at least 129 people dead, many of them like Mr. Le Dramp — young, aspiring and open to the possibilities that a cosmopolitan city like Paris can offer.AdvertisementMany were from France, but the people in the restaurants, bars and a concert hall, the Bataclan, that were targeted in the attacks also came from Chile, Mexico, Tunisia, Morocco and the United States — 19 countries over all, President François Hollande of France said Monday.They were in the French capital to study, to party, to work. And they embraced a decidedly Parisian culture of public socialization — the sharing of stories and bottles of wine on Friday nights in an array of nightspots in the bourgeois bohemian enclaves of the city.They included Nohemi Gonzalez, 23, a student from California State University, Long Beach, who had come to Paris to study design. Valentin Ribet, 26, a Frenchman who had studied at the London School of Economics and was looking forward to a legal career in criminal and white-collar law. Valeria Solesin, 28, from Venice, was a doctoral student in demography. The dead also included a rock ’n’ roll critic, a Mexican beauty contest winner, an electrical engineer from Spain. There were victims from Germany, Portugal and Sweden.And among them was Mr. Le Dramp, whose death has deeply shaken the close-knit community of waiters, chefs and restaurant owners in the shabby chic 11th Arrondissement and the nearby Third Arrondissement. The area’s ubiquitous bistros and brasseries, with their claustrophobic terraces and Toulouse-Lautrec reproductions, serve as a second home for young people working long hours.“We are all like one big family” said Jean-François Roux, the owner of Chez Janou, who goes by Jeff and is known for offering free glasses of wine and Calvados liqueur to staff members and customers alike. “We all know each other. We all go out together. Almost everyone on the terrace on Friday at La Belle Équipe was in the restaurant business, and the whole neighborhood is in shock and mourning. Everyone knew and liked Guillaume.”According to friends and family, Mr. Le Dramp was a former competitive table tennis player with the sly wit and charisma of a charmer. He had struggled with the exam to become a teacher but was determined to succeed.Anaïs Nicollet, 28, his half sister, said he had grown up in Cherbourg, in northern France, with three sisters and one brother. She said his father had disappeared from his life when Mr. Le Dramp was young, which deeply affected him. Their mother was a homemaker.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A bon vivant who had taken a course in oenology, Mr. Le Dramp loved food and wine and music, in particular the French singer Michel Sardou, Ms. Nicollet said. He had lived for several years in Parma, Italy, where he studied and worked as a bartender. He spoke fluent Italian.AdvertisementFriends and family said he was constantly poking fun and playing practical jokes. Colleagues at Chez Janou said that when they were taking customers’ orders, he routinely whispered jokes in their ears to set them off balance.“He was a charmer, a very French charmer, with blue eyes and an ever-present smile,” Ms. Mouraud said.His wry sense of humor was evident on his Facebook page, where he posted a link to an article with suggested answers to the idiotic questions that waiters receive from customers. One sample: If a customer asks whether there is a bathroom, the waiter should reply: “You are in a restaurant, and it is obvious there are toilets! How do you think we do our thing?”Ms. Nicollet said that she called her brother after learning of the attacks on television, and that when he did not respond, she assumed he had turned off his cellphone or was having another drink. He never showed up at a concert he was supposed to attend. For all his antics, she said, he was faultlessly punctual. When he did not show up for work on Saturday, his family knew something was wrong.Ms. Nicollet said that in the aftermath of the Charlie Hebdo attacks in January, the two had discussed Islamic radicalism, and her brother had said it was important to try to understand the roots of the anger of those who felt marginalized. He had many Muslim friends, she said, several of whom were with him on the night he was killed.She said she and her family had gone to a mosque in Cherbourg after learning of her brother’s death, to convey the message of love that his life personified.“It’s what he would have wanted,” she said. “Guillaume was all about being open-minded, enjoying life, bringing people together. He was all about love.”Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 17 about Guillaume Le Dramp, a waiter who was among the 19 people killed at La Belle Équipe bistro on the night of the terrorist attacks in Paris, misstated, in some editions, the day the French president, François Hollande, remarked that people from 19 countries had been in the bars, restaurants and concert hall that came under attack. He made the comment on Monday, Nov. 16, not Tuesday, Nov. 17.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Waiter Is Remembered as Bon Vivant With Sharp Wit and Wry Sense of Humor .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »