AdvertisementSupported byBy Rachel DonadioPARIS — Crowds gathered on Monday to place flowers and candles and pay their respects to the 89 people killed at the Bataclan, as speculation swirled about why the legendary music hall was the target of the most brutal of the terrorist attacks on Friday.The 150-year-old hall is a part of music history. Édith Piaf and Maurice Chevalier once sang there, crowds swooned for Jeff Buckley, and generations of hip-hop, rock and folk musicians have made and left with lasting memories.But the hall also has a political history. From the early 2000s until 2009, when the majority owner was a Jewish family, pro-Palestinian activists held several demonstrations outside the hall to protest an annual benefit held there for the Israeli border police.On the night of the attack, the Eagles of Death Metal, an American rock band, was performing. The band had recently defied a music industry boycott and played a concert in Israel.Neither the French authorities nor Jewish groups have said that anti-Semitism was an element in Friday’s attacks, though the investigation has so far failed to turn up any explanation for why gunmen and suicide bombers set their sights on the Bataclan or several nearby restaurants.In claiming responsibility for the attacks, the Islamic State, the group also known as ISIS or ISIL, called the Bataclan a place “where hundreds of apostates had gathered in a profligate prostitution party.”A French official briefed on the investigation said that the man suspected of being the architect of the attacks, Abdelhamid Abaaoud, had once said he had plans to attack “a concert hall.” And hundreds of fans were gathered there on Friday night.But the hall’s name had circulated on pro-Palestinian online networks for years.Marc Hecker, a researcher at the French Institute for International Relations, said: “When I heard there was an attack on the Bataclan, I thought it might just be by chance. It’s an easy target, and like ISIS said, it’s a place of debauchery.” “But there are hundreds of concerts halls in Paris and it happened to hit there,” said Mr. Hecker, who is the author of “French Intifada,” about pro-Palestinian organizations in France. “The Bataclan had held galas for the Israeli Army and might have been known by the jihadist movements for that.”He added, “But it might also be chance.” During the second intifada, around 2002, a French Jewish group, Migdal, began holding an annual benefit to raise funds for a branch of the Israeli border guards, the Magav. From 2005 until 2008, the benefit was held at the Bataclan, with the support of the family that had owned the hall since the 1970s but sold its remaining stake this year.Jules Frutos of the Alias Production group, which has been a manager of the Bataclan since 2004, said the hall had not been targeted during his tenure and that the management had not heard of any threats before Friday’s attacks. “No,” he said. The pro-Palestinian demonstrations of the past were “unrelated,” he added. “Unfortunately and traumatically this is about audience members who bought a ticket to hear an artist and are taken hostage and killed,” Mr. Frutos said. “This has nothing to do with the hall’s past.”That past included forceful but nonviolent demonstrations focused around the Palestinian cause.In January 2008, pro-Palestinian activists held an unauthorized demonstration at the Bataclan, pushing against the police in a “Greenpeace-style” protest, said Yazid Abouhakim, 33, a former activist with Génération Palestine, a student organization.In December 2008, a group of about 40 pro-Palestinian demonstrators, their faces masked by kaffiyehs, demonstrated in front of the Bataclan, calling the Migdal organization that had organized the benefit “pro-Israeli, racist and Islamophobic.”“You’ll pay the consequences of your acts,” a masked demonstrator said in a video posted on YouTube. He added: “In the neighborhoods, things are moving and heating up. The next time we won’t come to talk.” According to Mr. Hecker, the talk in the video was in line with the “more muscular actions” of a younger generation of pro-Palestinian activists. “But I don’t think it’s a terrorist movement at all,” he said. Nor did he think the past protests were connected to the jihadists who struck on Friday.“I don’t see links between pro-Palestinian activists and the attacks,” he said.Still, he added that the hall’s name had circulated online and might potentially have caught the attention of more radical forces.In 2011, the French daily Le Figaro reported that a terrorist suspect had told the French police that Jaish Al-Islam, the branch of Al Qaeda in Gaza, had mentioned the Bataclan as a potential target of attacks. The French authorities did not respond to questions about the account.Joël Touitou, from the family that used to own the Bataclan, told the Israeli news media that the hall could have been targeted for any number of reasons, including its gay evenings. “If they had wanted to target Jews, they would have picked another night,” Mr. Touitou said.It was also unclear whether there was anything behind the Islamic State’s striking on the night of the concert by the Eagles of Death Metal. According to a report in The Jerusalem Post, the band had played in Tel Aviv on July 12, rebuffing a growing movement in the music industry, promoted by Roger Waters, the former leader of Pink Floyd, to boycott Israel.“I would never boycott a place like this,” The Jerusalem Post quoted the Eagles of Death Metal’s lead singer, Jesse Hughes, as saying at the Tel Aviv show. Mr. Hughes told the crowd that he had received a letter from Mr. Waters urging him to participate in the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement. “You know what I wrote back? Two words.”The leading Jewish organization in France, the Crif, said it had not identified any anti-Semitic elements in Friday’s attacks. “We can’t make speculation,” said Laura Nhari, a spokeswoman for the Crif. “There’s an investigation underway, but for now we aren’t taking this into consideration.”A French promoter for the Eagles of Death Metal declined to comment beyond saying the band’s tour had been canceled. The band’s manager also declined to comment.On Twitter on Monday, the Bataclan’s owners wrote: “No words suffice to express the magnitude of our grief. Our thoughts go to the victims, to the wounded, and to their loved ones. Many of you have wanted to gather in remembrance at the Bataclan. Unfortunately, the authorities still need to work at the site. We will keep you informed about when it will be possible to assemble in front of the hall. We thank you for your support, which touches us profoundly.”Musicians offered widespread messages of sympathy and support after the attacks. “Why?” asked the musician Rosanne Cash, who said she had never forgotten her one concert at the Bataclan in 1990. “It was just one of those nights that you look for as performer, when you’re totally connected to the audience,” she said in a telephone interview.Ms. Cash said she would love to play there again. “As soon as this happened, I called my manager and said, ‘We have to book the Bataclan this year.’ ”Ben Sisario contributed reporting from New York.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement