By RAMI NAZZAL and ISABEL KERSHNERNOV. 16, 2015
QALANDIYA REFUGEE CAMP, West Bank —  Armed clashes broke out during an Israeli military raid at the Qalandiya refugee camp in the West Bank before dawn on Monday, leaving two Palestinian men dead and several others wounded, according to the Israeli military and Palestinian residents.Residents said that up to 1,000 soldiers had entered the camp, which is between Jerusalem and Ramallah, and had blocked its entrances, with the intention of demolishing the upper story of an apartment building that was home to the family of Muhammad Abu Shaheen.Mr. Abu Shaheen, also a resident of the camp, has been charged with shooting and killing Danny Gonen, an Israeli civilian, after Mr. Gonen visited a spring in the West Bank in June.“During the activity, suspects opened fire at the forces,” the military said in a statement, referring to the raid at the camp. “In response to the immediate danger, forces fired towards the attackers.”AdvertisementThe military said three people had been shot during the operation, adding that hundreds of Palestinians had clashed with the soldiers and thrown firebombs, improvised explosive devices and rocks at them.AdvertisementThe Palestinians who were killed were identified as Laith Manasra, 21, and Ahmad Abu al-Aish, 28. Witnesses said that a third Palestinian who had been critically wounded was removed from a Palestinian ambulance by Israeli soldiers, who detained him and transferred him to Israeli custody.Bassam Manasra, 24, a mechanic and the cousin of Laith Manasra, said troops entered the camp at 2 a.m.“The youths went out and began to clash with them in an attempt to stop them from entering further into the camp,” he said.Mr. Manasra said the forces had spread into every alley of the crowded camp and had placed snipers on rooftops. He said he had heard yelling and the sound of automatic gunfire, and then had heard reports that Mr. Abu al-Aish had been exchanging fire with the soldiers and had been fatally shot.Mr. Manasra said he had then gone onto his veranda and had seen his cousin, Laith, standing on the roof opposite. He said he had heard shots and had seen Laith drop to the ground.Laith had only been watching the clashes and had not been taking part when he was shot, he said, asserting that he had not been armed. Mr. Manasra said he and other cousins had put Laith, who was still breathing, in a car, but that soldiers had blocked the alley, preventing them from leaving for the hospital until the soldiers had withdrawn from the camp. By then, he said, Laith had died.The mother of Mr. Abu Shaheen, whose home was destroyed, said that more than a dozen soldiers came to the house around 2.15 a.m. and told those inside to leave and wait at a soccer field.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two hours later, she said, “I heard a big blast and knew that my house had been destroyed. Shortly after, they withdrew from the camp, leaving my home in rubble.”AdvertisementIsrael recently revived the tactic of house demolitions, after a break of a decade. The demolitions were halted because of questions about their effectiveness as a deterrent, and there had also been human rights concerns. But Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel recently pledged to expedite the legal process for approving demolitions as part of efforts to curb the recent wave of violence. Rights organizations have denounced the measure as a form of collective punishment.Channel 2 News in Israel showed rare footage in mid-October of masked gunmen in the Qalandiya camp marching to the Abu Shaheen home in solidarity after the family had received a notice that it was to be demolished.One of the gunmen, armed with an assault rifle, vowed that the home would be destroyed only over the bodies of the 30,000 camp residents. The gunmen were identified as members of the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, a militia affiliated with Fatah, the mainstream Palestinian party led by President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority.In an interview with Ohad Hemo, a reporter for Channel 2 News, one of Mr. Abu Shaheen’s brothers described the killing of Mr. Gonen as a “heroic” act and said, “It lets us hold our heads high.”After noon prayer on Monday, thousands of Palestinians joined the funeral march to the camp cemetery with the two bodies of those killed the night before. Participants were flying the flags of Fatah; of Hamas, the Islamic militant group; and the Palestinian flag.After the burials, hundreds of Palestinians violently clashed with Israeli forces at the nearby military checkpoint. The Israeli forces responded with tear gas and rubber bullets.Rami Nazzal reported from the Qalandiya refugee camp, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Deadly Clashes Erupt as Israeli Soldiers Raid Refugee Camp in West Bank.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.