AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephanie Saul and Melissa EddyTwo Air France flights bound for Paris from the United States were diverted Tuesday night over threats telephoned to a reservations center, the airline said.Passengers and crew members were removed from the flights in Salt Lake City and Halifax, Nova Scotia, where the aircraft were being inspected for explosives. Flight 65, carrying 473 passengers, departed Los Angeles and landed in Salt Lake City at 7:20 p.m. local time. Flight 55 left Dulles International Airport near Washington, D.C., with 234 passengers and landed at Halifax International Airport at 10:30 p.m., the airline said. The threat was called in after the flights had already taken off, the airline said. Todd Palmer, an F.B.I. spokesman in Salt Lake City, said in an email that several law enforcement agencies had responded to the airport there and were investigating the threat. Mr. Palmer said he had no additional information. In Halifax, the matter had been turned over to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Mark Skinner, a spokesman for the police, said the force received a bomb threat against Air France Flight 55. He said he was not aware of the details of the threat or its source.Security officials have been on heightened alert since Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris.On Tuesday, the German authorities canceled an exhibition soccer match between Germany and the Netherlands in Hanover, less than two hours before kickoff, after the authorities received what they called “a concrete security threat.”Chancellor Angela Merkel had been on her way to the match, a visit that her government had presented as a sign that Europe’s routines were resuming after the attacks. Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière, who was flying to the game from Berlin with Ms. Merkel, told reporters he had decided to cancel it after “indications about a threat to tonight’s game grew more concrete in the course of the evening.” The chancellor returned to Berlin, he said.The minister said the decision, made while en route to the match, “was not easy,” but he refused to give additional details. To provide answers “would unnerve the public,” he said. The first fans who had begun filing into the stadium were evacuated.“I would ask you for a leap of faith, to believe that we had good, bitter reasons to call off the game,” Mr. de Maizière said.Earlier in the day, the police reported a bomb threat, and rumors circulated that explosives had been found in an ambulance outside the stadium. But Boris Pistorius, interior minister for Lower Saxony denied that any explosives had been found.Ian Austen contributed reporting from Ottawa.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement