NOV. 17, 2015
The following excerpts are from an interview about how to defeat the Islamic State with J.M. Berger, a scholar at the Brookings Institution and a co-author of “ISIS: The State of Terror.” “The West can certainly go in militarily and take ISIS’ territory away from it, if it is willing to bear the costs of a ground war.”But, J.M. Berger said, the presence of the Russian military in Syria means such a strategy would risk a confrontation with Russian forces. A better solution, he argued, would be for regional powers to take on the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL and Daesh.“ISIS is, after all, a greater threat to them than to us, and it would undercut their ideological appeal if they were defeated by Muslims,” Mr. Berger said. A rout by their fellow Muslims would “undermine their apocalyptic narrative, which requires a ground war with ‘Rome,’” the nickname for Western powers used by Islamic State ideologues.Advertisement“There is probably no solution to ISIS until there is a solution to Assad,” he added, referring to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. “That is the factor that paralyzes everything else.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even if one nation or a coalition, provoked by Islamic State attacks, musters the military force to defeat and scatter the group, its defeat could have a dark coda, Mr. Berger said.Advertisement“Thousands of angry young men who were manning checkpoints and policing the streets in I.S. will be freed up to commit terrorism instead,” he said, using an acronym for the Islamic State and the land it controls in Iraq and Syria. “The result will probably be a wave of terrorism the likes of which the world has never seen.”Mr. Berger did not rule out a slower victory over the Islamic State, by containing the group and cutting off its sources of wealth.“The ISIS economy is largely based on looting,” he said, so the key to such a strategy is “preventing them from capturing any new towns with fresh resources.” The group might wither, he said, but “a lot of bad stuff could happen between now and then.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.