By KIT GILLETNOV. 17, 2015
BUCHAREST, Romania — Romania’s Parliament on Tuesday approved the government of Dacian Ciolos, who was nominated to replace Victor Ponta as prime minister last week.The lawmakers approved the new cabinet by a vote of 389 to 115.Mr. Ponta resigned amid large-scale protests over a nightclub fire on Oct. 30 in Bucharest, the capital, that left at least 56 dead. Many people blamed government corruption and inaction for the disaster.Mr. Ciolos, 46, has served as the country’s agriculture minister and, more recently, as the agriculture commissioner on the European Commission, the executive branch of the European Union. He is considered politically independent.Protesters had been demanding a new government made up of technocrats, and Mr. Ciolos’s cabinet includes ministers with experience in domestic and international organizations and the business sector.AdvertisementAnca Paliu Dragu, the new finance minister, is a former International Monetary Fund expert and an economic analyst at the European Commission. Mihnea Motoc, the new defense minister, was the Romanian ambassador to Britain.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I wanted to pick competent and expert people in their fields, open to dialogue,” Mr. Ciolos told reporters after announcing the nominees on Sunday.AdvertisementMr. Ciolos’s initial candidate for health minister, Andrei Baciu, 28, withdrew hours after photographs of him modeling underwear surfaced online and questions were raised about his relative youth and inexperience. The nomination of Cristina Guseth to fill the post of justice minister was also withdrawn after her poor showing in parliamentary hearings.Mr. Ciolos’s government is likely to remain in power until December 2016, when parliamentary elections are scheduled.It is unclear whether his government will have the time or political capital to enact wide-ranging new policies, or whether it will simply be a caretaker government.A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; Romania: Parliament Approves New Cabinet Including Technocrats.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.