AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — President Ashraf Ghani on Tuesday began a modest jobs program to try to stem an exodus of young Afghans to Europe and restore some faith in the struggling government and economy.Tied down by the offensives of the resurgent Taliban and by infighting within his coalition government, Mr. Ghani has not been able to mitigate the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs once linked to the presence of the large coalition of NATO troops in Afghanistan. After the end of the NATO combat mission in 2014, the international military presence here now numbers about 17,000 troops — down from a peak of about 140,000.The economic hardship, increasing insecurity and a loss of faith in the country’s future have prompted a huge wave of migration, with about 146,000 Afghan migrants arriving in Europe this year, according to Foreign Minister Salahuddin Rabbani.The first phase of Mr. Ghani’s jobs program, called Jobs for Peace, is planned to cover 12 provinces. The aim is to bring about two months of food security for nearly 100,000 families by creating around 5.5 million labor days. The initial cost is about $100 million, officials said. The program is to expand to cover all 34 provinces by June, requiring about $350 million.“In the first phase, the program will cover 4,700 villages, and in the spring it will reach 15,000 villages,” Mr. Ghani said in a televised address.Many of the jobs within the program will involve maintenance work on development projects completed in rural areas, and cleaning work in the urban centers. Existing local councils are to help identify poor people in each village who could work.Some analysts see the program as a way for Mr. Ghani to buy some time in the face of mounting domestic criticism, as the program is unlikely to be able to do much to reverse the trend of educated Afghans’ leaving the country. The government estimates that nearly 700,000 job seekers, a large part of them high school and college graduates, enter the market every year, but with no prospects.William Byrd, an economist at the United States Institute of Peace who has written extensively about Afghanistan, said that without political improvements, such economic programs usually had little effect in creating broader economic confidence.“The short-term focus is right, but you can’t just throw money at the problem, because there is no money,” Mr. Byrd said. “The government needs to start acting like a unified government that is facing a crisis. We really don’t see that.”While a decline of economic growth was expected with the withdrawal of foreign forces, the government’s slow start — it has struggled for months to make even the most basic appointments — has fueled the problem, Mr. Byrd said. The only bright spots are that revenue declines have been reversed in recent months and that agriculture remains a stabilizing factor.The modest scale of the program, despite the severity of the crisis, also suggested how little financial leeway Mr. Ghani has. In months of negotiations with international donors, it became clear to him that they “can’t put out an extra dime,” according to one adviser to Mr. Ghani. Donor nations still foot the bill for around two-thirds of Afghanistan’s annual expenditure, and have been loath to expand that, particularly given lagging progress in fighting corruption.Putting the jobs program into effect in rural areas may be made easier for Mr. Ghani by the existence of a vast rural structure that is already in place, the National Solidarity Program. The program, which has for years created community councils and given them small grants to start projects, has been credited as a rare success in an otherwise gloomy Afghan development sector marred by waste. Mr. Ghani was one of the founders of the program, when he served as finance minister in the early years after the American invasion.Officials say the National Solidarity Program’s success is rooted in a local focus, scaled to existing capacity. By chopping up billions of dollars’ worth of aid into small packages, it has been able to evade the large-scale corruption common in larger, centralized contracts.One success story has been in Joi Bala, a village of about 246 families tucked between pine-covered mountains in Kapisa Province. Through the local council set up by the National Solidarity Program there, the village added three irrigated freshwater sources and two community centers for $52,000.The local ownership of the projects also meant that the insurgents were less likely to try to block them. Even in insecure areas like Kapisa Province, local elders have often found ways of negotiating with the Taliban to allow the completion of development projects.But there are concerns that now, with the Taliban becoming increasingly aggressive, development will be more difficult. In his speech Tuesday, Mr. Ghani noted that heavy fighting and harsh weather would prevent some communities from benefiting from the jobs plan right away.Advertisement