AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael D. ShearMANILA — Standing in front of a former United States Coast Guard ship that is now the flagship of the Philippine Navy, President Obama on Tuesday sent a message intended for a single country: China.Kicking off five days in Asia by visiting the home port of the 378-foot ship, now known as the BRP Gregorio del Pilar, Mr. Obama announced that the United States would spend an additional $250 million over the next two years to help ensure maritime security for countries in Southeast Asia.That money will bolster the naval capabilities of Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Malaysia and Vietnam for one main purpose: to stand up to China’s increasingly aggressive claims on the South China Sea, where in recent months, that country has enlarged submerged reefs into islands capable of hosting military airstrips, equipment and soldiers.“We have a treaty obligation, an ironclad commitment to the defense of our ally the Philippines, who can count on the United States,” Mr. Obama said in brief remarks after touring the Gregorio del Pilar. “My visit here underscores our shared commitment to the security of the waters of this region and to the freedom of navigation.”Officially, the United States takes no position on the competing territorial claims on the South China Sea by China and its neighbors. But fears that Beijing’s behavior in the strategic waterways could hamper the free flow of commerce from the region, which has become increasingly important, have prompted Mr. Obama to act.Last month, he ordered a Navy destroyer into the disputed area to demonstrate American resolve behind the idea that no single nation could stand in the way of free navigation through open, international waters.The president’s visit to the Philippine harbor on Tuesday was meant to emphasize that message without directly challenging the Chinese before the start of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting here on Wednesday.In his remarks after his tour, Mr. Obama did not mention China’s activities in the South China Sea. But Susan E. Rice, the president’s national security adviser, made clear ahead of the trip that concerns about China would be a “central issue of discussion.”In a fact sheet about the president’s announcement, White House officials said that the additional money was intended to “address the evolving dynamics of the region” and that it would increase “the maritime security capacity of our allies and partners, to respond to threats in waters off their coasts.”Once named the Coast Guard Cutter Hamilton, the ship that Mr. Obama toured on Tuesday now carries the name of a Filipino hero who fought in the revolution against Spanish rule and in the Philippine-American war, before he was killed in 1899.The ship conducts missions in the waters near the Spratly Islands, a disputed set of hundreds of reefs, islets and islands that are in critical shipping lanes. Mr. Obama flew over the South China Sea in Air Force One as he arrived in the Philippines.“The ship that I just toured, a former U.S. Coast Guard vessel, helps the Philippines respond to disasters, perform counterterrorism missions and patrol the South China Sea,” Mr. Obama said, adding, “More capable navies and partnership with the United States are critical to the security of this region.”As part of the $250 million commitment, Mr. Obama announced that the United States would transfer two ships to the Philippines — another Coast Guard cutter and a research vessel. The Philippines is already the largest recipient of American maritime assistance in the region; it will get $79 million this year.Mr. Obama made no mention of the agreement that the United States and the Philippines reached a year ago to open several bases on the island here to American personnel and equipment. That agreement has been delayed by legal wrangling and is awaiting a decision by the Philippine Supreme Court and that country’s legislature.Once approved, that agreement could mean a return of United States forces to the Subic Bay military base, which once served as the largest overseas outpost for the American military.The Philippines ejected the United States from the base in 1992, declaring itself free of the “shackles of dictatorship.” Since then, however, the political dynamics of the region have shifted, and the Philippines is eager to welcome back the Americans as a counterweight to China.If the United States military returns to Subic Bay, it would provide a significant new base from which to assert its influence in the region. And it would be a powerful symbol of what the Obama administration calls its “rebalance” of foreign policy toward Asia.That effort relies partly on harnessing the spending power of the emerging economies in the region — something that could be threatened if the countries do not find ways to stand up to Chinese claims on the waters that surround them.After touring the Gregorio del Pilar, Mr. Obama said the effort to do that was well on its way.“I can tell you that after inspection, your ship looks like it is in tiptop shape,” he said.Advertisement