Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版As news spread on Thursday that Islamic State militants had executed a Chinese hostage, some Chinese called on their government to send troops to the Middle East, while others cautioned that such a move could invite terrorism at home.“ISIS is outrageous and killed the Chinese hostage,” demi_miao wrote on Weibo. “It’s time for China as a big power to stand up and act.”Xicai jianghu1901 wrote: “The ISIS terrorist group brutally killed the Chinese hostage. Heaven is furious and people are resentful.” President #XiJinping Thu strongly condemns #IS for the death of Chinese hostage, vows to crack down on terrorism. https://t.co/469HaUk7Al— People’s Daily,China (@PDChina) 19 Nov 15“What I want to see is: ‘Those who invade the Chinese nation will be punished no matter how far away they are,’ ” wrote Xiucai jianghu1901, quoting a saying from a 1,000-year-old book of history, the “Zizhi Tongjian,” or “Mirror of Governance.”But Xiucai jianghu1901 was concerned that the Chinese government would not respond forcefully enough, even though President Xi Jinping and other officials have condemned the killing of the hostage, Fan Jinghui.“As usual — I can see this even with my eyes closed — the next step will be a spokesman for the Foreign Affairs Ministry strongly protesting and condemning and moaning,” this commenter wrote. “But I hope I won’t just see the spokesman’s feeble ‘protest and condemnation’ and then everything just going back to silence and fading out.”#BREAKING: China confirms death of hostage held by #IS, saying criminal must be brought to justice https://t.co/VRdfAoWHJb— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) 19 Nov 15In Manila, where he was attending the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting, Mr. Xi said: “China strongly condemns the extremist ‘Islamic State’ that organized this cruel killing of a Chinese citizen. I express my deepest condolences to the family of the victim.“Terrorism is the common enemy of humanity,” he said, adding that China resolutely opposes terrorist in all forms and will resolutely crack down on any terrorist crime that challenges human civilization.Other commenters questioned the feasibility of China sending troops, fearing this could turn the country into a target.On Zhihu.com, a discussion site, Tao Ye wrote: “What can” the Chinese government “do? If you pay a ransom they’ll target Chinese when kidnapping people. They’ll get lots of money.“Military action? After that, don’t expect peace on your airlines or in downtown Beijing and Shanghai. Not to mention it’s a quagmire out there” in the Middle East. “Once you’re in, you never get out.”China has experienced violent attacks by people from the far-western Chinese region of Xinjiang, some of whom are fighting for greater autonomy and rights.And some Chinese citizens are believed to have joined radical Islamists to fight in the Middle East, according to a senior Chinese official. Wu Sike, a former special envoy to the Middle East, said last year that there were about 100 Chinese fighters with ISIS, adding, however, that the number was based on foreign news reports.On Weibo, a commenter called Weight-Losing Big Fat Xu Loves Eating Fried Pork wrote: “Why are you guys saying fight ISIS when it’s just hot blood rushing to your head? Does China have a military base in the Middle East? Isn’t China far away from the Middle East? Wouldn’t a group as extreme as ISIS fight back?”Hercule_Holmes_Star wrote: “If you don’t understand, then don’t talk nonsense. France declared war on ISIS and with what result? If China openly opposes ISIS, would you guys still be here talking with your legs crossed?”A Chinese “floater” in the Middle EastIn September, when photos of Mr. Fan appeared online with another hostage held for ransom, Ole Johan Grimsgaard-Ofstad of Norway, a Beijing News article described him as 50 years old, from the Shijingshan district of Beijing and a 1984 graduate of the Second High School attached to Beijing Normal University.#China “deeply shocked” by #IS killing of the Chinese hostage, still verifying the info.: FM Thur. https://t.co/2RrUqZTXF5— People’s Daily,China (@PDChina) 18 Nov 15In 2001, Mr. Fan told China National Radio in a feature about people who chose unconventional lifestyles that he had been a middle school teacher but had quit that secure job to join an advertising company in 1994.After working at a department store “run by Taiwanese” in Beijing, he worked as a freelancer for China Central Television, the state broadcaster. Around 1997, he returned to advertising.Mr. Fan said he enjoyed his life as a “floater,” as those who choose a more independent path are called in China. The first of several jobs as a freelance advertising consultant went well and brought him a good income.“I was so happy,” he said. “I told myself, I have to be this kind of free man. Easily making money, and free. Freedom is key. What young people pursue is freedom, a state of freedom. Making money and freedom, who doesn’t want that?”He added: “I’m deliberately pursuing this insecurity, because it gives me a kind of pleasure.”“Many young people like martial arts novels, with their fighting and killing and venturing into the world,” he said. “This is very appealing to young people. It’s only because they’re faced with pressures of life, reality, the environment and their families, that they don’t dare choose. As soon as they can secure the basics in life, I believe many people would choose to float.”It was not immediately clear why Mr. Fan was in the Middle East or how he was kidnapped.Vanessa Piao contributed research. Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.