By CHRIS BUCKLEYNOV. 18, 2015
BEIJING —  Two Chinese dissidents who had sought sanctuary in Thailand have been sent back to China, despite winning official recognition as refugees, rights groups said Wednesday.The groups denounced the act by the Thai authorities as a betrayal of the men’s right to flee feared political persecution and torture.The decision to deport the men last week showed the Chinese government’s growing power to persuade other countries to deny its citizens refuge, said William Nee, a researcher on China for Amnesty International based in Hong Kong.“This deportation fits a worrying new pattern of China putting pressure on third-party countries to repatriate dissidents and others who have left China for economic and social reasons,” Mr. Nee said. “China now seems more willing than ever to exert its influence internationally to ensure that its crackdown on human rights domestically can go on unimpeded.”AdvertisementThe men, Jiang Yefei and Dong Guanping, had been previously detained in China for their activism. Under President Xi Jinping, the government has expanded arrests, detentions and controls to quell potential challenges to Communist Party control.AdvertisementThe Thai government has not publicly confirmed that it sent the men back to China. The Associated Press and other news outlets reported the decision on Tuesday. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said, without confirming the nationality or background of the two men, that it was “deeply concerned.”The men had been accepted by the United Nations agency as refugees and were due to be resettled soon in a third country, said the statement, which was forwarded by Vivian Tan, a press officer in the high commissioner’s Bangkok office.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The deportations appear to have occurred only days before the two were to depart” Thailand, the statement said. “This action by Thailand is clearly a serious disappointment, and underscores the longstanding gap in Thai domestic law concerning ensuring appropriate treatment of persons with international protection needs.”Mr. Jiang went to Thailand in 2008, after he was twice held by the Chinese police for denouncing the government’s response to a huge earthquake that year in his home province, Sichuan, in the southwest, according to Maya Wang, a researcher on China for Human Rights Watch.Mr. Dong, from Zhengzhou in central China, went to Thailand in September, Ms. Wang said. He was jailed from 2001 to 2004 on charges of “inciting subversion of state power” and detained for several months beginning in 2014 for publicly commemorating the people killed in 1989 during the military crackdown on pro-democracy protests across China, she said.In Washington, John Kirby, the State Department spokesman, expressed “grave disappointment” at the deportation of two “registered Chinese refugees.” Mr. Kirby said at a daily press briefing that in China, the two men “could face harsh treatment, arbitrary detention, and the lack of due process.”The Thai police arrested Mr. Jiang and Mr. Dong in late October for not holding valid visas, Amnesty International said in an earlier account of the case. That account said that the men were kept in a detention center in Bangkok, that someone unknown to them or their families had paid their fines for violating the visa rules, and that they were deported a few days later.AdvertisementThe Chinese government has taken increasingly forceful steps to prevent citizens from fleeing into Southeast Asia, especially through Myanmar and on to Thailand, where many then try to leave for other, more welcoming countries. China’s campaign first focused on the Uighur minority, a largely Muslim people in western China. Growing numbers of Uighurs have fled their volatile homeland, and in July, Thailand sent about 100 back to China, prompting denunciations from rights advocates and the United Nations refugee agency.Last month, forces in a border town in Myanmar detained and handed back to the Chinese authorities the teenage son of a detained Chinese human rights lawyer, as well as two men who were trying to help the boy flee to Thailand, then to the United States. Some human rights groups have also said that Gui Minghai, a publisher in Hong Kong who disappeared from his vacation home in Thailand, may have been spirited to China.The military junta that seized power in Thailand last year has sought political and economic support from China. Thailand is not a member of the international convention obliging signatory states to respect the rights of people designated refugees by the United Nations.On Tuesday, Chinese government representatives faced intense questioning in Geneva by members of a United Nations panel on torture. That hearing is to continue on Thursday.A version of this article appears in print on November 19, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Thailand Deports 2 Dissidents to China, Activists Say.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.