

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

NOV. 20, 2015

At least 130 people were killed in terrorist attacks on Nov. 13 in the French capital. They were mostly young people, out having fun. The victims included an architect, an American college student, an Algerian violinist and many, many music fans. Here are some of their stories.
At least 130 people were killed in terrorist attacks on Nov. 13 in the French capital. They were mostly young people, out having fun. The victims included an architect, an American college student, an Algerian violinist and many, many music fans. Here are some of their stories.Maxime Bouffard, a longtime rugby player with a thin beard, had gone with a friend from his university days to see the band Eagles of Death Metal at the Bataclan concert hall when terrorists opened fire with assault rifles.“By the time his friend said they should get down, Maxime had taken a bullet and was already dead,” his sister said. “He’d fallen into his friend’s arms.”Emmanuel Breuil first found out that his daughter, Elodie, was attending an Eagles of Death Metal concert at the Bataclan concert hall on Nov. 13 when his dinner was interrupted by phone calls from his sons.Elodie, a 23-year-old design student, had gone to the concert in the 11th Arrondissement with a group of friends. She was one of two in the group who died at the Bataclan.Christophe Foultier, 39, a husband and father, was among those killed at the Bataclan. He was with a group of four friends and was the only one who did not survive.Mr. Foultier may have worked in advertising by day, but by night he was a rock musician, working on his latest album. He was at the show with his wife, Caroline Jolivet. “We went to our first concert together at the Bataclan,” she said, “and a thousand more afterwards.”Véronique Geoffroy de Bourgies lived in Paris but loved Madagascar, said her husband, Stéphane de Bourgies. It was there that she adopted their two children, now 12 and 15, and to Madagascar that she dedicated the last 15 years of her life.A native Parisian, Ms. Geoffroy de Bourgies was the daughter of two journalists, and a former model and journalist herself. But she quit her job in 2005 to create Zazakely Sambatra, a nongovernmental organization that helps children in Madagascar.Manuel Colaço Dias, a retired chauffeur, still took pleasure in accepting the occasional driving job, and some clients continued to request him by name. Friday, Nov. 13, was just such an occasion. An avid soccer enthusiast, he had agreed to drive a minivan full of fans to Paris from Reims to watch France play Germany — a four-hour round trip.Not long after dropping his clients off at the Stade de France, Mr. Dias became the sole victim of the attacks nearby.Matthieu Giroud was a professor of geography at the University of Marne-la-Vallée. He and his girlfriend, Aurélie Silvestre, had a 3-year-old son, Gary, and a baby girl expected in March.He had the charisma to be the lead singer in the rock band he played with, his friends said, but he chose to play the bass — to be the quiet guy in the back.For Nohemi Gonzalez, a bubbly and determined first-generation Mexican-American from California, studying industrial design in Paris was the culmination of a dream.Two weeks after the Nov. 13 attacks, which left 130 people dead, the multicultural band of friends and colleagues who spent their time at La Belle Équipe are trying to rebuild their lives. But it is a wrenching task made all the more difficult by the fact that so many of the victims were intimately connected.Amine Ibnolmobarak, a native of Morocco, and his French wife, Maya Nemeta, were married about 18 months ago.They met as architecture students in Paris, where they stood out for their talent and their activism, friends and former teachers said.Mr. Ibnolmobarak was killed in the attacks, while Ms. Nemeta survived.The cousins Pierre Innocenti and Stéphane Albertini were enjoying a rare Friday night out at the Bataclan concert hall with some friends.Normally, the two men, along with Mr. Innocenti’s younger brother, Charles, were working Friday nights at a popular Italian restaurant in the Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine, which has been owned by members of their extended family for three generations.Guillaume Le Dramp had taken the night off from his job to attend a birthday party at La Belle Équipe bistro. He died there, along with 18 others. His friends described him as a bon vivant with a sharp wit and a wry sense of humor.Cédric Mauduit lived for rock ’n’ roll and Clint Eastwood movies. On Nov. 13, he headed from his home in Lower Normandy to Paris to see the Eagles of Death Metal — one more rock ’n’ roll road trip in a lifetime of them. He was surrounded by four close friends when the assailants started shooting.He was a financial auditor and father of two, and his passion for music had led him to open a small concert venue, Le Normandy, near his hometown in a building that housed a carousel from 1810. It still hosts festivals and performances by independent musicians.Of the 130 people killed in the Paris attacks, most died at the Bataclan concert hall. Hélène Muyal-Leiris, a wife and the mother of a young son, had been attending the rock concert there.After her death, her husband, Antoine Leiris, posted a tribute to his wife on Facebook, saying he would not allow his grief to turn into hatred.Kheir Eddine Sahbi, or “Didine,” as his family called him, was returning home when he was struck by a bullet in front of the Casa Nostra restaurant on Nov. 13. A violinist from Algeria, he had been in France for only a year, pursuing music. He was finishing a degree in ethnomusicology at Sorbonne University.Fabian Stech, a critic and teacher at a private school in Dijon, France, was a regular at exhibitions and art fairs throughout Europe. On Nov. 13, he was in Paris to see the Eagles of Death Metal at the Bataclan. Mr. Stech lost his life after gunmen stormed into the venue and fired into the crowd. Mr. Stech was the second German known to have died in the Paris attacks.A graphic designer from the Paris suburb of Clichy, Éric Thomé was an effusive rock and electronic music fan who enjoyed discovering new artists and songs, friends said. He died, along with more than 80 other music fans, in the attack on the Bataclan. He was also a film buff and a self-taught photographer whose images had recently begun to attract critical attention.An earlier version of this list misspelled the name of a nongovernmental organization created by Véronique Geoffroy de Bourgies. It is Zazakely Sambatra, not Zakakely Sambatra. Advertisement