AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Eric SchmittWASHINGTON — The two Islamic extremist groups that claimed responsibility for the assault on the Radisson Blu hotel in Mali on Friday are among the most dangerous and resilient in a hodgepodge of terrorist organizations in northwest Africa that have ties to nomadic tribesmen as well as Al Qaeda.One of the groups, Al Mourabitoun, based in the ungoverned triangle of desert between Libya, Mali and Niger, was founded by Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the one-eyed mastermind of the 2013 terrorist seizure of an Algerian gas plant that left 38 foreign hostages dead. France’s defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said Mr. Belmokhtar was “likely behind” Friday’s deadly attack.The other group, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, is the Qaeda offshoot on the southern flank of the Sahara stretching from Senegal to Chad. Until Friday, it had been largely eclipsed on the jihadist landscape in Africa in recent years by Boko Haram in Nigeria and Mr. Belmokhtar’s fighters. But the Qaeda wing most likely still has millions of dollars in ransoms from kidnapped Westerners, making it one of the wealthiest Qaeda franchises.More than 1,000 French troops and international forces had since early 2013 scattered these two groups, as well as other factions, in Mali. But the vicious attack in Bamako, the capital, is forcing counterterrorism officials to recalibrate the threat from this part of Africa, even as the West grapples with a more global menace from the Islamic State after the attacks in Paris.“Which faction did what is less important than the fact that these groups can still function even though the French have been there for two years hunting them down and killing them,” said Michael R. Shurkin, a former C.I.A. analyst now at the RAND Corporation. “That tells me the problem is all but intractable and won’t be solved easily or quickly.”Boko Haram in Nigeria, which has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State, is perhaps the most violent group operating in northern Africa. And the Islamic State’s affiliates in Libya pose the biggest long-term threat in the region, American officials said.But at the center of the terrorist constellation is Mr. Belmokhtar, who has a long and complicated relationship with Al Qaeda. Mr. Belmokhtar, known as Laaouar, or the one-eyed, after losing an eye to shrapnel, fought against a Soviet-installed government in Afghanistan.After returning to Algeria in the 1990s, he joined a militant Algerian group and took refuge in Mali, where he was involved in smuggling and kidnapping for ransom. He became a leading figure in Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, or AQIM, when it was formed out of the Algerian group.Mr. Belmokhtar’s success in maneuvering largely unhindered for years in the deserts of northern Mali and southern Algeria and Libya was a result of his masterful integration into the local populations. He is believed to have married a woman from the Timbuktu region of Mali, spoke the local dialects and shared some of his rich takings from kidnappings.Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, which grew out of an Algerian insurgency, was forced to reorient itself away from attacks aimed at overthrowing the Algerian government and toward international attacks following its merger with Al Qaeda in late 2006. The group, however, suffered from internal rifts led by Mr. Belmokhtar, who saw himself as the natural heir to Al Qaeda in the region and chafed at being a subordinate.The Sahel-based commander began to operate more and more independently of the group’s leadership. The feud spilled into the open in late 2012, when Mr. Belmokhtar split with Al Qaeda’s regional leadership, saying he wanted to report directly to the terrorist group’s main leaders in Pakistan.His first attack as an independent operator came in January 2013, when he led the assault on the Algerian gas plant that resulted in the deaths of 38 civilians, including three Americans.Since then, he has changed the name and composition of his group several times, including in August 2013, when his group joined another breakaway faction from Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb to establish yet another group: Al Mourabitoun. But the merger fell apart, and the other militants split from Mr. Belmokhtar’s group and joined the Islamic State. Mr. Belmokhtar has remained loyal to Al Qaeda. His last public statement was a rebuke of those colleagues, who he said had “violated the foundation” of their organization.Western diplomats say that intelligence agencies have been tracking Mr. Belmokhtar in and out of Libya at least since a late 2012 spotting in Tripoli. American fighter jets targeted him in an airstrike in Libya in June, but Western analysts say he escaped.Indeed, frequent attacks by Islamist fighters continue in Mali, despite a tenuous peace pact signed in June. In August five United Nations workers were killed in an assault on a hotel in central Mali. Five months before, militants killed five at a restaurant in Bamako. Mr. Belmokhtar’s group and a new one that Western analysts said shares some of the same members — the Macina Liberation Front — claimed credit for the attacks.In its statement on Friday, Al Mourabitoun demanded that Malian authorities release imprisoned fighters held in Bamako and stop “aggression” in northern Mali.J. Peter Pham, director of the Africa Center of the Atlantic Council, a policy research group in Washington, said he was not surprised by the assault on the Radisson hotel.Although the French-led military intervention in early 2013 ousted militants from their control of the northern two-thirds of Mali, Mr. Pham said the African Union and United Nations forces that largely replaced French troops in much of the country have seen little more than garrison duty in a few towns.“The militants have also shifted strategy away from attempting to seize and hold territory to attacking high-profile targets that have the double objective of hitting foreigners and garnering attention,” Mr. Pham said.Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from Paris.Advertisement