By IVAN NECHEPURENKONOV. 20, 2015
MOSCOW —  When reporters at Russia’s government-leaning newspaper Izvestia found an archive of letters, supposedly written by State Department employees to a prominent Russian gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex activist, they thought they had stumbled upon an extraordinary trove.Three years ago, Russia passed a law banning so-called propaganda of “nontraditional sexual relations” among minors. Since then, state news media have worked hard to portray gay activists as traitors doing the work of foreign powers to undermine the Russian state.The letters, Izvestia saw immediately, were a veritable Pentagon Papers-level scoop, the first tangible evidence that the propaganda line actually had some truth in it. The news was splashed across the front page in a two-part series this week.But as the United States Embassy in Moscow revealed in its social media accounts on Wednesday, the letters — packed full of grammatical errors — were obvious fakes. Most tellingly, they left off the article “the,” a common mistake in Russian to English translation.Advertisement“Dear Izvestia, next time you are going to use fake letters — send them to us. We will help you correct the errors,” an embassy representative wrote.AdvertisementOne letter, supposedly signed by Randy W. Berry, the State Department’s special envoy for the rights of gay, bisexual and transgender people, lauded the efforts of Nikolai A. Alekseyev, head of the GayRussia.ru advocacy project, for staging a rally against “the Russian aggression against Ukraine” in May.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is worth noting that consistent actions of L.G.B.T. activists during the demonstration triggered widespread media coverage of the event, as well as negative responses from Russian officials, which is a clear sign of excellent training and qualification of the protesters,” the letter read.Izvestia used the letter to claim that “considering their low efficiency in developing civil society in Russia,” the State Department was now diverting its financial contributions from opposition democratic organizations to Mr. Alekseyev’s GayRussia.ru and other rights organizations.The newspaper drew on emails published on the website of an obscure hacker group in May, Mr. Alekseyev said. “All these letters are fake,” he said. “I have never communicated, either with the U.S. Embassy in Moscow or with the State Department.”Izvestia did not return a request for comment.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Russian Paper’s Scoop Is Based on Made-Up Letters, U.S. Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.