Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版FIFA, the global governing body for soccer, has fined the Hong Kong Football Association after Hong Kong fans booed the Chinese national anthem — technically their own — at a World Cup qualifier last month despite warnings.The Hong Kong association was ordered to pay 5,000 Swiss francs, or about $5,150, after FIFA’s disciplinary committee found it “liable for the improper conduct” of supporters of the Hong Kong team.According to a statement released by the Hong Kong association on Tuesday, some fans booed the national anthem during the Sept. 8 game between Hong Kong and Qatar, even though FIFA had warned of possible sanctions after fans booed the song at two earlier games. The Chinese anthem — “March of the Volunteers” — is also that of Hong Kong since the former British colony returned to Chinese rule in 1997. Hong Kong fans booed the Chinese national anthem during the Sept. 8 match with Qatar. Political tensions between Hong Kong and mainland China rose last fall after the Chinese government set down a rigid framework for the election of the city’s next leader, which set off months of street protests.The protests, which failed to change Beijing’s position, brought to the surface a broader resentment of mainland China, with many of Hong Kong’s younger residents seeking to distance themselves from a “Chinese” identity. More radical protesters, some in their teens and 20s, have demonstrated against shoppers from the mainland who they say disrupt their daily lives and drive up prices for items as varied as diapers and apartments. Real estate in Hong Kong is already among the most expensive in the world.Tensions were further stoked in June, when the Chinese Football Association pointed out the multiracial nature of Hong Kong’s team in a promotional poster. It said that the Chinese team should not underestimate Hong Kong’s “black skin, yellow skin, white skin” players, a statement that some Hong Kong fans saw as racist.FIFA has threatened further disciplinary actions against supporters of Hong Kong’s team, including a ban on attending games, if they continue to violate rules.The fans will have a chance to demonstrate whether they have taken any notice of the FIFA penalty when the Chinese anthem is played before a home game on Nov. 17 against the Chinese national team.“The H.K.F.A. would like to request Hong Kong fans to refrain from such action at all future matches,” the Hong Kong association said in its statement, “to avoid future sanctions.”Follow Alan Wong on Twitter @alanwongw. 