By CLAIR MacDOUGALL and HELENE COOPERNOV. 20, 2015
MONROVIA, Liberia —  Three members of a family in Liberia have contracted Ebola, two months after the country was declared free of the virus for the second time, health officials said on Friday.The most recent outbreak, which officials are calling the fourth wave, was confirmed after a 15-year-old boy with symptoms of Ebola — including fever, weakness and bleeding — was admitted to John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Monrovia, the capital, on Tuesday, the Liberian health minister, Dr. Bernice Dahn, said at a news conference. The boy was then placed in isolation in the hospital.Another senior health official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak on the record, said the teenager was taken to the main Ebola treatment unit on Wednesday. He had started showing symptoms of Ebola last week, the official said.The teenager’s test came back positive on Thursday, as did tests on Friday for his father and a brother, the official said, adding that at least seven health care workers may have treated the teenager without the protective equipment essential for Ebola cases. A key member of the contact-tracing effort said one nurse wore only regular gloves when treating the teenager, who was bleeding at the time.AdvertisementAlong with the father and the 8-year-old brother who tested positive, the boy’s mother and two other brothers — a 2-month-old and a 5-year-old — were taken to the Ebola treatment center and were being tested. On Friday, two other people suspected of having Ebola were admitted to the center; neither is related to the family, said two health care workers involved with the cases.AdvertisementIn Paynesville, just outside Monrovia, health care workers in hazmat suits could be seen spraying the family’s house with disinfectant on Friday, and contact tracers were interviewing neighbors.“I feel bad, that is my community members,” said one, Helena Bokai, who sat on her stoop. “Ebola is not for one person. It can travel all over. If they die we will feel bad. All of us are here and are living together.”Health workers were also seen at the boy’s school, Living in Christ International Ministry School, spraying surfaces, setting up hand wash stations and distributing informational leaflets to students.There were conflicting reports as to whether the boy had attended school after he became contagious. The vice principal of the school, G. Othello Mannieh, said the boy had not been in school for three weeks, and the school registrar said he had heard the same from other teachers.But the senior health official said the boy had gone to school on Monday and Tuesday of this week, and an official involved with the investigation said the boy’s father had told health workers that the boy came home sick from school on Nov. 13, was treated at home by his parents over the weekend and went back to school on Monday.The official involved in the investigation suggested that school officials were denying the boy’s attendance to avoid looking irresponsible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The World Health Organization declared Liberia free of Ebola on May 9, but a resurgence of the disease the next month sickened four people, two of whom died. The country was declared Ebola-free again on Sept. 3.In Geneva, Dr. Bruce Aylward, the World Health Organization’s special representative for the Ebola response and deputy director general for outbreaks and health emergencies, told officials that the new cases had not dimmed hopes that West African countries were still moving toward eliminating the original outbreak. The W.H.O. declared Sierra Leone free of Ebola transmissions two weeks ago and Guinea released its last known patient from a treatment unit on Monday.AdvertisementThe teenager’s case appears to point to the persistence of the virus among survivors, which can result in occasional resurgence of the disease, said Dr. Aylward, adding that flare-ups are expected to be less common and to end in 2016.Dr. Aylward said the boy had no known contacts with a survivor or a history of travel that might have put him at risk.He said the latest developments were the seventh time the W.H.O. suspected that a flare-up was related to the persistence of the virus in the population of survivors. For example, scientists have shown that the virus remains present for months in the semen of some men who recover from the disease, and could, in rare cases, be transmitted through unprotected sex.In all cases, however, transmission has been stopped quickly, with a low number of subsequent cases. New tools include an experimental vaccine that can be given to those who come into contact with patients.Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, said the center was working closely with the Liberian government.“The new cases in Liberia show both the continuing threat of sporadic cases, and the readiness of the country, which rapidly diagnosed and isolated them,” Dr. Frieden said in an email. “C.D.C. will continue to assist on the front lines. Liberia is now highly experienced at stopping Ebola clusters, and with vigilance, they will do it again.”A slow initial global response to the outbreak has been blamed for the scale and length of the epidemic, which killed more than 11,000 in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.An earlier version of this article, using information from Liberian officials, misstated the age of the boy who was first confirmed as having Ebola. He is 15, not 10.Clair MacDougall reported from Monrovia, and Helene Cooper from Washington. Sheri Fink contributed reporting from New York, and Nick Cumming-Bruce from Geneva.A version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Liberia, Called Ebola-Free, Finds 3 People Have Virus .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.