By MICHAEL D. SHEARNOV. 20, 2015
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — The young man vaulted to his feet as the end of the town hall approached, and yelled out for President Obama’s attention.Mr. Obama had skipped over him for a question a year ago, he said, and now he had another chance. His question was a tough one: He called the president’s new trade deal for the region elitist, and he wanted to hear Mr. Obama’s response.The president told the young man he was wrong about the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement: “I believe that it’s a good deal and we’ll get it done.”It was a rare moment of friction during more than an hour Friday in which the president fielded mostly friendly questions from a group of young people from Malaysia, Indonesia, Laos, Cambodia and elsewhere, shortly after landing here.AdvertisementIt was also one of the few times on Mr. Obama’s three-country trip that the president has moved out of the formal setting of a global summit meeting and the grim discussions about terrorism that have dominated the trip.Advertisement“I meet with all these leaders and we take pictures and we talk about all kinds of things,” Mr. Obama told the 500 young people gathered at a college here. But what he really enjoys, he said, is “your energy and your idealism and your optimism.”Aides to Mr. Obama say the pageantry of summit meetings can evoke an eye-rolling response from him, given his preference for the directness of one-on-one diplomacy, or exploring the world’s wonders in a way that only a president can.By the end of his 10-day trek through Turkey, the Philippines and Malaysia, Mr. Obama will have logged his 51st summit meeting, according to an informal count by Mark Knoller, a CBS Radio reporter who tracks presidential trivia of all kinds.“You are the busiest man in the world,” Tommy Vietor, the president’s former national security spokesman, said of the president. Then he recalled the summit tradition that requires world leaders to pose for a picture wearing clothing that represents the host nation. “But now someone comes to you and says, ‘It’s time to take the funny-shirt photo,’ and you have to grin and bear it.”Having won the presidency in part by advocating a renewed focus on global partnerships, Mr. Obama has embraced the power of summit meetings as a central tool of his foreign policy apparatus.In Asia, in particular, the Obama administration has been aggressive in calling together the region’s leaders several times each year as part of an effort to display a new commitment to the economy and security of its allies there.“We want the United States to be at the table at the Asia-Pacific in shaping the future of the region, and signaling that we’re going to be present,” Benjamin J. Rhodes, the president’s deputy national security adviser, said.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“When we’re not at the table, we’re on the menu,” he joked. “And when we’re there, we can actually shape this agenda.”AdvertisementBut it’s no secret that the president enjoys the more informal parts of his trips more. Among the items that have been on his bucket list: the Roman Coliseum, the Great Wall in China, the Petra ruins in Jordan, the Egyptian pyramids, the Arctic glaciers.In 2009, just six months into his presidency, Mr. Obama lamented the frequent gatherings, saying at the end of one in L’Aquila, Italy: “The one thing I will be looking forward to is fewer summit meetings.”That was clear from the wide grin on Mr. Obama’s face throughout the town-hall-style meeting here. The president took questions — boy, girl, boy, girl, as he tells the audience — on subjects ranging from climate change to public accountability, to the most influential person in his life. (His mother, he said.)One young man asked him to confront Najib Razak, the prime minister of Malaysia, with allegations of corruption and lack of press freedom when the two meet face to face in the days ahead.“I’ll do it,” Mr. Obama told the young man, “I admit I was going to do it anyway, but now that I hear it from you, I’m definitely going to do it.”Mr. Najib, who has had a friendly relationship with Mr. Obama and even played golf with him once in Hawaii, has been under investigation by the United States Justice Department for corruption, and the wealth fund he runs is under investigation around the world.“The United States has to have some humility because there have been times when we did the wrong thing,” Mr. Obama said. But he added: “I do believe there are basic values that we all share. One of those values is that countries work best when everybody has a voice that can be respected, and the press can report on what is happening with current affairs and people can organize peacefully.”AdvertisementMr. Obama had advice for the young people in the audience, some of whom were members of the White House’s Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative, which has brought 55,000 young people together in the region to confront global issues.He urged them to take on climate change, saying, “This has to be one of our highest priorities.” And for those going into politics, he pressed them not to allow racial, ethnic or religious difference to dominate the conversation.“When you start doing that, it’s very easy for people to start thinking that whoever’s not part of my group is somehow less than me,” he said. “That’s how violence happens. That’s how discrimination happens.”One young man he called on said that other questioners had focused on “high issues” and that he wanted to go low.“How low are you going to go?” a somewhat alarmed president asked.The young man started off by noting Mr. Obama’s “very senior” time in life.“That’s pretty low,” Mr. Obama said, laughing.“Sorry, president,” the young man said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.