AdvertisementSupported byBy Ben C. Solomon and Leslye DavisThe Times has produced a virtual reality film from footage of candlelight vigils in Paris. To view it, download the NYT VR app on your mobile device if you don’t already have it. (Go here for Android, and here for iPhone.) Here, two video journalists reflect on covering the vigils.Arriving in Paris after the terrorist attacks last week, we didn’t find people in a state of despair. Instead, as we traveled to the various sites of the attacks — the bloodiest in Europe in more than a decade — we realized we were documenting a place that seemed determined to push past the violence.Even though demonstrations were not allowed, large groups of people showed their determination to return to a French way of life, the very thing the attackers had sought to disrupt.We decided to film around the places of remembrance: in the squares, at the attack sites and at memorials that Parisians and visitors had quickly constructed as a way to transform sadness into strength.As journalists, we always seek to help readers understand what life feels like in the places we cover. Virtual reality allows us to do that in an entirely new way.The Paris attacks shocked the world’s conscience so profoundly that we felt we should bring our audience to the streets of Paris in the most visceral way we could. We wanted them to feel both the grief and the strength that we encountered on every street corner.In places of destruction and pain, one can find inspiring stories of hope and resilience. We tried to communicate the hope we found in spaces that were once vibrant but had become crime scenes. It was in front of the cafes that had been bombed and in the central squares where people gathered that you could understand a true sense of community and togetherness.As a reporting tool, virtual reality is still in its infancy; its power to create empathy is just beginning to be understoodUsing this medium, we aimed to create a more textured experience — the streets of Paris distilled to voices and spaces. Although the technology is evolving, it’s clear that this new frontier can soon become a crucial journalistic tool.Our mission as journalists is to answer questions. In this case, we sought to answer the question of how a city gathers itself and begins moving forward.Advertisement