AdvertisementSupported byBy Ellen BarryNEW DELHI — The Bangladeshi authorities on Sunday hanged two senior opposition leaders convicted of atrocities dating to Bangladesh’s 1971 war for independence from Pakistan. Violent protests have followed previous convictions and executions from the war crimes trials, and the authorities deployed heavy security and asked businesses adjacent to the Dhaka Central Jail to close their doors. Toward midnight on Saturday, an imam was seen entering the jail, and family members filed out after final meetings with the condemned men, Salahuddin Quader Chowdhury and Ali Ahsan Mohammad Mojaheed. Both were executed shortly after midnight. Bangladesh’s law minister, Anisul Huq, said that the two men petitioned the president for clemency on Saturday and that the president had rejected the petition. In a brief comment released by Human Rights Watch, however, relatives of Mr. Chowdhury said that was not true. “He didn’t apply for mercy,” the statement said. “And he certainly didn’t admit guilt.” The war crimes trials, which began in 2009, have widened fault lines dating to 1971 over whether Bangladesh should be a secular or Islamist country. They have unfolded against a background of rising extremist violence, with deadly attacks on secular intellectuals and religious minority groups becoming more frequent over the last year. Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, criticized the trials as biased toward the prosecution, noting that the defense was prevented from calling important witnesses to testify. In Mr. Chowdhury’s case, the court excluded witnesses who could have proved that “his alibi was valid beyond a reasonable doubt,” the group said.Mr. Chowdhury and Mr. Mojaheed were leaders of parties opposed to the governing Awami League, which is led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. They had opposed the creation of an independent Bangladesh in 1971. Mr. Chowdhury, 66, was an adviser to former Prime Minister Khaleda Zia, Ms. Hasina’s longtime political adversary and a member of the standing committee for the Bangladesh National Party. During the 1971 war, he was a student at Dhaka University. Prosecutors said that his father had used the family residence in the coastal city of Chittagong as an interrogation center and that Mr. Chowdhury had tortured prisoners there. A three-judge tribunal found him guilty of nine of 23 charges, including trying “to wipe out the Hindu population as a religious group by launching a systematic attack on a large scale with the aid of the Pakistan Army.”Throughout the trial, which lasted for three years, Mr. Chowdhury insisted that he was innocent. He was caustic about the prosecution, remarking at one point that of the three million people killed during the 1971 war, “you say I have killed two million.” Stephen J. Rapp, a former American ambassador who led the State Department’s Office of Global Criminal Justice, called Mr. Chowdhury’s prosecution “particularly disturbing” because he was not allowed to call witnesses who could testify that he left Bangladesh in March 1971, and was therefore not in the country at the time of the crimes he was accused of committing. “For such a process to stand the test of time,” it must respect “the highest legal standards,” Mr. Rapp said in a statement released on Friday. “It saddens me to say that I do not believe that was done” in the cases of Mr. Chowdhury and Mr. Mojaheed. Mr. Mojaheed, 67, served as minister of social welfare from 2001 to 2006, and he was secretary general of the country’s main Islamist party, Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh. He was convicted of four charges, including organizing the murders of intellectuals and minority Hindus while he commanded Al Badr, an auxiliary force of the Pakistani Army. After the judge pronounced the verdict, Mr. Mojaheed shouted from the dock that the decision was “a hundred percent injustice,” according to a reporter who was present. “Forging an Islamic movement was my offense,” he said. Julfikar Ali Manik contributed reporting from Dhaka, Bangladesh.Advertisement