Dr. Tu was awarded the prize, shared with two other scientists, on Monday for the discovery of a drug that is now part of standard regimens to fight malaria.For the Chinese government and many Chinese people, Nobel Prizes in the sciences have a special luster. Scientific success is regarded as crucial to ensuring China’s advance into modern prosperity, and a Nobel Prize is seen as the ultimate confirmation of that success.But state news media in China betrayed some surprise after the first Nobel Prize in the sciences for a citizen of the country went to Tu Youyou, a joint winner for her work in developing Artemisinin, which has proved effective in treating malaria. Here is an overview of the reaction to her win, and the discussions it has provoked.News reports have described Dr. Tu as a “three withouts” scientist, lacking the credentials usually associated with scientific prestige: a doctoral degree, training and experience abroad, and the title of academician in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Chinese premier congratulates #TuYouyou on winning #NobelPrize for medicine //t.co/b8RYGRdX99— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) 5 Oct 15But Wang Yuanfeng, a professor at Beijing Jiaotong University, said the win showed the need to overhaul the academy, which has been criticized for putting political connections before research achievements.“Tu Youyou’s winning of the Nobel Prize can provide impetus for further reform of China’s science and technology system,” Professor Wang wrote in an online commentary.“Also, I think that Tu Youyou’s prize should lead to deeper reflection about China’s scientific efforts,” he wrote. “It’s undeniable that, despite the quite vigorous reforms over the past two years to national science and technology planning and management, and to the system of academicians, there are still many problems in the system and institutions of China’s scientific endeavors. The prize for Tu Youyou has raised questions precisely about this.”Dr. Tu’s research drew on texts and teachings from traditional Chinese medicine to identify naturally occurring substances that might help treat malaria, but the Nobel committee was emphatic that the award was not for traditional Chinese medicine, which many scientists say lacks robust scientific foundations.That, however, did not stop Chinese news outlets and Prime Minister Li Keqiang from calling her prize a vindication of the practice.“Tu Youyou’s winning of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine is an expression of the prosperity and progress of Chinese science, and of the huge contribution that Chinese traditional medicine and pharmacy have made to the health of humankind,” Mr. Li said in a message of congratulations.Liu Qingquan, the president of the Beijing Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, told Xinhua, the state news agency: “This is a proud moment for the Chinese people, and even more so for traditional Chinese medical practitioners. The development of traditional Chinese medicine must be mutually integrated with science.”#NobelPrize winning honor for TCM in course of reaching out to world, says China’s #TuYouyou //t.co/Y5Kr76hDhH //t.co/1bJH1vj7ub— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) 6 Oct 15Throughout the hubbub, Dr. Tu has said very little. A reporter from the newspaper Qianjiang Evening News, from Dr. Tu’s home province of Zhejiang in eastern China, spoke to her briefly on Monday, according to an article in the newspaper. Dr. Tu confirmed that she learned she had been awarded the prize from the television news.The reporter asked if she was surprised.“There was no particular feeling,” Dr. Tu said. “It was a bit of a surprise, but not much of one.”Why, the reporter asked.“Because this was an honor not for me alone, but for all Chinese scientists,” she said. “Everyone has been researching for decades, and so there’s no surprise in being able to win a prize.”Follow Chris Buckley on Twitter @ChuBailiang. 