By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI and NABIH BULOSNOV. 21, 2015
Footage from inside the Radisson Blu hotel in Bamako, Mali, shows security forces evacuating guests as attackers held others hostage.A member of Al Qaeda in Africa confirmed Saturday that the attack Friday on a hotel in Bamako, Mali, had been carried out by a jihadist group loyal to Mokhtar Belmokhtar, an Algerian operative for Al Qaeda.The Qaeda member, who spoke via an online chat, said that an audio message and a similar written statement in which the group claimed responsibility for the attack were authentic. The SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist groups, also confirmed the authenticity of the statement.The Qaeda member, who refused to be identified for his protection, said that Mr. Belmokhtar’s men had collaborated with the Saharan Emirate of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a unit that is active in the Sahara, in and around the desert outpost of Timbuktu, Mali. The cell is led by Yahya Abu Hammam, a longtime member of A.Q.I.M. who has been responsible for numerous kidnappings of Western citizens in Mali and neighboring countries.Mr. Belmokhtar has been reported killed at least twice in the past year, but American officials acknowledge that he is probably still at large.AdvertisementIn the audio recording, the group, known as Al Mourabitoun, says it carried out the operation in conjunction with Al Qaeda’s branch in the Islamic Maghreb. The attack on the Radisson Blu hotel in Bamako, Mali’s capital, left at least 19 people and two attackers dead. Among the dead were six Russians who worked for an air cargo company, three senior executives of a Chinese state-owned rail construction company and an American public health worker.AdvertisementThe recording was released to the Al Jazeera network and simultaneously to Al Akhbar, a website in Mauritania that has frequently been used by jihadist groups active in northern Africa.The recording states: “We, in the group of the Mourabitoun, in cooperation with our brothers in Al Qaeda in Islamic Maghreb, the great desert area, claim responsibility for the hostage-taking operation in the Radisson hotel in Bamako.”The messages went on to state that a cease-fire and release of the hostages were “predicated on the release of the all the imprisoned mujahedeen in the prisons of Mali and the cessation of the aggression against our people in the north and center of Mali.”There was no such cease-fire: Malian forces, backed by French special operations soldiers, stormed the hotel to end the siege.The Malian government, at the insistence of France, has in the past agreed to release members of Al Qaeda held in Malian prisons, in return for the release of Western hostages held by the terrorist group. A French hostage, Serge Lazarevic, was freed last December after the release of several Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb prisoners in Mali, according to a statement by Mali’s justice minister. Mr. Lazarevic was kidnapped in 2011 while doing a feasibility study for a possible factory in northern Mali.Dozens of hostages were released during the standoff at the hotel in Bamako. It remains unclear whether the terrorist group authorized the release or if the hostages escaped.The attack in Bamako came at a moment when Al Qaeda is competing with the Islamic State, a younger upstart, for recruits in Africa and for supremacy among jihadists on the global stage.In recent months, Boko Haram, whose leaders had received training from Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, cut ties with Al Qaeda and pledged allegiance to the Islamic State. And in recent weeks, the Islamic State has made inroads into the Shabab, Al Qaeda’s affiliate in East Africa, luring a senior leader and several groups of fighters.AdvertisementSupporters of Al Qaeda loudly celebrated the Mali attack, and used it to point out how Al Qaeda’s tactics differed from those of the Islamic State. Since the release several years ago of “Guidelines for Jihad” by Al Qaeda’s leader, Ayman al-Zawahri, the group’s operatives have been under orders to minimize Muslim civilian casualties. At the hotel in Bamako, witnesses reported that hostages were quizzed on religious topics, and asked to recite verses from the Quran. Those who passed were let go.Similar interrogations were reported by survivors of an attack on a Kenyan university in April as well as those who survived assaults on the Westgate shopping mall in Kenya and a gas plant in Algeria, both in 2013. All three were carried out by affiliates or offshoots of Al Qaeda, and although Muslims were accidentally killed in those attacks, the attempt to spare them is a tactic that is meant to appeal to the Muslim masses and reinforce the notion that Al Qaeda is at war with the West.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Twitter, sympathizers of Al Qaeda described the Bamako attack as an exemplary operation. One person who said he was in Somalia and posts messages under the name Ibnu Abu Zubayr praised the “lions” who carried it out, citing the reports that they let hostages who were able to recite Quranic verses go free. He wrote that they did it “to protect the inviolable blood of Muslims.”A Qaeda supporter who said he was in the Syrian province of Latakia, agreed. “This is how Muslims SHOULD act,” he wrote in a Twitter post. The Islamic State, he said, “should learn a thing or two and drop their crooked creed and methodology.”On Saturday, Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate, called the American health worker who was killed, Anita Ashok Datar, “a bright light who gave help and hope to people in need around the world.”She said the killing should strengthen the resolve of the United States to “wage and win an immediate battle” against terrorist networks, as well as a “generational struggle against radical jihadism.”Liam Stack and Amy Chozick contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Attackers at Hotel Are Linked to an Algerian Qaeda Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.