AdvertisementSupported byBy Jane Perlez and Neil MacFarquharBEIJING — Three senior executives of a Chinese state-owned rail construction company and six Russian employees of a cargo company were among the 19 victims of the gunmen who attacked a hotel in the capital of the West African nation of Mali.The three Chinese victims, all men, were killed at the start of the siege of the hotel, their employer, China Railway Construction said Saturday. The six Russian men, employees of the airline Volga-Dnepr, were killed in the hotel restaurant when the gunman first opened fire, according to Maria Zakharova, a spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry. Israel’s Foreign Ministry said Saturday that an Israeli man had also been killed in the attack but that officials still needed to gather evidence before confirming his identity. An American aid worker and two Belgians were among other foreigners killed. The Chinese Embassy in the Malian capital, Bamako, said that seven Chinese citizens, all of them on business trips, were inside the Radisson Blu Hotel at the time of the attack on Friday. Four were rescued with the help of French special forces, the embassy said.Speaking in Moscow, Ms. Zakharova said that six additional employees of the airline Volga-Dnepr who had been in the hotel were rescued. The freight company often transports relief aid.In expressing condolences for all the victims, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia issued a statement repeating his emphasis on the idea that “broad international cooperation” was needed to counter terrorist threats.Volga-Dnepr reported that the six dead were Stanislav Dumansky and Pavel Kudryavtsev, mechanics; Vladimir Kudryashov, a flight radio operator; Konstantin Preobrazhensky, a flight engineer; Sergei Yurasov, a load manager, and Aleksandr Kononenko, a navigator. Governor Sergei Morozov of the Ulyanovsk region in Russia said that five of the six Russian victims were from there, the Interfax news agency reported. The governorate declared a day of mourning on Monday.The Chinese victims were described by their company as experienced negotiators, seasoned in building infrastructure in some of the toughest and most remote parts of the world.One of them, Chang Xuehui, the regional general manager in West Africa for the China Railway Construction Corporation, had written recently on the company website that arduous travel in Africa often left him exhausted and that a bout of malaria while he was in Gabon, also in West Africa, had depleted his energy. But “my job cannot stop,” he wrote.The other two executives were Zhou Tianxiang, 49, the general manager of the company’s international group, and Wang Xuanshang, deputy general manager of the international group, according to the website. China Railway Construction, a conglomerate with infrastructure projects in 17 countries, including in Latin America and Southeast Asia, announced a $1.5 billion deal with the Malian government last fall to rehabilitate a strategic rail line from Bamako to Dakar, the capital of Senegal. The railway was designed to bolster exports of Mali’s iron ore.At the same time, another Chinese company, China Railway Engineering Corporation, signed an $8 billion deal to build a new rail line from Bamako to the port of Conakry in Guinea. That was also intended to carry iron ore out of the landlocked country.A public affairs official for the company told The Paper, a Shanghai-based news portal, that the three executives were in the lobby of the hotel greeting visitors when the attackers burst in wielding automatic weapons.Mr. Zhou, the most senior of the three, had just been transferred to his job as manager of the international group from another major state-owned construction firm, the company said.He had once worked in Tanzania, the African nation where China first built railways in the 1960s, and had recently finished an assignment in Russia.Mr. Wang, the deputy for the international group, had previously worked in Luanda, the capital of Angola, the company said.Describing his work in an article on the company website, Mr. Chang said that as a member of the Communist Party, he was determined to do his best despite the rough conditions in Africa.Jane Perlez reported from Beijing, and Neil MacFarquhar from Moscow. Daniel Slotnik contributed reporting from New York, and Yufan Huang contributed research.Advertisement