AdvertisementSupported byBy Kareem FahimCAIRO — Bahrain’s security forces torture detainees using electric shocks, beatings and sexual abuse, despite a public pledge by the king of Bahrain four years ago to end such practices, according to a report released on Monday by the New York-based Human Rights Watch.The group interviewed 10 detainees, including political dissidents accused of attending protests. One of them, Hussain Jawad, a human rights advocate who was arrested in February, said officers had squeezed his genitals, beaten him in a hallway and “threatened to rape his wife.” Other detainees described similar practices.Bahrain’s ruler, King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, earned international praise four years ago for commissioning an independent committee to investigate weeks of unrest in his country, including a crackdown on protesters by the security forces. The resulting, nearly 500-page, report was a rare public accounting of one of the 2011 revolts that swept the Middle East, as well as the state-led violence used to suppress it. The Obama administration, a major ally of Bahrain, praised the report, and King Hamad vowed to heed its findings, including the “systematic” abuse of detainees. “We do not tolerate the mistreatment of detainees and prisoners,” King Hamad said at a news conference on Nov. 23, 2011.Human Rights Watch said that although Bahrain had set up three government bodies to end torture in detention facilities, the authorities had “failed to fulfill their mandate.” The group said that the government had not convicted, or even prosecuted, a single security officer of torturing domestic dissidents, despite hundreds of complaints.Bahrain’s Interior Ministry, which controls a criminal investigation division where many of the torture allegations have originated, wrote a letter responding to Human Rights Watch, saying that it had carried out all of the recommendations made by the independent committee.“Your conclusion that ‘the authorities have failed to tackle a culture of impunity among the security forces’ is incorrect and unfounded,” the ministry said.Human Rights Watch also called on the Obama administration to impose restrictions on arms sales to Bahrain until it enacted the recommendations in the 2011 report. The United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet has its headquarters in Bahrain.One of the detainees, Mohamed Sudif, said he had discovered during the months he was detained in 2013 that the beatings and threats of violence were routine. Mr. Sudif, an antigovernment activist who frequently worked with foreign journalists, said in a telephone interview that he had written in a notebook about his cellmates’ testimonies describing “the same practices, the same techniques.”“It is a nightmare to read over,” said Mr. Sudif, who fled Bahrain and now lives in Britain, where he was granted political asylum. Mr. Sudif was arrested in July 2013, after being detained several times by the authorities. During his various interrogations, he was blindfolded, slapped, kicked in the groin and beaten on the head with a chair, he told Human Rights Watch.After the beatings, he said, he falsely confessed to belonging to two antigovernment groups and to accusations that he “had incited hatred against the government.” Advertisement