AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — Three Palestinians who each attacked Israeli Jews in separate episodes across the occupied West Bank on Sunday, were shot dead by Israeli civilians and soldiers, officials and witnesses said. One Israeli woman was killed in the attacks.The father of one of the Palestinian attackers, a 16-year-old girl, said she had been preparing for martyrdom and asked him to donate her organs.The slain Israeli woman, identified by news sites as Hadar Buchris, age 20 or 21, was stabbed at an intersection in the Etzion settlement block south of Jerusalem. The attack occurred near where an American studying in Israel was killed along with two other people by a Palestinian gunman on Thursday, and where three Israeli teenagers were abducted in 2014 and later murdered.The spate of attacks, and another Thursday in which a Palestinian fatally stabbed two Israelis at a Tel Aviv store that served as a prayer space, suggested a return to the daily drumbeat of violence that has plagued the region since Oct. 1. More than 90 Palestinians have been killed during the period, about half while attacking or trying to attack Israelis, and the rest during demonstrations where they clashed with Israeli soldiers. At the same time, 17 Israeli Jews have been killed and dozens wounded in 70 stabbings, 10 shootings and 10 vehicular attacks. Secretary of State John Kerry, seeking to quell the violence, is scheduled to arrive in Jerusalem on Tuesday for a one-day visit, his first in more than a year. He is to meet with both Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority.The first attack Sunday occurred at an intersection in northern West Bank. Gershon Mesika, a former leader of the settlement council, said he spotted a teenage girl with a knife chasing an Israeli girl, and rammed the would-be attacker with his car. An Israeli soldier then shot the girl.“In a split second I made my decision,” Mr. Mesika told Army Radio. “I took a sharp right and knocked into her with the car. She fell and a soldier came and finished the job.”Raed Amr, the head of a group in Nablus that advocates on behalf of Palestinians imprisoned by Israel, identified the Palestinian as Ashrakat Qattanani, 16, from a nearby refugee camp, and said her father, Taha Qattanani, was involved with Islamic Jihad, a militant group.“My daughter went to the Hawara checkpoint today to seek revenge in her own hands against the Israelis who have stolen our land and continue to kill innocent Palestinian people,” Mr. Qattanani, an imam at a neighborhood mosque, said in an interview. “Last night, she was very upset, and said, ‘If I become a martyr, give my organs to a Palestinian who needs them.’”The Palestinian government declared her death “a brutal war crime against humanity and childhood.” A Twitter account affiliated with Mr. Abbas’s Fatah party circulated a photograph of Mr. Mesika with a blood-spattered target on his face, and a spokesman for the militant Palestinian faction Hamas called for him to be killed.In the second attack, a Palestinian cabdriver rammed an Israeli car near Maale Adumim, a large settlement outside Jerusalem, then got out of his vehicle and ran toward the Israelis with a knife, according to a police spokeswoman. One of the Israelis in the car, Shmuel Shapira, told Israel Radio that a passenger, Yaakov Halevy, took out his pistol and fatally shot the Palestinian, who was later identified as Shadi Khaseb.Ms. Buchris, a resident of the northern city of Safed, was fatally stabbed in the third attack of the day, in the Etzion block, according to Israeli news reports. The attacker, identified by Palestinian authorities as Issam Ahmad Sleiman al Thawbteh, 31, was killed by security forces.Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Ramallah, West Bank, and Myra Noveck from Jerusalem.Advertisement