AdvertisementSupported byBy Dionne SearceyBAMAKO, Mali — On a sunny weekend morning, one day after gunmen went on a murderous rampage at the Radisson Blu hotel, a local dignitary sped across town in his official government S.U.V.There was no motorcade of bodyguards trailing the man, no dark tinted windows, not even a siren to clear the road. The man, Karim Keita, son of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and the head of the commission of national defense, dangled his arm out the open passenger window as he winked at passers-by.“Look at how open Mali is,” Mr. Keita said on Saturday as he pointed out the numerous places that security experts would call “soft targets” for terrorists: a short cement wall along the perimeter of the parliamentary building over which a grenade could easily be tossed; restaurants along the street where crowds gather for carefree evenings; popular hotels that have done nothing to improve their already lax security.On Sunday, President Keita was joined at a news conference by President Macky Sall of Senegal, who had arrived to mourn a Senegalese citizen killed in the attack on Friday and to show solidarity with a neighboring country in the campaign against terrorism. Senegal has contributed a contingent of troops to the United Nations-led multinational force in Mali.Amid speculation that the two attackers, who spoke English, might have links to the Nigerian extremist movement Boko Haram, Mr. Keita said he would be reinforcing security in the country, including revisiting controls on people entering and leaving.“We have to be more and more aware of the issue, and absolutely security will be reinforced,” he said. “It’s expensive, it’s difficult, but I think we will succeed.”The spectacular attack here in Mali’s capital killed 19 people as well as the two gunmen. A member of Al Qaeda in Africa confirmed that the attack was carried out by a jihadist group loyal to Mokhtar Belmokhtar, an Algerian operative for Al Qaeda, in collaboration with a unit of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.The assault at the Radisson Blu shattered a brief, precarious calm that had taken hold after years of war and civil strife. Mali’s long stretch of violence, highlighted by a bloody coup in 2012 and the ensuing rebel takeover of large stretches of the country in the north, has been so notorious that it has prompted the deployment of a huge United Nations peacekeeping force, spawned internationally brokered peace talks among various factions and regularly compelled world leaders to weigh in to denounce the mayhem.For some in Mali, carrying on had little to do with bravery in the face of terrorism; it was a simple matter of economics in one of the world’s poorest nations.“If we stay home, how are we going to feed our families?” asked Youssouf Traore, who was peddling traditional statues Sunday morning outside the headquarters of the United Nations operation here.Mr. Traore was working the day in 2012 when the military took over the national television station next to his shop. He closed the door and holed up inside his business for hours as soldiers confiscated his statues to block the roads.“You never know when lizards will start fighting,” he said, quoting a local saying for the inability to predict the unknown. “Of course we are scared — it’s an uncertain situation.”But here in Bamako, people seem to take the security situation, or insecurity situation, in stride. Most seem to agree the country needs tighter security, but a weekend tour of this sprawling city, bisected by the wide Niger River, shows that little has been done toward that end.A state of emergency has been called, but evidence of just what that entailed was scant. Outside one hotel popular with foreigners and regional imams gathering for peace talks, a sleepy guard pretended to peer into the bags he was required to check. No one had told him to do anything differently in light of the attacks less than a mile away.The barrier gate was open at a neighborhood of embassies and homes of diplomats, allowing anyone to pass through. People thronged open-air markets and carried on with weddings and outings with friends. Security outside the airport amounted to no more than shooing away aggressive phone-card sellers.“There is no security here,” said Ali Mahamedou, a member of the peace talks committee, as he stood at the airport, scoffing at what he saw.Dr. Kassim Ouattara, an emergency room physician, was on call when victims of the attack started arriving at the hospital Friday.“I was so frustrated and so sad,” he said. “I asked God to give me the power to kill these bad men” who carried out the attacks.Security around town must be bolstered, he said, but after talking to his neighbors he understood why most people were behaving normally. They work near the Radisson Blu, and the day after the attacks they went back to their jobs.“We have no choice,” Dr. Ouattara said they told him.Along the popular Rue Princess, a street lined with boutiques, nightclubs and restaurants, business was a bit slower than usual on Saturday night, workers there said. In March, a masked man killed five people using a machine gun and a grenade at the nearby bar La Terrace.Sitting outside that bar, now called Doo Doo, among the empty beer bottles collected over the weekend, Allassane Doua said he had been on the lookout for anything suspicious. He works at bar Bla Bla, next to the site of the March attack.“We’ll keep going with life,” Mr. Doua said. “You shouldn’t expect people’s way of life to change. We fight for the future, not the past.”Advertisement