By PENN BULLOCKNOV. 22, 2015
A spokesman for the Iranian judiciary announced on Sunday that the jailed Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian had been sentenced to prison, an Iranian news agency reported.The announcement, as with much the Iranian authorities have said about Mr. Rezaian’s case since his arrest last year, was vague, and it contained no information about the length of his prison term.“I cannot disclose the details of the sentence. I will say in short that he has been sentenced to imprisonment,” Gholam Hossein Mohseni-Ejei, the judiciary spokesman, said during a news conference, according to the Iranian Students News Agency. He added that the verdict was not final, apparently referring to the possibility of an appeal.Mr. Rezaian’s lawyer, Leila Ahsan, told The Associated Press that she had not been given any information about the sentencing — or even the verdict.Mr. Rezaian’s brother, Ali, called him “an innocent man and a well-respected journalist,” in a statement on Sunday. “As our family gathers for Thanksgiving, we remain hopeful that Jason will soon be reunited with us.”AdvertisementMr. Rezaian, 39, a California native and dual citizen of the United States and Iran, was The Post’s bureau chief in Tehran in July 2014 when he was arrested. He was charged with spying on Iran’s nuclear program and gathering information about violations of international sanctions against Iran.Advertisement“He began to identify individuals and companies that violated sanctions and were cooperating with Iran,” an Iranian television station said on its website. “The information that Rezaian gave to the Americans had led many Iranian and international businessmen and companies to be included in America’s sanctions list.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He was convicted in October after a trial closed to the public.Mr. Rezaian has been held at Evin Prison in Tehran. Last December, Ali Rezaian said that his brother had had health problems while in custody, including high blood pressure and back pain.In a Twitter post on Sunday, Martin Baron, The Post’s executive editor, wrote: “No details. Lawyer told nothing. Opaque system persists in its cruelty.”In New York, Sherif Mansour of the Committee to Protect Journalists, wrote, “By withholding information about the verdict and sentence, the Iranian government shows that its pursuit of Jason Rezaian on bogus espionage charges is nothing but a facade to prolong his unjust imprisonment.”A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Post Reporter in Iran Is Said to Be Given Prison Sentence.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.