By STEPHEN CASTLENOV. 23, 2015
LONDON —  In a significant reversal of British government policy, Prime Minister David Cameron promised on Monday to bolster military spending, ending years of cutbacks that had prompted critics to claim that Britain was retreating from its global role.Announcing the outcome of a defense review, Mr. Cameron told lawmakers that his government would add 12 billion pounds, or about $18 billion, to the defense budget over the next decade, largely for military equipment, adding that such an investment was “vital at a time when the threats to our country are growing.”The announcement, made 10 days after the terror attacks in France, came on a day in which Mr. Cameron also paid a brief visit to Paris, and promised the French government use of a British air base in Cyprus for France’s air campaign in Syria.At present, British bombing raids against the Islamic State are limited to Iraq because of a vote in Parliament in 2013, but on Thursday Mr. Cameron will make the case to extend British airstrikes into Syrian territory.AdvertisementHe appears anxious not to lose again on the issue, but with the opposition Labour Party divided over intervention in Syria, Mr. Cameron may decide that he could win a vote before Christmas.AdvertisementIn the aftermath of the Paris assaults, Mr. Cameron had already announced plans to increase resources for Britain’s intelligence agencies, and to invest in drones and special forces.But the spending plans announced on Monday will increase the broader capabilities of the British armed forces, which — along with those of France — are the only ones in Europe with a significant military reach. With the £12 billion increase, the defense equipment budget would rise to £178 billion, or $269 billion over the next decade.Britain’s military has been stretched in recent years because of reductions made as the government has sought to stabilize the country’s finances after the financial crisis.Those cuts prompted public criticism from Washington that Britain risked playing a reduced international role. Partly in response, London pledged this year to continue to meet a NATO target of spending 2 percent of gross domestic product on defense.That decision set the tone for the defense review, which was published Monday to praise from defense experts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is much better for defense and for security than people were anticipating six months ago,” said Malcolm Chalmers, the research director at the Royal United Services Institute, a research organization.“Over all, the message is that cutbacks have been reversed and some modest, but nevertheless significant, increases in defense and intelligence spending have been made,” Mr. Chalmers said, adding that the decision signified a trend toward “more global engagement.”Speaking in Parliament, Mr. Cameron promised to create two new rapidly deployable, 5,000-strong “strike brigades” by 2025, and to buy nine maritime patrol aircraft for surveillance, anti-submarine and anti-surface ship warfare. Mr. Cameron added that he would extend the life of the Royal Air Force’s Typhoon aircraft for 10 years, to 2040, and stressed that the country faced “state-based threats” as well as those from terrorist groups.AdvertisementHe also restated his intention to renew the Trident nuclear submarine system, a project which, according to the defense review, would cost £6 billion more than originally planned. Mr. Chalmers noted that the review had been conducted in the context of Russia’s display of military assertiveness, which explained the decision to make anti-submarine capabilities a priority.The decisions announced on Monday will change the trajectory in defense expenditure. According to the Royal United Services Institute, government figures show a reduction in defense expenditure, between 2010-11 and 2014-15, from £44.3 billion to £34.4 billion in 2014-15 prices.Maria Eagle, who speaks for the Labour Party on defense issues, said the proposed budget increase would “not undo the damage to our armed forces caused by the last one, when the government reduced the U.K.’s defense budget by 14.1 percent over the course of the Parliament.”“This is a government which, since coming to office, has left the U.K. with aircraft carriers without aircraft, without maritime patrol and with plummeting morale in our armed forces. We will therefore judge the government by its actions rather than its words,” she added.Mr. Chalmers said it would be possible only with hindsight to judge whether the correct balance had been struck, and in light of the threats that emerge in the future. “The test of this review will be in three years from now,” he added.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Cameron Plans Rise in Military Spending .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.