By DAVID E. SANGERNOV. 23, 2015
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates —  With the Obama administration under mounting pressure from some of its own top former officials to take a more aggressive approach to combating the Islamic State, Secretary of State John Kerry said Monday that he would like to see the American-led military and diplomatic effort in Syria “go faster.”He added that President Obama had charged his aides with “coming up with any concepts that will, in fact, work, and which could help change the situation on the ground.”Defending Mr. Obama’s policies, Mr. Kerry argued that weeks before the Paris attacks the president had already made a series of decisions that would put more military pressure on Islamic State militants, including the deployment of 50 Special Operations troops to Syria. But those troops, intended to advise the Kurdish rebels, have still not arrived, and Mr. Kerry conceded that other steps had not been fully instituted by the time the Paris assault occurred.In interviews over the past few days, however, White House, State Department and Pentagon officials have described fierce debates within the administration over how deeply to involve American forces in the campaign against the Islamic State.AdvertisementSeveral said that the arguments made last week by Mr. Kerry’s predecessor, Hillary Rodham Clinton — calling for a no-fly zone in Syria and a more muscular military response to bolster the diplomacy now underway — generally reflected arguments Mr. Kerry made, and lost, in the Situation Room.Advertisement“I think you are going to see many of those decisions revisited now,” said one senior administration official, who declined to speak on the record about continuing strategy discussions within the administration.Yet so far Mr. Obama appears to be sticking to his incremental approach, part of a long-term effort to make the Persian Gulf states less dependent on American intervention in the region’s crises. His trip to Asia over the past week was part of his aim to refocus American diplomatic energy.The Paris attacks, though, became the latest events to suck the United States back in, with the fear that Syria is becoming the kind of terrorist training ground that Afghanistan was before the Sept. 11 attacks, a powerful gravitational force.Mr. Obama remains concerned that a no-fly zone, while attractive for the humanitarian benefits it might bring to displaced Syrians, would involve a far greater military commitment than its proponents, including Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Kerry, are willing to acknowledge. He also worries that it would be a distraction from the campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Speaking to reporters on Monday afternoon after meeting the leadership of this wealthy gulf nation, and just before a meeting with the foreign minister of Saudi Arabia, Adel al-Jubeir, Mr. Kerry was careful not to get ahead of Mr. Obama. He echoed the president’s statement in Malaysia over the weekend that he was confident that the Islamic State would ultimately be defeated.But frustration crept into his voice, when he said “we have to cut off this narrative of success by Daesh,” using the somewhat derisive Arabic expression for the group that Mr. Obama has also begun to adopt. He said that while he had “some ideas” to speed American pressure, “the president has to make these decisions.” He declined to describe those ideas in any detail.The pressure on the administration to take a far more active role comes in part because several of Mr. Obama’s former counterterrorism advisers have gone public with critiques arguing that the administration has been too slow, and too tentative, when it comes to the Islamic State and Syria. One of the most stinging criticisms came from Michael G. Vickers, the under secretary of defense for intelligence until the spring.AdvertisementMr. Vickers, whose counterterrorism experience goes back to his days at the C.I.A., compared the effort to oust the Islamic State from Syria to the effort to get Al Qaeda out of Afghanistan.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The reasons for our success in 2001 and our lack of success in 2014-15 are twofold: a far more intense air campaign and an indigenous ground force, led by Special Operations and C.I.A. advisers, that could rapidly exploit the effects of air power,” he wrote in Politico late last week in an article titled “Change Your Strategy, Mr. President.”“We conducted as many airstrikes in two months in Afghanistan in 2001 as we have in 16 months in Iraq and Syria,” he said. “We should increase our strike tempo and weight of attacks significantly to bring both mass and precision to bear on ISIL’s stronghold.”Another of Mr. Obama’s senior intelligence advisers, Michael Morell, sounded a similar concern on the CBS program “Face the Nation” on Sunday.“You have a group who says it wants to attack us, just as Bin Laden said he wanted to,” said Mr. Morell, who was twice the C.I.A.’s acting director. “You have them building that capability, just as Bin Laden built it. We don’t have great visibility into that capability, just as we did not do then.”Both men’s views carry considerable weight within the administration.Mr. Kerry has been hoping that the events of the past month will focus Russia’s firepower on the Islamic State rather than the more moderate opponents of President Bashar al-Assad, and bring the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia back into that fight, instead of their current focus on Yemen.Yet Mr. Kerry’s plans go further. On Monday, he expressed the hope that he would accomplish a cease-fire between moderate rebel groups and the government of Mr. Assad in “the next few weeks.” He outlined a strategy in which the Saudis would convene the so-called moderates in the next few weeks, and come up with some common principles for negotiating with Mr. Assad’s government.That is a long shot at best. For one thing, no one can agree who, exactly, is a “moderate.” And Mr. Kerry said that a deal would not be possible if any of the groups thought the United States had given up on ousting Mr. Assad.The task is made all the harder because the opposition groups have often failed to hold together and fought among themselves, mirroring Syria’s own disintegration.AdvertisementOne early indicator of how Mr. Kerry will handle the effort is whether a group known as Ahrar al-Sham is permitted to join the negotiations. That group has often joined forces with the Nusra Front, and the Russians have been opposed to letting it join the political process. Mr. Kerry, in his first public comments on the question, seemed open to it on Monday.“I don’t want to categorize people except hard core” like the Nusra Front and the Islamic State, he said.Mr. Kerry said he discussed Ahrar al-Sham with Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan of the Emirates and would take up the issue with Mr. Jubeir, the Saudi foreign minister. Saudi Arabia, which the United States complains has done far too little to confront the Islamic State, is responsible for bringing the factions together in Riyadh next month.The challenge facing Mr. Kerry now is whether he can devise a strategy that convincingly takes on two adversaries — the Islamic State first, then Mr. Assad — while holding together a coalition riven with different interests. “The key is destroy Daesh rapidly in Syria and in Iraq, and that will have a profound impact of what happens in these other places,” he said.Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Nov. 24 with an article about Secretary of State John Kerry’s push for a more aggressive approach to combating the Islamic State misidentified, in some editions, the Emirati foreign minister, Abdullah bin Zayed, who visited a mosque in Abu Dhabi with Mr. Kerry the previous day. Sheikh Zayed is the man standing in the foreground waiting for Mr. Kerry, not the man lacing up his shoes along with Mr. Kerry.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerry Adds Voice to Those Urging Bigger Push Against Islamic State in Syria.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.