By JODI RUDORENNOV. 23, 2015
JERUSALEM — Under pressure from Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank, who are demanding better security after weeks of attacks by Palestinians, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Monday that his government would establish bypass roads for Israeli drivers in certain areas and revoke the work permits of attackers’ extended families.Also on Monday, a Palestinian man fatally stabbed an Israeli soldier, Pvt. Ziv Mizrachi, at a gas station on a West Bank highway that had been the site of many deadly attacks in a previous outbreak of violence. Private Mizrachi was the sixth Jew to be killed by Palestinians in five days, including an American spending the year studying in an Israeli yeshiva.Mr. Netanyahu visited an intersection in the Etzion settlement block that has been the site of several recent attacks, including one on Sunday that killed Hadar Buchris, 21. Settler leaders have demanded that Palestinian drivers be barred from roads in the area.The prime minister said he was meeting with local commanders “to step up our war against the terrorists.” He said security forces were already inspecting “every Palestinian vehicle that is on main roads” and seeking “pinpoint solutions” for individual locations, such as a “local bypass” to separate Israeli and Palestinian traffic at the intersection.Advertisement“We have a meeting of those who wield knives, individual terrorists and Internet incitement, and, therefore, we are also using various means to deal with the social networks,” Mr. Netanyahu added. “But it seems to me that the most important tool that we have is the perseverance, courage and determination to fight terrorism, just as we have fought its various expressions over the past 100 years.”Mr. Netanyahu is scheduled to meet with Secretary of State John Kerry in Jerusalem on Tuesday to discuss ways to quell the violence.AdvertisementHadar Horen, a spokeswoman for the Israeli agency that coordinates with Palestinians on civilian matters, said a decision had been made last week to revoke work permits held by the extended families of assailants. Ms. Horen said she did not know how many assailants’ families the revocation order would apply to, how many of their relatives hold work permits, or when the order would take effect.There were three attacks by Palestinians on Monday, two in the West Bank and one in Jerusalem’s storied Mahane Yehuda market. According to the Israeli police, two female cousins, ages 15 and 16, used scissors to wound an older Palestinian man in the market who they apparently thought was an Israeli.An Israeli police spokesman discussed the attack at a Jerusalem market, in which two Palestinian girls wounded an elderly man before the police shot them, killing one.The younger cousin, Hadeel Wajeh Awad, was fatally shot by the police, and the older, Noorhan Ibrahim Awad, was seriously wounded, a relative said. The police said an Israeli man had been injured in the gunfire.The assailants in the West Bank attacks — at the gas station and at a West Bank military checkpoint — were also shot dead by Israelis at the scenes, according to the authorities.Private Mizrachi, 18, was killed at a gas station on Highway 443, which had been closed to Palestinian drivers for a time during the second intifada, which began in 2000. Though the restriction was lifted in 2010, the highway is still sometimes referred to as the “apartheid road.”A female officer was injured in the stabbing, and another woman was wounded by errant gunfire from Israeli troops who shot at the attacker.An article on Nov. 24 about Israel’s plans to establish bypass roads for Israeli drivers in certain areas of the West Bank, in response to demands by settlers for better security, referred incorrectly to the six Jews killed by Palestinians in the previous five days. One was an American; they were not all Israelis.Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Ramallah, West Bank.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Netanyahu Announces New Steps in West Bank .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.