By JEFFREY GETTLEMANNOV. 23, 2015
NAIROBI, Kenya —  The United States imposed sanctions Monday against four men connected to a wave of violence in Burundi that has destabilized the central African nation and raised fears of all-out civil war.Hundreds of people have been killed in protests, mysterious attacks and a coup attempt in Burundi since its president, Pierre Nkurunziza, announced in April that he would run for a third term, despite many Burundians’ saying it was illegal. He won that third term in July in an election that many Western officials said was flawed.“President Nkurunziza’s pursuit of a third term in office has precipitated a humanitarian, economic, and security crisis,” said a statement by Ned Price, spokesman of the National Security Council in Washington. “Burundi is on the precipice, but there is a clear path available to Burundi’s leaders to avoid further violence and reach a political solution.”The sanctions, which come after the European Union also imposed sanctions on some Burundian officials, are part of an executive order issued Monday singling out any individuals who “threaten peace and security in Burundi, undermine democratic processes, or who are responsible for or complicit in human rights abuses.”AdvertisementHuman rights groups have said that both government forces and rebel groups in Burundi have killed civilians. Bodies are often found on the streets of Bujumbura, the capital. Many victims show signs of torture. Others seem to be random killings.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States government has been quite critical of Mr. Nkurunziza, but in an apparent effort to achieve some neutrality, the four people identified for immediate sanctions include two from the government and two from the opposition. They are: Alain Guillaume Bunyoni, minister of public security; Godefroid Bizimana, deputy director-general of the national police; Godefroid Niyombare, the leader of a coup attempt in May; and Cyrille Ndayirukiye, the deputy leader of the coup attempt. Their assets have been frozen and visas restricted.AdvertisementThe United States and other Western governments have tried to push Mr. Nkurunziza into an inclusive dialogue with Burundi’s political opposition. The White House said Monday in a statement that it calls on all parties to “to live up to their commitments to participate in an internationally mediated dialogue outside of Burundi.”Analysts said that the influence of human rights groups on the Obama administration was a big reason the United States moved forward on the sanctions, and leading human rights observers seemed to be pleased.“The U.S. sanctions send a strong message that impunity for serious crimes is not acceptable,” said Carina Tertsakian, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch. “We hope these sanctions will deter senior Burundian officials from ordering, carrying out or tolerating serious abuses in the future.”A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: After Violence, U.S. Puts Sanctions on Burundi Officials and Their Rivals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.