AdvertisementSupported byBy Simon Romero and Jonathan GilbertBUENOS AIRES — When he was just 32, the president-elect of Argentina, Mauricio Macri, thought his life would follow the predictable pattern of the son of an industrial tycoon, marked by luxury and privilege as he followed his father’s path into business inside the cocoon of this nation’s elite.But then rogue police officers kidnapped him and placed him in a coffin on their way to a hide-out.“When they opened the coffin, I breathed deeply as much as I could,” Mr. Macri said of the harrowing episode in 1991, which ended more than 10 days later when his father paid a multimillion-dollar ransom to secure his release. “I wasn’t sure of anything anymore, not even if I would live through the day.”Likening the experience to surviving a terminal illness, Mr. Macri, now 56, credits the kidnapping with an awakening, putting him on a course that would ultimately lead him to politics.He eventually became the mayor of Buenos Aires, and on Sunday, he defied early expectations by winning Argentina’s presidential race, upending the nation by defeating the Peronists, who have dominated politics here for decades.Only a day later, Mr. Macri moved quickly to strike a different tone from that of the departing president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who — along with her late husband, Néstor Kirchner — had controlled the presidency for the last 12 years.At a news conference on Monday, Mr. Macri emphasized how his administration would differ from that of Mrs. Kirchner on foreign policy. He announced an effort to get Venezuela — a close ally of Argentina under the Kirchners — suspended from the Mercosur regional trade bloc over claims of the infringement of civil liberties there.And he made clear his desire to revoke an agreement struck under Mrs. Kirchner with Iran to jointly investigate the 1994 bombing here of a Jewish center, which killed 85 people. Some investigators have accused senior Iranian officials, including a former Iranian president, of planning and financing the attack, making the agreement to give Iran a direct role in the investigation a political lightning rod.Mr. Macri has also announced plans to improve diplomatic ties with the United States, which became strained in recent years over Argentina’s international debts and Washington’s sway in the hemisphere.“There is little doubt that Argentina’s relations with the U.S. under a Macri administration will become friendlier,” said Michael Shifter, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a policy group in Washington.Mrs. Kirchner stepped down because of term limits, but her divisive governing style had enraged many voters, one of the factors that appeared to hurt her party’s candidate, Daniel Scioli, a former speedboat racer.After winning by a narrow margin, Mr. Macri vowed to “build bridges” with rivals in an effort to achieve a more conciliatory leadership approach.For one of his most pressing challenges, overhauling a sluggish economy, Mr. Macri said he would form a six-member economic cabinet to unwind currency controls and reduce export tariffs.Before entering politics with the formation of a center-right party in 2003, Mr. Macri cut his teeth in the cutthroat world of Argentine soccer. After his kidnapping, he remained for a few years in leadership roles in the construction and auto manufacturing business empire assembled by his Italian-born father, Franco Macri, before winning an election as the president of Boca Juniors, one of Argentina’s most popular soccer teams.The team, which allows fans who pay for membership to vote for a president every four years, was mired in financial troubles when he took over in 1995. But he pressured the leadership to reduce the team’s debts and start promoting promising younger players.“At Boca, it didn’t go well at first,” said Orlando Salvestrini, 67, a businessman who met Mr. Macri when the president-elect was an 18-year-old summer office worker in Franco Macri’s holding company. Later, Mr. Salvestrini went on to accompany Mauricio Macri during his 12-year tenure at Boca Juniors, chiefly occupying the post of the team’s treasurer.“But he kept on going and saw the fruits of his labor,” Mr. Salvestrini added, emphasizing Mr. Macri’s preference for working in teams and mediating between quarreling parties. For instance, Mr. Macri settled one high-profile conflict that arose before an Intercontinental Cup final in Japan, in 2000, when two star players argued over which team member should be selected in a crucial position.“He was the arbiter, and it translated into one of the team’s most famous triumphs,” Mr. Salvestrini said of the eventual victory over Spain’s Real Madrid during one of the most glory-laden periods of Boca Juniors, setting the stage for Mr. Macri’s successful mayoral campaign in 2007. “Boca helped him mature and grow as a manager.”While presiding over Boca Juniors gave Mr. Macri a chance to establish his own name, he still has to contend with claims that his privileged upbringing makes him unaware of the challenges faced by ordinary Argentines. At a televised debate with Mr. Scioli, critics accused him of dismissively smirking at his opponent.“It provokes fear when you see Mauricio Macri expressing himself quite so arrogantly,” Maurice Closs, the governor of Misiones Province and an opponent of Mr. Macri, said in an interview.Mr. Macri has sought to soften his image by explaining that he plans to maintain popular antipoverty programs introduced by the Kirchners since 2003.Still, his ideological positioning clearly stands to the right of many of his rivals. He has expressed opposition, for instance, to legalizing abortion, while listing “The Fountainhead,” the 1943 novel about an individualistic young architect by Ayn Rand, the writer who espoused unbound capitalism, among his favorite reads.“It is one of the best books I have read in my life,” Mr. Macri said.In his personal life, Mr. Macri also mixes in exclusive circles, driving perceptions of him as out of touch with some voters.“I don’t like Macri at all,” said Guadalupe Berlanga, 33, an English teacher here in Buenos Aires. “Privileges should not be for just a chosen few,” she said, saying she feared a wave of privatizations. “Macri voters don’t understand the reality because they come from money.”In his personal life, Mr. Macri married his third wife, Juliana Awada, 41, a fashion designer of Lebanese and Syrian descent, in 2010; they have one young daughter. His first wife was Ivonne Bordeu, the daughter of a racecar driver with whom he had his three other children. His second wife was Isabel Menditeguy, a model.Mr. Macri, who cultivated a mustachioed look in the 1990s, now eschews both facial hair and neckties, while seeking to connect with voters by professing an ability to relax and have a good time. After winning the election on Sunday night, for instance, he bounced around on stage in a victory dance.In fact, Mr. Macri has described himself as a “phenomenal” dancer, and like some Argentines his age, he is a fan of decades-old pop music, including the onstage moves of the singer Rod Stewart. Once, when he was asked by the newspaper Clarín if he had any idols beyond soccer players, he answered, “Freddie Mercury is my idol.”At his 50th birthday party, he impersonated Mr. Mercury on a small stage, dressed in white head to toe. The video of the performance emerged as a sensation on YouTube, capturing Mr. Macri singing Queen’s 1976 hit, “Somebody to Love.”videovideoAdvertisement