By NEIL MacFARQUHARNOV. 23, 2015
MOSCOW — Russian security services killed 14 insurgents who were smuggling fighters out of the North Caucasus region to join the Islamic State in Syria, Russian news reports said Monday.Quoting a statement from Russia’s antiterrorism committee, the reports said the men were killed Sunday in two clashes with law enforcement agents in and around the southern city of Nalchik in the republic of Kabardino-Balkaria.The first 11 killed were hiding in a fortified base in the wooded mountains near Nalchik, and information there led to the other three, the reports said.Insurgent websites in the region questioned whether all the men were in fact loyal to the Islamic State, although the former leader of the fighters, who was killed in a clash on Nov. 10, had publicly vowed allegiance to the would-be caliphate in August.AdvertisementHuman rights activists have accused the Russian government of stepping up its campaign of killing insurgents since the leaders of the scattered bands of fighters first began announcing their loyalty to the Islamic State a year ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The North Caucasus used to be dominated by a group called the Caucasian Emirate, an affiliate of Al Qaeda. As its leaders were killed off in rapid succession, the group became less active, and more and more of its prominent members, but not all, switched their allegiance to the Islamic State.Still, the level of violence in the North Caucasus has dropped considerably, a change attributed to the fact that so many fighters have left for Syria. About 2,000 militants from the North Caucasus are believed to be there.AdvertisementRussia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, deployed the military to Syria in September to shore up President Bashar al-Assad. Mr. Putin said part of the reason for the move was a need to fight Islamic State loyalists from Russia there before they could return to wreak havoc in Russia.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; Russia: Security Services Kill 14 Linked to Smuggling of Fighters to Syria.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.