By STEPHEN CASTLENOV. 23, 2015
LONDON — Showing Christians in public and private prayer, an advertisement produced for Britain’s main church was designed to promote a moment of contemplation among moviegoers as they settled down to watch a pre-Christmas blockbuster.Instead, it has provoked a ferocious debate over the role of religion in an increasingly secular Britain.Based on the Lord’s Prayer, the 60-second commercial, which was to be shown before “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” when it opens next month, has been refused screen time in most of Britain’s movie theaters.The decision to reject the advertisement has been criticized by the Church of England, which commissioned it. The church said it was “bewildered” by the move and claimed it could have a “chilling effect” on free speech.AdvertisementOn Monday, Prime Minister David Cameron was equally direct, describing the decision as “ridiculous,” an official spokesman said.AdvertisementBut campaigners for a secular society argued that if the advertisement were shown, other religious groups might by law gain the right to have their material distributed in the same way.The decision to turn down the advertisement was taken by Digital Cinema Media, a company that says it handles 80 percent of advertising in British movie theaters. The move comes as Britain, like other European nations, has been wrestling with ways to assimilate minority groups that include those with a variety of faiths.The ad starts with a shot of the Most Rev. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury and the spiritual leader of the Anglican Church. It features lines from the Lord’s Prayer recited by a variety of people, including a weight lifter, a police officer and a mourner at a graveside.In a statement on Twitter, Digital Cinema Media said it had “a policy of not accepting political or religious content for use in its cinemas.”“Some advertisements — unintentionally or otherwise — could cause offense to those of differing political persuasions, as well as to those of differing faiths and indeed of no faith,” the company said, adding that it treated “all political or religious beliefs equally” in that regard.Digital Cinema Media describes itself as the “market leader” in advertising in British movie theaters, providing access to 2,929 screens at 455 sites. The company says its clients include major operators such as Cineworld, Odeon, Picturehouse, Vue and some independent movie theaters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Church of England made the commercial to coincide with the start of a new website called Just Pray, intended to promote “the renewal of prayer in a digital age.”“The prospect of a multigenerational cultural event offered by the release of ‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ on 18 December — a week before Christmas Day — was too good an opportunity to miss,” the Rev. Arun Arora, the director of communications for the Church of England, said in a statement. He added, “We are bewildered by the decision of the cinemas.”Advertisement“The Lord’s Prayer is prayed by billions of people across the globe every day and in this country has been part of everyday life for centuries,” Mr. Arora said. “In one way, the decision of the cinemas is just plain silly, but the fact that they have insisted upon it makes it rather chilling in terms of limiting free speech.”“There is still time for the cinemas to change their mind, and we would certainly welcome that,” he added.The church said the ad had received clearance from the Cinema Advertising Authority and the British Board of Film Classification, two British watchdog bodies.Keith Porteous Wood, the executive director of the National Secular Society, said his organization did not find the ad offensive or object to it on principle. “We don’t have a problem with it being screened,” he said.But, he added, Digital Cinema Media might find that, if it showed the ad, it would face legal action if it then refused other religious material. “If it takes this film, it may mean it has to screen films about controversial religions or even cults,” he said.Asked about Mr. Cameron’s comment about the decision, Mr. Porteous Wood said his criticism “fails to deal with the substance of the issue.”The Church of England said that the commercial was now available online, and that it had been contacted by some small, independent theaters that wanted to show it.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Refusal to Run a Church Ad Has Britain in an Uproar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.