By CARLOTTA GALLNOV. 23, 2015
BAMAKO, Mali —  The government of Mali released photographs on Monday that it said showed the bodies of two men suspected of attacking the Radisson Blu hotel on Friday in Bamako, the capital. At least 19 people were killed in the assault.The two men were killed when security forces stormed the building hours after the attack; they have not been identified by the authorities. Security officials showed the photographs to reporters and said the images would be posted to a government website. Anyone acquainted with the two men is urged to come forward, said Amadou Sangho, a press officer for the Security Ministry.“The investigation is continuing, and we are trying to find out their nationalities,” Mr. Sangho said. “We want to find people who knew them, and then perhaps find accomplices.”Though there were earlier reports of more gunmen involved in the hotel attack, Mr. Sangho said the two men in the photographs were the only attackers. Both were clean-shaven and appeared to be in their 20s. One had visible bullet wounds to his upper body.AdvertisementIn an audio message, a jihadist group called Al Mourabitoun said that two men, Abdul Hakim al-Ansari and Mu’adh al-Ansari, were the fighters who attacked the hotel. It was not immediately clear whether they were the men in the photographs.AdvertisementThe message, like an earlier recording on Friday, was sent to Al Jazeera. In the latest recording, the group refers to the attackers as “two heroes of Islam.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mokhtar Belmokhtar founded Al Mourabitoun in 2013 after breaking with Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a regional affiliate of the terrorist group. He remained loyal to Al Qaeda’s central leadership, and earlier this year he denounced former jihadist colleagues who had defected to the Islamic State.Mr. Sangho said on Monday that Malian special forces and police officers had sealed off the hotel and evacuated 133 people on Friday — 128 guests and five hotel employees. They were taken to a sports hall, where they were screened.Besides the two gunmen, 18 guests and one police officer were killed in the attack, he said. Seven more people were wounded, three of them police officers. The officers were killed and wounded as they tried to flush out the gunmen, who had taken up positions on the top floor of the hotel.The government has declared a three-day period of national mourning.Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Mali Says 2 Men Carried Out Attack at Hotel .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.