
Sinosphere By                     
 AUSTIN RAMZY
 
NOV. 23, 2015
A victory by Guangzhou Evergrande in the A.F.C. Champions League, the biggest competition for club soccer in Asia, offered a quick hangover cure for Chinese fans reeling from the continuing struggles of their country’s national team.The 1-0 win in the second leg of the finals against the United Arab Emirates’ Al Ahli on Saturday gave Guangzhou its second Asian Champions League title in three years. Its 2013 title was the first by a Chinese club.Last week, China’s men’s national team drew, 0-0, with Hong Kong in a match colored by domestic rivalry and political discontent. The tie made it unlikely that China will advance to qualify for the 2018 World Cup, which provoked angry reactions from Chinese fans and demands that the team’s coach, Alain Perrin, be fired.The long-running travails of China’s national team are a source of endless distress to Chinese soccer enthusiasts, and Guangzhou’s recent success has prompted further head-scratching. Many sports pages have asked what the vastly different fate of the national team says about the state of soccer in China. “Evergrande’s Victory Confirms the Strength of Chinese Players, So Why Is the National Team No Good?” read the headline on an article on Sunday by the state-run China News Service.AdvertisementWhile the rules differ by league, the lineups of professional teams are mostly limited by checkbooks, not nationalities. Evergrande has three Brazilian attackers in its starting lineup, including the forward Elkeson, who scored the winning goal on Saturday.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some national teams rely on naturalized players. Against China, Hong Kong fielded players born in Cameroon, England, Ghana, Nigeria and mainland China. China, however, uses only homegrown players. An official in Wuhan has proposed lifting the restrictions that prevent foreign-born players from participating on the national team. But for many fans, such a solution would sidestep the question of why a nation of 1.4 billion, which has managed to dominate global competition in sports like badminton and diving, cannot do the same in soccer.AdvertisementWhile Evergrande has strong foreign talent, it also has a core of Chinese players, an indication that other problems are at play. Several commentators have argued that China’s national team still suffers from unwieldy state-run management. It could benefit from the streamlined, “capitalist” model of Evergrande, they say, which is owned by a real estate company and the e-commerce giant Alibaba and this month became the first listed club in Asia.“Evergrande’s ability to succeed confirms that if the government gets out of Chinese soccer and gives it over to the market and society, there will be quick results,” the sports commentator Huang Jianxiang wrote. “They don’t only rely on money, but also the most professional skill levels and methods to improve their game.”President Xi Jinping of China has made no secret of his love for soccer. On a trip to England in October, he visited Manchester City’s training ground and had a photo taken with the team’s Argentine star, Sergio Agüero, and Prime Minister David Cameron. In March, China announced a plan to overhaul the sport, including increasing youth participation levels and moving the soccer federation from the national sports administration to give it more autonomy.Still, not everyone is confident that Evergrande’s success will mean much to anyone besides Evergrande.“The national team is now under Uncle Xi’s watch, and the main points of reform have come out, including removing the soccer federation from under the sports administration,” said a column on the website of the Southern Media Group, based in Guangzhou. “But what will the national side learn from Evergrande? That’s still a question.”Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Club Team Thrives as National Squad Sputters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »