By MICHAEL FORSYTHENOV. 23, 2015
Some participants in last year's pro-democracy "Umbrella Movement" won seats in local elections in Hong Kong on Sunday, while supporters of closer ties with the central government in Beijing gained ground in other areas.HONG KONG —  Voters here went to the polls on Sunday, choosing hundreds of neighborhood representatives in the first election since concern about China’s influence over the electoral process set off immense sit-in protests last year.Turnout for the election of 363 district councilors, who serve four-year terms, was higher than in contests in 2011 and 2007, with about 47 percent of eligible voters casting ballots, the government reported. An additional 68 seats were uncontested.The results were mixed, as several participants in last year’s pro-democracy Umbrella Movement won seats in some areas, and supporters of closer ties with the central government in Beijing gained ground in others.District-level lawmakers, who on average serve constituencies of fewer than 20,000 people, are focused on day-to-day issues, like pushing for better bus service and securing funds for improvements to public facilities such as roads, parks and street signs.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the tension over last year’s protests, known as Occupy Central, which shut down some major thoroughfares in Hong Kong for more than two months, was evident in the election on Sunday. In one densely populated region, pro-Beijing and pro-democracy, or pan-democratic, constituencies were divided by one street.Next year, voters will elect people to Hong Kong’s 70-member Legislative Council, the city’s top lawmaking body. In June, the legislature rejected a voting plan backed by the Beijing government that would have allowed the city’s more than three million eligible voters to directly elect Hong Kong’s top official, the chief executive. That plan, which allowed only candidates screened by a committee dominated by pro-Beijing loyalists to appear on the ballot, set off the Occupy Central movement last year.In 2017, Hong Kong will hold elections for the chief executive. That contest will be decided by a 1,200-member unelected committee dominated by pro-Beijing groups, including tycoons, farmers and fishermen, pro-Communist labor organizations and industry groups.A version of this brief appears in print on November 24, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: In Hong Kong, Vote Reflects Split on Beijing.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.