By JODI RUDORENNOV. 24, 2015
KFAR VITKIN, Israel —  The unassuming proprietor of an unassuming hummus place in this little village near the Mediterranean Sea has a dream: that one day, he will run a chain of restaurants across Israel where the sons of Isaac and the sons of Ishmael will be able to sit together at the table and share hummus. At a steep discount.The proprietor, Kobi Tzafrir, is hardly a natural successor to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. A 32-year-old accountant in a hooded sweatshirt, Mr. Tzafrir stumbled across an opportunity five months ago to take over a restaurant on the second floor of a nondescript shopping center off the highway.He renamed it the Hummus Bar but did not even take down the previous owner’s sign out front.Then a wave of violence broke out in the land, with Palestinians stabbing Israeli Jews and hurling rocks and firebombs at soldiers, and Israelis shooting the attackers as well as the riotous protesters. Mr. Tzafrir posted on Facebook that he would give half off every hummus plate to tables at which Jews and Arabs ate side by side.The gimmick has attracted more journalists than diners. But still. In a place where day-to-day interactions across the divide have dwindled over a decade, and all but disappeared in the last eight deadly weeks, there is something to be said for a gesture toward peace.Advertisement“If there is one word for peace in food, it is hummus,” said Mr. Tzafrir, who meticulously assembles each warm plate of chickpeas, spices and fixings himself. “This is a social food. You eat together and share the pita. This is a food that came from Arabs, and Jews really like it.”AdvertisementMr. Tzafrir’s hummus, it should be said, is very tasty. So is his falafel, prepared without flour and delivered fresh and crisp. He offers a finely chopped salad, excellent thin fries and a dish called msabbaha, where chickpeas swim in tahini.Maybe 15 or 20 mixed tables have been served since Mr. Tzafrir’s Oct. 13 post. At least as many articles about it have appeared on news sites around the world, with headline puns like The Daily Mail’s “Give chickpeas a chance.”There were no Arab customers during a two-hour visit last week. Then again, it was the slow late afternoon; there were only two other tables of any kind. A family with a baby had a leisurely late lunch, then a driver for the electric company wolfed down a plate with lemonade.Asked what he thought of the promotion, the driver said, “Lamah lo?” — “Why not?” — then rushed off.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The waitress, Adi Dror, lit up when a reporter for The New York Times arrived with a Palestinian reporter and an Israeli photographer. She did not mention the discount but eagerly translated the menu into English. Later, she told how Mr. Tzafrir’s Facebook post had changed her life.Ms. Dror, 22, grew up in a conservative home an hour’s drive from Kfar Vitkin. During a year and a half of global travel after her army service, she said, “I changed my point of view about love and hate and fear and what causes people to do what they do.” Mr. Tzafrir had separately posted that he needed workers; she got the gig, moved to nearby Hadera and is constructing a huge peace sign out of bottle caps.“I saw this post, and I was like, ‘Oh my God, this is exactly what I was talking about,’ ” Ms. Dror recalled.“He’s not a peace-and-love guy, a hippie,” she added of Mr. Tzafrir. “He is really chill and just doing this little thing that raises the connection between people.”AdvertisementThere have been some negative reactions to the Facebook post, mostly sarcastic. Mr. Tzafrir said one Jew had warned against giving Arab customers knives, and some Arabs had complained that Israel had taken Palestinian land, and he is offering only hummus.But still. He has a dream. That one day he could even give mixed tables free hummus, backed by crowdfunded donations.“I want to keep this idea for all time; it will be the thing here,” Mr. Tzafrir said. “Maybe in a few years, everybody won’t even know the difference between Jews and Arabs, so maybe I’ll stop it then.”A version of this letter appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: A Reward for Meals Shared Across an Israeli Fault Line.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.