By MUJIB MASHALNOV. 24, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan —  The Taliban captured at least 13 Afghan soldiers and two foreigners after their aircraft made an emergency landing in the northern Afghan province of Faryab on Tuesday, officials said.Details of the episode, including the nationalities of the two foreigners, remained unclear. At least three Afghan soldiers were killed in a firefight after the landing, in the Taliban-controlled area of Ghar Tepa, according to local officials.In a social media post, the Taliban claimed that two American soldiers were among those captured. But American officials said there were no Americans aboard the aircraft. Officials said that they were looking into the possibility that an American company was operating the aircraft under contract with the Afghan Army.Col. Michael T. Lawhorn, a spokesman for United States forces in Afghanistan, said that although he was aware of reports of an aircraft crash, “we have no reports at this time of any Americans being on board.”AdvertisementNaqibullah Fayeq, a member of Parliament from Faryab, said the aircraft was carrying army engineers to the province. Mr. Fayeq had traveled to Faryab as part of a delegation to introduce the new provincial governor to his job.Advertisement“They were flying so low that they were shot at, and no one was hurt in the emergency landing,” Mr. Fayeq said. “They had enough ammunition to resist for an hour after the landing and were then overpowered by the Taliban.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maj. Mohammad Reza Rezai, an Afghan National Army spokesman, said the aircraft was an Mi-17 transport helicopter and confirmed that it had made an emergency landing in the Ghar Tepa area about 3:30 p.m. Tuesday.“The area is completely under Taliban control,” Mr. Rezai said, adding that an operation has begun to try to rescue the hostages.Faryab has faced an intense offensive this year by the Taliban, who are contesting several districts in the province. The severity of the threat had drawn one of Afghanistan’s vice presidents, Abdul Rashid Dostum , back to his home territory for a monthlong clearance operation. After Mr. Dostum returned to Kabul, the insurgents, emboldened by their capture of the city of Kunduz, made a run for Faryab’s capital, Maimana, only to be repelled by local militias and American airstrikes.With the Taliban choking many of the country’s major highways, transport flights have taken on an increased importance in the war. The reliance has resulted in a spate of fatal air accidents in recent months, the deadliest occurring in August, when an Afghan National Army helicopter crashed in Zabul Province, killing all 17 aboard.Joseph Goldstein contributed reporting from Kabul, and Eric Schmitt and Matthew Rosenberg from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Afghan Troops and Foreigners Are Taken Prisoner by Taliban .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.