By FARAH SAMTI and KAREEM FAHIMNOV. 24, 2015
TUNIS —  An explosion tore through a bus carrying members of the president’s security guard through the heart of Tunisia’s capital on Tuesday evening, killing at least 12 people and prompting the president to declare a 30-day state of emergency.In a statement, President Béji Caïd Essebsi, who was not near the site of the explosion, called the blast a “cowardly terrorist attack.” He canceled a scheduled trip to Switzerland and announced a nightly curfew beginning at 9 p.m. The Tunis airport and tourist sites were closed after the explosion, according to news reports.Mr. Essebsi said that in addition to the dead, 20 members of the presidential guard had been wounded. There was no immediate claim of responsibility.The blast was the third major attack by militants in Tunisia this year and the first serious assault on the security forces in Tunis since jihadists began a campaign of violence in 2011. It occurred on Mohammed V Avenue, near Avenue Habib Bourguiba, the city’s storied commercial thoroughfare and the location of the headquarters of the Ministries of Interior and Tourism, along with other important landmarks.AdvertisementAfter the uprising in 2011 that toppled the country’s dictatorship, Tunisia defied the civil strife that took hold in countries throughout the region, including Libya. But its transition to democracy has been threatened repeatedly by political violence, including assassinations of prominent figures and militant attacks.President Béji Caïd Essebsi of Tunisia declared a state of emergency and a curfew after an explosion on a bus carrying presidential guards in Tunis killed at least 12 people.Tunisia has also been shaken as thousands of its citizens have traveled to Iraq and Syria to join the Islamic State. The exodus has confounded policy makers and earned Tunisia an unwanted distinction as a wellspring of regional extremism.AdvertisementThe violence has shaped Tunisia’s emerging political order, as well. Ennahda, the country’s main Islamist party, won the first legislative elections after the uprising but faced criticism for failing to curb the militants.Mr. Essebsi rose to the presidency pledging a crackdown on extremists and greater stability.The Islamic State has been associated with two deadly attacks in Tunisia this year: one in March at the Bardo National Museum in Tunis, which killed 22 people, and one in June at a beach hotel in Sousse, which killed 38 people, including 30 British tourists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The attacks have undermined the government’s promise of stability, at a time when some are warning that the violence will prompt the authorities to overreact and limit citizens’ rights.“We’re going into this war with everything we have,” Mr. Essebsi said in a televised address after the explosion. “Victory will always be on Tunisia’s side.”After the recent attacks claimed by the Islamic State in Paris and Beirut, Lebanon, the Tunisian authorities increased the security level in Tunis 10 days ago and deployed soldiers and police officers to patrol the city.It was not immediately clear whether the explosion was caused by a bomb or by an explosive fired at the bus. Reuters, citing unnamed government and security officials, said that the presidential guards were boarding the bus at the time of the explosion and that the blast had probably been caused by a suicide bomber.Farah Samti reported from Tunis, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.A version of this article appears in print on November 25, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tunisia Declares State of Emergency After Explosion on Bus.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.