By NIC WIRTZ and ELISABETH MALKINOCT. 5, 2015
SANTA CATARINA PINULA, Guatemala —  From the roof of his house, Julio René Barillas can see the gash in the mountainside where the earth gave way and buried the houses below.He heard the deafening noise and saw the landslide swallow up the neighborhood just 100 yards away.“They never had a chance,” said Mr. Barillas, 61, an evangelical pastor. “There was nothing they could do.”But he said he would not leave, though it was clear that his own house was in peril. Below and above it, trees had been uprooted and the land itself seemed prepared to crumble at any moment.  “This is our house. Our family’s house,” Mr. Barillas said on Monday. “I have faith nothing will happen.”AdvertisementFour days after a landslide destroyed the concrete block settlement of El Cambray II, burying hundreds of people, officials armed with maps moved through the neighboring streets, knocking on doors, taking count and noting the risks.AdvertisementIn the wake of one of Guatemala’s worst natural disasters in years, officials at the National Coordination for Disaster Reduction said they would try to persuade the families living on the unstable land around the collapsed hillside to move.  Sergio Cabañas, who is in charge of the recovery effort for the agency, said that a crack had appeared in the crown of the hill above the village. Six small landslides had been detected in the area. Manuel Pocasangre, a spokesman for the Santa Catarina Pinula city government, said, “It’s impossible to say why these people stay.”“Maybe they think they will get more land,” he added. “Maybe they think they won’t get a better opportunity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The death toll stood at 152 on Monday, with 300 missing. With no hope of finding survivors, teams used backhoes and bulldozers to move the tons of earth that buried the neighborhood. The intermittent rain and the erosion caused by the rising Pinula River posed a threat to the recovery teams. A new temporary morgue was set up, and the Red Cross sent out an appeal for dry ice.Above, the town center of this gritty suburb of Guatemala City was hushed, the crowds of mourners and others that had packed the streets a day earlier had disappeared. Funeral processions made their way in and out of the town cemetery where workers had made space for new crypts.As the disaster preparedness teams zigzagged through a small settlement of about 15 houses, families who thought they would stay became rattled. Many people approached, asking for advice, although there was little to be had.But some decided not to leave until they were forced to do so. “I’ve lived here all my life,” said Fabia Alonzo, 23. “We couldn’t get this house elsewhere.”Her husband’s grandmother, Gregoria García, 85, explained the problem echoed by many families here. “I really don’t know where we’d go,” she said. “We’re poor.”Mr. Barillas, the pastor, also vowed to stay. “I have my fruit trees and I leave a simple, peaceful life,” he said. “Where would I go?”Nic Wirtz reported from Santa Catarina Pinula, and Elisabeth Malkin from Mexico City.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Officials in Guatemala Urge Residents to Leave Settlement Hit by a Landslide .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.