AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — George Osborne, the British chancellor of the Exchequer, abandoned a plan on Wednesday to cut welfare benefits, making a significant tactical retreat in his drive to shrink the British state and balance its budget.Confronted by formidable political opposition, Mr. Osborne scrapped his proposed limits on payments available to millions of people in low-paid work. He acknowledged that for now, at least, government welfare spending would be higher as a result.But the move was a switch in tactics, not in strategy, from one of Britain’s most ambitious politicians. Mr. Osborne promised to stick to his overall financial targets, and he said that a windfall of 27 billion pounds (about $41 billion) from unexpectedly strong tax receipts and low borrowing costs would help the country avoid cutting front-line services like the police.Britain’s economy is growing faster than those of other major European nations, so Mr. Osborne has some big advantages over his continental counterparts in shaping his spending plans. But Britain still has a large budget deficit, relatively high public debt and low productivity.While it has not had to impose the harsh austerity measures seen in nations like Greece or Spain, the British government has been constraining its spending for years as ministers tried to stabilize public finances after the global financial crisis.Mr. Osborne has also tried to reshape the way the government spends, reducing the size of the state and its welfare payments.He announced in July, two months after the Conservative Party won enough seats in the House of Commons to govern without a coalition partner, that he planned to keep squeezing spending for the next few years, aiming to turn the budget deficit to a surplus by the 2019-20 fiscal year.But Britain’s second parliamentary chamber, the House of Lords, complicated his plans in October by rejecting his proposals to limit the tax credits paid to people who earn very low wages, saving £4.4 billion.On Wednesday, Mr. Osborne acknowledged that his plans had aroused widespread opposition and said he had decided not to try to impose them, even gradually.“I’ve had representations that these changes to tax credits should be phased in,” Mr. Osborne told lawmakers. “I’ve listened to the concerns. I hear and understand them. And because I’ve been able to announce today an improvement in the public finances, the simplest thing to do is not to phase these changes in, but to avoid them altogether.”The decision was a victory for the opposition Labour Party, which had campaigned vigorously against the cuts, saying they would harm about three million people. The party also accused Mr. Osborne of leaving a £1 billion gap in the budget that would be paid for by “working families.”But the moment was marred for Labour by criticism of John McDonnell, the party’s spokesman on economic and financial matters. During the parliamentary debate on Wednesday, Mr. McDonnell quoted from Mao Zedong’s “Little Red Book,” prompting laughter. Aides to Mr. McDonnell said he had intended the reference as a joke, to highlight the risks of selling British assets to Chinese investors.The tax credit episode has been a setback for Mr. Osborne, who is seen as a potential successor to Prime Minister David Cameron. But he did succeed in presenting a budget that stuck to his overall goals.“The chancellor appears to have achieved the impossible — easing the squeeze on public spending, dumping cuts to tax credits and sticking to his deficit reduction plans,” said Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte, the business advisory firm. “Decent U.K. growth and a better outlook for tax receipts have saved the day, enabling Mr. Osborne to cut less and shrink the deficit much as planned.”Other measures announced by Mr. Osborne include significantly higher taxes on the purchase of second homes and rental properties, and new freedom for local governments to sell off assets like golf courses.Many believe that Mr. Osborne’s stewardship of the economy laid the foundations for the Conservative Party’s unexpectedly strong showing in the general election in May. And by making a swift retreat on the tax credits, he has a chance to rebuild his reputation as a skilled political operator.But Mr. Osborne remains far behind his originally promised timetable for balancing the budget: When he and Mr. Cameron first took office in 2010, in a coalition government, he promised to get the country there by 2015.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement