AdvertisementSupported byBy Didi Kirsten TatlowBEIJING — A top Chinese health official has denied that the country’s new organ transplant system allows organs to be harvested from executed prisoners, saying that earlier comments he made suggesting that a loophole allowed the practice to continue had been misconstrued.The official, Dr. Huang Jiefu, said his statements that prisoners were also citizens and therefore should be allowed to donate organs under the new rules had been meant “philosophically,” and he denied that the government was allowing it in practice.“I never said that,” Dr. Huang said in an interview here last week. “It is a lie. It distorts my words. The context, the words are from a philosophical level.”“As a doctor, we cannot reject the kindness and the conscience of the prisoners,” he added. “However, on a practical level, we cannot do that, to put them into the civilian donation.”Dr. Huang’s earlier comments, reported in the official Chinese news media and  cited in The New York Times, drew outrage from medical ethicists and human rights advocates, who have long criticized China’s practice of harvesting organs from executed inmates. They said the comments showed that China never really abandoned the policy, as Mr. Huang had promised it would last December, but instead had simply reclassified prisoners as citizens and continued to take their organs.Dr. Huang, a former deputy health minister, is in charge of overhauling China’s organ transplant system as chairman of the Human Organ Donation and Transplant Committee. He is also president of the China Organ Transplant Development Foundation, which supports the organ-donation program and whose deputy secretary general, Zhuang Yiqiang, has also said publicly that prisoners have the right to donate organs and should be encouraged to do so.In the interview last week, in the foundation’s offices, Dr. Huang did not deny making the comments attributed to him, and he repeated his contention that prisoners “have a right” to donate organs.“You can’t say, oh, death row prisoners don’t have the right,” he said. “That’s wrong. Death row prisoners have their rights.”Critics say that statement is troubling coming from the official in charge of the organ donation system, and some questioned his assertion that his earlier comments had been misinterpreted.“Dr. Huang’s statements, even if he says now that he meant them only theoretically, have influenced many, many transplant professionals in China who believe that it is ethically correct for prisoners to donate,” said Dr. Huige Li, a professor at the University of Mainz, Germany, and a board member of Doctors Against Forced Organ Harvesting. “If prisoner organ donation is also theoretically correct, what can prevent it happening?”In the interview, Dr. Huang said he could not rule out that prisoners’ organs were still being used illegally, but said they were no longer used in the state-run system that administers organ donation and distribution.“In governmental systems, no,” he said. “However I cannot say there are no organs from executed prisoners.”“They are not allowed to be used,” he added. “Not that they have stopped being used.”International medical organizations like the World Medical Association and the Transplantation Society say the use of organs from prisoners in any country that has the death penalty violates medical ethical standards because the prisoners cannot give their consent freely.China executes more people than any other country, and its practice of taking organs from executed prisoners was the largest and most systematic in the world. In the interview, Dr. Huang said that last year more than 8,600 organs were transplanted in China, 80 percent of them from prisoners.Last December, China’s critics were heartened when Dr. Huang announced that as of Jan. 1, 2015, the country would end its reliance on prisoners’ organs and use only citizen donations.Dr. Philip O’Connell, president of the Transplantation Society, said he believed the policy had had an effect.“Based on conversations with others, we believe there has been a change that to a large extent they are not using organs from executed prisoners,” he said.Chinese surgeons feared the new policy would worsen an acute organ shortage, but that has not happened, they said. Donations from citizens surged as word spread of possible shortages, said Chen Jingyu, a lung transplant specialist at the Wuxi People’s Hospital near Shanghai.After the Communist Party called for members to donate and ordered the media to call for donations, the organ supply increased this year, doctors said.“It’s a topic that we in the transplant community are all talking about,” Dr. Chen said. “It’s as if we had to die in order to be reborn.”Others, however, are skeptical that prisoners’ organs, which accounted for the vast majority of transplants last year, could have been completely and suddenly eliminated from the supply chain without affecting it.And they are haunted by a comment Dr. Huang made last year, before the ban took place, that “organs from willing death row prisoners” would be “considered voluntary citizen donations, and the expression ‘death row donations’ won’t exist anymore,” according to a report in The Beijing Times.Dr. Huang said last week that that comment, too, was meant theoretically.“Dr. Huang is engaging in sophistry,” Dr. Li said. “China needs to prohibit the use of prisoner organs by law. Only with a new law can it convince the world.”Adam Wu contributed research.Advertisement