By CHOE SANG-HUNNOV. 25, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — The office of President Park Geun-hye of South Korea said Wednesday that her government was trying to secure the freedom of nine North Koreans, including a baby, who a rights group said were in danger of being sent back from China to face harsh punishment for leaving the North.“Our government is mobilizing all its diplomatic efforts to ensure that the North Koreans won’t be forcibly repatriated to the North against their will and that they can travel safely and swiftly to the country of their choice,” said Chun Hye-ran, a spokeswoman for Ms. Park.The statement came after an appeal from the group, Human Rights Watch, earlier Wednesday for Ms. Park to put pressure on China to free the North Koreans, who are believed to be held in a Chinese military garrison near the North Korean border.“Time is running out for these nine refugees, so President Park needs to immediately press China’s government to ensure this group is not sent back into harm’s way,” said Phil Robertson, Asia deputy director at Human Rights Watch. “No one should forget that if this group is handed over, they will likely disappear into a North Korean prison camp system characterized by torture, violence and severe deprivation.”AdvertisementThe Chinese Foreign Ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday.The North Koreans were detained by the Vietnamese police on Oct. 22 in Mong Cai, near the Chinese border, after the bus they were on was stopped for a random check, according to Human Rights Watch, which cited accounts from the North Koreans’ relatives in South Korea. Two days later, they were handed over to the police in Dongxing, in the southern Chinese province of Guangxi, the rights group said.AdvertisementOne of the nine North Koreans is an 11-month-old baby, Human Rights Watch said.On Friday, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concern for the North Koreans, saying that they might already have been returned to their home country, where “they would be at risk of very serious human rights violations.” Sophie Richardson, the China director at Human Rights Watch, said the group’s researchers believed they were being held in Tumen, a Chinese town near the North Korean border that is the last stopping point for many North Koreans being processed for repatriation, but they were not certain.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More than 28,000 North Koreans have resettled in South Korea since the North was ravaged by famine in the 1990s. Most have fled first to China, then crossed into Southeast Asian countries like Laos, Thailand and Vietnam, from which finding a way to South Korea is easier.Activists and smugglers help arrange their travel, which is often financed by relatives who have already made it to the South. But the operations do not always go smoothly. Refugees are sometimes detained by the Chinese authorities or returned to China from other Asian countries for traveling without proper documents or illegally crossing borders.When that happens, their supporters often resort to a public campaign on their behalf, asking international human rights groups and foreign governments to intervene. For years, advocates have contended that China does not recognize such North Koreans as refugees, treating them instead as illegal economic migrants and sending them back to North Korea.Last weekend, Human Rights Watch urged China to ensure that the nine were allowed to travel to their countries of choice, including South Korea, rather than return them to the North.Many North Koreans who have reached the South have testified that those sent back from China have been subjected to severe punishment, including torture and incarceration in labor camps. As a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 protocol, China is barred from returning refugees — people who have left their home countries and have a well-founded fear of persecution there — to a place where their life or freedom would be threatened, Human Rights Watch said.Activists say that in recent years, it has become riskier and more costly to help North Koreans flee to China. North Korea has tightened its border controls under its current leader, Kim Jong-un, hoping to limit influences from the outside world, including popular South Korean TV dramas recorded on pirated DVDs, and to stem an outflow of refugees, whom the North calls “traitors.”According to the South Korean government, 1,397 North Koreans arrived in the South last year, down from 2,914 in 2009.Edward Wong contributed reporting from Beijing.A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; South Korea: North Koreans Held by China Face Peril.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.