AdvertisementSupported byBy Vinod SreeharshaRIO DE JANEIRO — The young actor aroused the suspicions of the senator’s chief of staff as they were about to meet in a hotel suite in Brasília this month. The chief of staff, Diogo Ferreira Rodrigues, searched the backpack of the actor, Bernardo Cerveró. Mr. Ferreira, seemingly reassured, signaled his boss, Senator Delcídio do Amaral, a member of the governing Workers’ Party and an important ally of President Dilma Rousseff, that he could enter the room.According to prosecutors, Mr. Amaral had arranged the meeting in the hope of persuading Mr. Cerveró’s father, Nestor Cerveró, a former executive of Brazil’s state-owned oil company, Petrobras, who had been sentenced in August to 12 years in prison on corruption and money-laundering charges, not to cooperate in the investigation that had shaken the oil giant, and the country’s political establishment. But despite Mr. Ferreira’s precautions, the younger Mr. Cerveró recorded the meeting on a smartphone and turned over the recording to federal prosecutors in the hope of helping his father, according to court papers. Mr. Amaral and Mr. Ferreira were arrested on Wednesday along with a billionaire investment banker, André Santos Esteves, on charges of trying to obstruct the Petrobras investigation. An order has also been issued for the arrest of Edson Ribeiro Filho, Nestor Cerveró’s former lawyer, who was also at the meeting. He remains at large.While Bernardo Cerveró, 34, had been relatively unknown until this week, working as a theater actor and producer in Rio de Janeiro, the evidence he provided has stunned Brazil’s jittery political and business elite. At the meeting, according to transcripts in court documents made public by prosecutors, Mr. Amaral, one of the Senate’s most influential members and Ms. Rousseff’s top ally in that chamber, sought to dissuade Nestor Cerveró from negotiating a plea agreement. Recordings indicate that he promised Bernardo Cerveró that he would intervene with the judiciary to try to get Nestor Cerveró released early through a habeas corpus proceeding, help him leave the country and pay the Cerveró family for their silence. The money for that, according to prosecutors, would have been supplied by Mr. Esteves, the head of one of Brazil’s largest investment banks, BTG Pactual. On Thursday, Mr. Amaral spent about four hours providing testimony to the federal police in Brasília. He acknowledged that his voice was on the recordings but said he was innocent, according to O Globo, a Brazilian newspaper. The O Globo report quoted his lawyer, Mauricio Silva Leite, as saying, “He is certainly innocent, and we are here to prove that.”In one transcript excerpt, provided in the prosecutors’ documents, Mr. Amaral said, “Now, now, Edson and Bernardo, I think we need to now focus on the S.T.F.” That is the acronym for Brazil’s Supreme Court.He continued: “I spoke with Teori. I spoke with Toffoli.”Teori is Teori Zavascki, and Toffoli is Dias Toffoli, and both are Supreme Court justices. Mr. Zavascki has played a prominent role in advancing the Petrobras investigation, even approving the three arrests on Wednesday. Neither he nor Mr. Toffoli have made any public comment on the transcript. Mr. Amaral, head of the Senate’s economic committee, was seen as crucial in getting the government’s fiscal austerity measures passed.“He was the most committed senator to the fiscal agenda of the government,” Mansueto Almeida, a Brazilian economist, said.“I don’t see how the government can replace him,” he added. “This will make it really hard for the government to control the agenda in the Senate or negotiate with it.”In another part of the recording, Mr. Amaral suggested to Bernardo Cerveró that his father flee to Spain and offered specific advice on the route. “I already thought that, and I was thinking about going via Venezuela,” Bernardo Cerveró said. But then he expressed concern about his father’s electronic monitoring device and that a boat would be the best mode of transportation. Mr. Amaral disagreed, saying “the best way for him to leave is via Paraguay,” where he could go on to Spain by private plane.In another excerpt, Mr. Ribeiro tried to summarize their understanding. According to the transcript, he gave the younger Mr. Cervero a summary of the proposed financial agreement meant to keep his father from cooperating, or at least not divulge anything incriminating about Mr. Amaral or Mr. Esteves.Mr. Ribeiro said, “To review, what we’re agreeing to is that Nestor deny everything.” Bernardo Cerveró responded, “Yes.”Mr. Ribeiro continued, “Are you certain? So then he won’t sign the agreement,” and repeated that twice.Advertisement