AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — António Costa, the Socialist leader, on Thursday took office as Portugal’s new prime minister, at the helm of a minority government that has pledged to comply with European fiscal commitments while also reversing some of the austerity measures that had turned Portugal into a model student for international creditors.Mr. Costa’s new government brings to an end almost two months of political instability in Portugal, after the center-right coalition of Pedro Passos Coelho, the departing prime minister, won the most votes in a national election on Oct. 4, but lost its parliamentary majority.A month later, Mr. Costa joined ranks with erstwhile rivals and more radical left-wing parties — the Communists and the Left Bloc — in an unexpected alliance that forced Mr. Passos Coelho’s ouster by voting down his government program in Parliament.In the medium term, however, Mr. Costa faces a difficult balancing act between meeting the demands of his new left-wing allies, in terms of unwinding the austerity measures of the previous center-right government, while maintaining the confidence of creditors.Mr. Costa, a former mayor of Lisbon, is leading a Socialist administration that will govern with the backing of Communist and Left Bloc lawmakers who have made their support conditional upon pursuing anti-austerity measures that include raising public wages and unfreezing pensions.On Thursday, Mr. Costa promised to maintain balanced public finances, but also insisted that his government would change tack in terms of economic management, in part “to fight poverty and inequality.”He excoriated the previous government for neglecting public services and prompting an exodus of Portuguese forced to seek work overseas. “Austerity doesn’t generate prosperity,” Mr. Costa said. “The spirit that fills this government is another one and very different: We want to build step by step, measure by measure, a new era for Portugal.”Mr. Costa, 54, took office after receiving the tepid endorsement this week of Portugal’s conservative president, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, who had initially decided to allow Mr. Passos Coelho to serve a second term in office.During his first term, Mr. Passos Coelho stuck to the belt-tightening prescriptions demanded by international creditors in return for granting Portugal a bailout of 78 billion euros, about $83 billion, in 2011.As he won plaudits from creditors, however, tax increases and spending cuts helped widen income disparities. Tax breaks for foreign investors under Mr. Passos Coelho’s government also revitalized pockets of the economy, while other parts felt left behind.Last month, investors pushed up Portugal’s borrowing costs after it became clear that the October election had left the country without any solid government leadership.But this week — despite concerns that Mr. Costa would introduce more radical anti-austerity policies — investors apparently welcomed the conclusion of Portugal’s political crisis. On Wednesday, Portugal managed to auction almost €1 billion in 10-year bonds.Mr. Costa insisted on Thursday that Portugal would continue to meet the deficit and debt targets agreed with Brussels.He was also forced to make some pledges to Mr. Cavaco Silva to win his recent endorsement, including keeping a tight budget. Such pledges, according to analysts, will make it difficult for Mr. Costa to also meet the expectations of the Communists and other more left-wing supporters.“The fragility of the alliance between left-wing parties does not bode well for the stability of a Socialist administration,” said Antonio Barroso, an analyst at Teneo Intelligence in London, in a research note issued Monday.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement