AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew Higgins and James KanterBRUSSELS — Belgian officials on Thursday reduced their assessment of the threats facing Brussels, five days after saying that the risk of a Paris-style terrorist attack was “serious and imminent,” a warning that paralyzed the capital.The decision to lower the threat level back to 3, from the highest level, 4, was made by the government’s Coordinating Unit for Threat Analysis. The government announced on Monday that it would keep Brussels at level 4, the highest possible, until next Monday.The authorities did not immediately explain what prompted the change in the assessment, but the country’s National Security Council was scheduled to meet Thursday evening in Brussels.Prime Minister Charles Michel said at a news conference on Thursday evening that the lowering of the alert level “means the character of an attack is no longer imminent.” He said the “situation remains serious.”Mr. Michel declined to explain the thinking behind the decision, but Luc Verheyden, who was deputy director of the threat analysis unit from 2006 to 2010, said the change indicated that the authorities were no longer aware of a particular, precise plot.The elevated alert had put Brussels in a state of virtual lockdown — with schools, museums, government offices, public transportation and markets all closed — and exposed the highly fragmented system of governance in Belgium, which has hampered efforts to crack down on terrorism.Even before the threat level was lowered, some elements of normalcy had returned — schools and transit were reopened on Wednesday, for example — though the city remained jittery, its streets patrolled by heavily armed soldiers and armored military vehicles.The president of the Brussels region, Rudi Vervoort, cautioned that while the lowering of the threat level was “good news,” the crisis was far from over. “It is not the end, just the beginning,” he said Thursday evening.On Thursday, the Grand Mosque in Brussels was evacuated, and a hazardous-materials crew sent in, after an envelope with a suspicious white powder was found, raising fears of an anthrax attack like those in the United States in 2001. The powder turned out to be harmless.The Belgian authorities continue to search for Salah Abdeslam, who is believed to have fled after participating in the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks, and for Mohamed Abrini, who they say was seen with Mr. Abdeslam at a gas station northeast of Paris two days before the attacks.On Thursday, as part of their investigation into the Paris attacks, Belgian authorities searched two houses in the eastern city of Verviers, while a judicial tribunal extended for one month the detention of two men who were arrested on Saturday.Anxiety about terrorist attacks has spread to the Netherlands.The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, told reporters in The Hague on Wednesday that the European Union should do more to stop terrorists posing as refugees and “get the border under control between Turkey and Greece.”Many of the attacks were just minutes apart.Two of the Paris attackers are believed to have entered Greece on Oct. 3 by posing as Syrian migrants. Their actual identities have not been disclosed.Mainstream European leaders like Mr. Rutte face pressure from populist politicians who have seized on the attacks in Paris as a further sign that the European Union — hobbling from a long financial crisis that nearly sank the euro and its limited ability to counter a resurgent Russia — is crumbling amid its accumulating challenges.Mr. Rutte dismissed the stance of Geert Wilders, a Dutch lawmaker who is leader of the anti-Islam, far-right Party for Freedom, who in a recent Op-Ed essay for The New York Times criticized Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany for a policy of welcoming migrants.“Ms. Merkel was responsible for what happened in Paris?” Mr. Rutte said. “No, it’s crazy.”On Sunday, Mr. Rutte and leaders of 27 other European Union member countries will meet in Brussels with Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.The goal of the meeting is to push Mr. Erdogan to stem the flow of refugees entering Europe in exchange for about 3 billion euros in humanitarian aid, but talks have repeatedly stalled amid mutual distrust and Turkey’s insistence on using the crisis to speed up talks on membership of the European Union and to obtain visa-free travel for its mostly Muslim population.Asked about the vulnerability of the Netherlands to a Paris-style attack, Mr. Rutte said his country had taken steps in recent years to improve community policing and to improve the availability of jobs for newcomers. He also pointed to the popularity of a Dutch politician, of Moroccan descent, Mayor Ahmed Aboutaleb of Rotterdam, as a sign of diminishing discrimination.“I always tell Dutch people I cannot guarantee that nothing will happen,” said Mr. Rutte. “I can only guarantee that I will do everything to prevent it,” he said.Andrew Higgins reported from Brussels, and James Kanter from The Hague. Kimiko De Freytas-Tamura contributed reporting from Brussels.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement