By CHRIS BUCKLEYNOV. 26, 2015
BEIJING —  The Chinese government confirmed that it had detained two dissidents who had been living in Thailand and had been given United Nations recognition as refugees, a state-run newspaper reported on Thursday.The Thai police handed the two Chinese men, Jiang Yefei and Dong Guanping, to the Chinese police this month, although the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees had arranged for their resettlement to another country, human rights groups said last week.Until Thursday, the Chinese government had been muted about the case, and the circumstances of the men were unclear. But Chinese public security officials told Procuratorial Daily, an official newspaper for legal affairs, that Mr. Jiang and Mr. Dong had been detained on illegal migration charges.“Based on a cooperative mechanism between Chinese and Thai police, the Thai police followed the law and handed the two men over to the Chinese police on Nov. 13,” the report said, citing the public security authorities.AdvertisementThe men had confessed to wrongdoing, the report said. It made no mention of whether the men had access to lawyers or independent legal advice.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chinese government’s confirmation that it had worked with Thailand to secure the return of the men is likely to harden criticism from rights groups and Western governments who have accused Beijing of taking increasingly aggressive steps to stop citizens fleeing China, and to spirit them back if they do.AdvertisementLast month, the Chinese police worked with forces in a border town in Myanmar to secure the return of the teenage son of a detained Chinese human rights lawyer who fled after he was blocked from leaving China on a student visa. Two men accompanying the boy were also detained. In July, Thailand sent back to China about 100 members of the Uighur ethnic minority who had fled there, prompting criticism from advocates and the United Nations refugee agency.Before he went to Thailand in 2008, Mr. Jiang had been twice detained by the Chinese police for criticizing the government’s handling of an immense earthquake that year in his home province, Sichuan, in the southwest.Mr. Dong, from Zhengzhou, a city in central China, went to Thailand in September. He had been jailed from 2001 to 2004 on charges of “inciting subversion of state power” and detained for several months beginning in 2014 for publicly commemorating people killed during the military crackdown on pro-democracy protests across China in 1989.But according to the Chinese police, both men were common crime suspects. Officials have accused them of organizing other Chinese people to leave the country illegally through an overland route into Thailand.Thailand is ruled by a military government that took power last year. On Tuesday, its prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, said his government was applying the law when it sent Mr. Jiang and Mr. Dong back to China, Reuters reported. “They violated immigration law and after checking, we found that there was an arrest warrant from the source country,” Mr. Prayuth said, according to Reuters.Both men had permission to resettle in Canada, where their families flew last week after they were sent back to China.Adam Wu contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: China Says It Has Detained 2 Dissidents Sent Back by Thailand.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.