By STEPHEN CASTLE and ALISON SMALENOV. 26, 2015
LONDON —  The diplomatic push by President François Hollande of France to rally allies in the fight against the Islamic State since the Paris terror attacks has begun to stir European capitals, with leaders in both Britain and Germany taking tentative steps to test the level of support at home for a more robust military engagement in Iraq and Syria.After a session with President Obama in Washington on Tuesday, Mr. Hollande flew to Moscow on Thursday to meet with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, continuing his campaign to bridge tensions and forge a common alliance against the Islamic State, which France blames for the attacks in Paris two weeks ago that left 130 people dead.Having also met with Mr. Hollande this week, Britain’s prime minister, David Cameron, on Thursday described the Islamic State, also known as ISIL, as a “grave danger” as he sought to persuade wavering lawmakers to authorize airstrikes in Syria. “Every day we fail to act is a day when ISIL can grow stronger and more plots can be undertaken,” Mr. Cameron told Parliament. “That is why all the advice I have received — the military advice, the diplomatic advice and the security advice — all says, yes, that the risks of inaction are greater.”Germany, too, while still sensitive when it comes to military deployment abroad, has reacted swiftly to the request from France, its closest European ally, to do more against the Islamic State. After meetings of top ministers, and pending parliamentary approval, the Germans will offer Tornado warplanes for surveillance, plus satellite intelligence, a frigate and perhaps airborne refueling, government sources told the German media.AdvertisementIn Moscow, Mr. Hollande said that the two had agreed to three basic steps. France and its allies would share intelligence with Russia, further coordinate strikes against Islamic State targets in order to “raise their effectiveness,” and concentrate attacks on mainly ISIS infrastructure rather than other groups.AdvertisementYet the two presidents also made clear that there was still no consensus on one grand coalition, and that the Russian effort would remain separate.The two leaders remained sharply divided on the question of the fate of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, however. The French president said he had no role in Syria’s future, while Mr. Putin said he and his army were an important ally in the fight against the Islamic State.Each of France’s allies remains hesitant to enter the messy Syrian conflict, the dangers of which became apparent this week when Turkish forces shot down a Russian warplane near the Syrian border. American officials have indicated that they would like European nations to do more in the fight, and that differences with Russia over Mr. Assad remain a barrier to a broad alliance.But the Paris attacks, and Mr. Hollande’s diplomatic appeals, now seem to be chipping away at some of the reluctance in Europe.In Germany, the defense minister, Ursula von der Leyen, announced on Wednesday that up to 650 German soldiers would go to Mali to free up French forces from there, and that their current training and equipping of Kurdish pesh merga forces in northern Iraq would be expanded when the parliamentary mandate comes up for renewal in January.Mr. Cameron now believes that since the Paris attacks he can win approval to ratchet up British military engagement, but also knows that many lawmakers remain skeptical about an extended bombing campaign. The attack in Paris “could have been in London. If ISIL had their way, it would be in London,” Mr. Cameron told Parliament.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Mr. Cameron received some significant support from senior deputies during a parliamentary debate on Thursday, he also faced tough questioning about which forces could be used to take and hold territory.Mr. Cameron, who has ruled out the use of British troops, said that there are “around 70,000 Syrian opposition fighters, principally of the Free Syrian Army, who do not belong to extremist groups, and with whom we can coordinate attacks on ISIL.” Julian Lewis, chairman of the defense select committee, described the assertion as “a revelation to me.”AdvertisementA former Conservative cabinet minister, Peter Lilley, asked for an assurance that “the Free Syrian Army actually exists rather than is a label that we apply to a ragbag group of clans and tribal forces with no coherent force.”At present, Britain’s air campaign against the Islamic State is limited to Iraq because of a parliamentary vote in 2013, which rejected the idea of bombing Syria, denting Mr. Cameron’s authority in the process. Because of that rebuff, Mr. Cameron will not risk another vote until he is sure he will win. His decision will come down to parliamentary arithmetic. British politicians know that voters are cautious about military entanglements in the Middle East because of the legacy of conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.Yet Mr. Cameron’s supporters point out that in 2013, the proposal rejected by British lawmakers was to attack the forces of the Syrian president, Mr. Assad.Now the question is whether to attack the Islamic State, and Mr. Cameron has long argued that it makes little sense to limit attacks to Iraq when the group does not recognize the frontier.On Thursday he argued that bombing in Syria was legally justified as self-defense, and suggested that it would not increase the risk of retaliatory terror attacks significantly, since Britain “is already in the top tier of countries that ISIL is targeting.”Though some experts doubt that British involvement would matter much militarily, Mr. Cameron argued that Britain could deploy Brimstone — a precision missile system which, he said, “even the Americans do not have” — as well as Raptor, a reconnaissance airborne pod for Tornado aircraft.Since the 2013 vote, the composition of the British Parliament has altered after a general election in May in which Mr. Cameron’s Conservative Party won a full majority, allowing it to govern without its former coalition ally, the Liberal Democrats.The opposition Labour Party has also changed leaders, electing Jeremy Corbyn, a left-wing politician who opposes airstrikes in Syria. He acknowledged the threat to Britain from the Islamic State, but on Thursday wrote in a letter to his lawmakers that Mr. Cameron had not set out a coherent strategy or explained what “credible and acceptable ground forces” could retake and hold territory from the group.Stephen Castle reported from London, and Alison Smale from Berlin. Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from Moscow.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: France Pushes Allies to Weigh ISIS Action.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »