AdvertisementSupported by7 PhotosView Slide Show ›Georgina Goodwin/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesBy Jeffrey GettlemanNAIROBI, Kenya — Remember the poor. Respect the youth. Protect the unborn.That was Pope Francis’ message on Thursday to hundreds of thousands of Kenyans who gathered for a rain-soaked Mass, their open umbrellas spread tip to tip, their feet sinking into the mud.Some had been waiting since dawn in a huge waterlogged field in central Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, and few left disappointed.“There is something different about him,” said Lucy Namu, a government chemist and a resolute Catholic. “He is bringing a new hope, forgiveness, mercy, the sense everyone is welcome.”The pope was busy on his second day in Africa. He met with religious leaders and told them that interfaith dialogue was not optional but “essential, something which our world, wounded by conflict and division, increasingly needs.” He joked with nuns and priests at a Catholic school, saying that everyone was a sinner, “first me, then you,” and as he left he said, “Please don’t forget to pray for me, because I need it.”He spoke passionately about environment degradation, ivory poaching and diamond smuggling, saying a cry is “rising up from humanity and the very bowels of the earth itself, a cry that needs to be heard by the international community.”This is his first official trip to Africa, and he arrives at a time when the African wing of the Roman Catholic Church is growing more powerful by the day, with African bishops and cardinals increasingly influencing the overall direction of the church, and Catholicism continuing to spread across the continent.It is not purely because of the appeal of the religion. In many poor areas in Africa, the church has stepped in where government has failed, winning converts by running schools, hospitals and too many kinds of aid programs to count.At every place Francis has visited in Nairobi, his first stop on a five-day, three-nation tour, the crowds have been enormous. People have stood outside for hours, their wet shirts sticking to their backs, holding up cellphones whose batteries were about to die for one last shot of the passing pontiff. Francis has made a statement of humility by traveling around town not in a sleek Mercedes sedan or fancy four-by-four, as many Kenyan officials do, but in a little gray Honda. Many Kenyans have said their politicians could learn a thing or two.So far Francis has steered clear of hot-button issues, not talking directly about contraception or same-sex marriage, but stressing the importance of the family and the need to protect the “innocent unborn.” One person at the meeting of religious leaders said he was surprised by how subdued the 78-year-old pontiff seemed. “After all I read about him, I was expecting this little ball of energy to fill the room with his energy and aura, but that wasn’t the case,” said the person, who did not want to be identified because of the delicate nature of talking about the pope. “He seemed terribly, terribly tired.”But, the person added, when he had the chance to meet Francis at the end of the meeting: “It was different. He was very warm, he made eye contact, you could see a sparkle.”More than any recent pope, Francis has cast himself as a champion of the poor. On Friday, he plans to walk the muddy footpaths of one of Nairobi’s harshest slums, Kangemi.After visiting the slum and holding a few other meetings, Francis will fly to Uganda and then to the Central African Republic, an extremely poor nation in the midst of a religious war in which Christians and Muslims have brutally slaughtered each other.At the Mass on Thursday morning, he arrived in his popemobile, waving from behind a protective plastic covering while a squad of Kenyan security agents jogged behind him, in jacket and tie, their faces slicked with rain and sweat. A Kenyan government spokesman said 400,000 people attended the Mass at the University of Nairobi and in nearby parks where large video screens were set up. One Kenyan television station reported that scores of eager worshipers had been injured in a push for space.The Mass was dominated by Catholic rituals, such as the pope sipping from a large golden chalice, but it had an unmistakably Kenyan flair. Priests banged on giant bongo drums with their bare hands and even Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta, an observant Catholic, was getting into the music and bobbing his head to the beat as he waited for the pope’s homily.The pope finished his message with a Swahili touch. “Mungu ibariki Kenya!” he said. “God bless Kenya!”Advertisement