By CHOE SANG-HUNNOV. 26, 2015
Negotiators for North and South Korea met Thursday at their border in an attempt to lay the groundwork for higher-level talks aimed at easing tensions on the divided peninsula.SEOUL, South Korea — North and South Korea have agreed to resume high-level talks next month to discuss easing tensions and improving relations on the divided Korean Peninsula, South Korean officials said Friday.The talks, to be headed by a vice minister from each side, will take place in Kaesong, a North Korean city near the border with South Korea, on Dec. 11, a statement from the South’s Unification Ministry said. The delegates will meet inside the joint factory complex the two Koreas have been running in Kaesong since 2004.The agreement, forged by negotiators from both sides who met at the border on Thursday, provided another indication that the Koreas were working toward a thaw in their relations, which have been strained for years by North Korea’s nuclear weapons development program and armed provocations, and the South’s retaliatory sanctions.In August, the Koreas agreed to resume high-level discussions as part of a deal that ended weeks of escalating tensions, set off by the wounding of two South Korean border guards by land mines. The South, which accused the North of planting the mines, responded by broadcasting propaganda across the border, and the Koreas, which never signed a peace treaty to formally end the Korean War, briefly appeared to be on the verge of armed conflict.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, negotiators met at the border village of Panmunjom to follow up on the August deal, haggling late into the night over who would represent their respective governments at higher-level talks and what issues would be on the agenda.AdvertisementIn the end, they abandoned their governments’ earlier agreement to hold talks in Seoul, South Korea’s capital, or Pyongyang, the North’s capital, instead choosing the less significant site of Kaesong. They also settled for vice ministers as the top delegates, despite expectations among analysts for a ministerial-level dialogue.AdvertisementThe shortcomings reflected both sides’ “lack of will for dialogue and flexibility,” said Cheong Seong-chang, a senior analyst at the Sejong Institute in South Korea.The two Koreas held their last vice-ministerial talks in February 2014. The dialogue was followed by family reunions in which hundreds of older Koreans separated during the Korean War were allowed to meet for the first time in more than six decades.North and South Korea held another round of family reunions last month at a North Korean resort, as part of the August deal. Such reunions are considered an important barometer for improving relations on the divided peninsula.A version of this article appears in print on November 27, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; North and South Korea Agree to Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.