By NICK CUMMING-BRUCENOV. 27, 2015
GENEVA — Only days before Pope Francis is scheduled to visit the Central African Republic, the United Nations warned on Friday that a resurgence of violence in the conflict-torn nation has driven tens of thousands of people from their homes and increasingly threatens the delivery of humanitarian aid to the impoverished population.Outbreaks of violence since September have killed scores of people, destroyed hundreds of houses and forced more than 70,000 people to flee their homes, the United Nations refugee agency said.The surge reversed a trend in the first nine months of the year, when people who had fled earlier clashes between mainly Christian and Muslim militias were returning to towns and villages. The total number of people uprooted by the conflict is around 447,000, the refugee agency said.In the camp for the displaced beside the runway of the airport in the capital, Bangui, where the pope is expected to land this weekend, the number of people seeking refuge from the violence had dwindled to around 11,000 in August. But it has since climbed to 19,000, a spokeswoman for the United Nations high commissioner for refugees told reporters in Geneva.AdvertisementStill, the situation calmed in recent days as residents of Bangui and other towns prepared for Francis’s arrival, hanging out banners of welcome for a visitor they hope can help bridge the sectarian divide, said the spokeswoman, Dalia al-Achi. “There is a lot of excitement from the people, regardless of their religion,” she said. Huge banners welcoming Pope Francis are draped from buildings in towns across the country. “People are really hoping it will help the reconciliation process,” she said.AdvertisementThe bloodshed and lawlessness are raising concerns about the country’s ability to hold a referendum on a new Constitution planned for Dec. 11 and the presidential and legislative assembly elections that were scheduled to take place in October but were put off by fighting until Dec. 27.The United Nations brought in 300 additional troops this month to strengthen its 12,000-member peacekeeping force in the country ahead of the elections. But it appears stretched by spreading violence by armed groups that international aid workers say control half the country and are gaining access to heavier weapons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The main difference between the present violence and the sectarian carnage that plunged the Central African Republic into crisis at the end of 2013 is that armed gangs are increasingly targeting international aid agencies, hampering delivery of critically needed food and medical care, Ms. Achi said.Looters have attacked the offices of at least 10 international agencies, including the World Food Program, the Save the Children Fund and the International Organization for Migration, she said.The rampant violence was worsening the already dire humanitarian plight of much of the population. The United Nations children’s agency, Unicef, says that more than a million children urgently need humanitarian aid and that more than 40 percent of children under the age of 5 are “chronically malnourished.”“People are not only dying because of violence, they are dying because of malnutrition, because they can’t get to health clinics or because there isn’t any health care service,” Ms. Achi said.Much of the international aid for the nation is carried by road from Cameroon, but deliveries have suffered from strikes by truck drivers protesting the lack of security on the road. Sporadic attacks by armed groups along the way in recent weeks have resulted in the deaths of several drivers, she said.“This road is our lifeline and on several occasions it has been cut,” Ms. Achi said.A version of this article appears in print on November 28, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Africa; Central African Republic: Violence Is Rising, U.N. Agency Warns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.