By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 28, 2015
ANKARA, Turkey —  President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia approved sanctions against Turkey on Saturday in the aftermath of its downing of a Russian warplane last week.A decree signed by Mr. Putin and published on the Kremlin’s website on Saturday came hours after President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey voiced regret over the episode, saying that his country was “truly saddened” by the jet’s downing and wished it had not occurred.The decree includes a ban on some goods and forbids extensions of labor contracts for Turks working in Russia as of Jan. 1. It does not specify what goods are to be banned, but it also calls for ending chartered flights from Russia to Turkey and for Russian tourism companies to stop selling vacation packages that would include a stay in Turkey.Mr. Putin’s decree also calls for ending visa-free travel between Russia and Turkey, while ordering tighter control over Turkish air carriers in Russia “for security reasons.”AdvertisementMr. Erdogan’s expression of regret on Saturday was the first after Turkish F-16 jets shot down the Russian craft on Tuesday on the grounds that it had violated Turkey’s airspace despite repeated warnings to change course.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are truly saddened by this incident,” he said. “We wish it hadn’t happened as such, but unfortunately such a thing has happened. I hope that something like this doesn’t occur again.”But Mr. Erdogan also defended Turkey’s action and criticized Russia for its military operations in Syria.AdvertisementRussia has restricted tourist travel to Turkey, left Turkish trucks stranded at the border, confiscated large quantities of Turkish food imports and started preparing a raft of broader economic sanctions.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Russia Places Sanctions on Turkey .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.