By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 28, 2015
CAIRO —  A drive-by shooting killed four Egyptian police officers near a historic site on the outskirts of Cairo on Saturday, and a military helicopter crashed as a result of a “sudden technical failure” northeast of the capital, officials said.Masked gunmen on a motorcycle fired on a security checkpoint near Saqqara, said a police official, Maj. Gen. Khaled Shalaby. The area is the site of the 4,600-year-old Step Pyramid. No one immediately claimed responsibility for the attack.The helicopter that crashed was on a reconnaissance mission northeast of Cairo in Ismailia Province, the military said in a statement. It said crew members were injured, without specifying the number hurt or the severity of the injuries.Egypt has been battling a growing insurgency in the northern Sinai Peninsula led by a local affiliate of the Islamic State group, which has mainly attacked soldiers and police officers there, but has also claimed attacks elsewhere in Egypt.AdvertisementThe militant group claimed responsibility for the crash of a Russian passenger plane in Sinai last month, saying it had smuggled a bomb aboard the airliner. Russia said the plane was downed by a bomb and suspended flights to Egypt. Egypt has not commented on the cause of the crash, saying an investigation is still underway.At the same time, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi is moving ahead with the construction of a side channel for the Suez Canal, the latest step in a multiyear effort to expand the crucial waterway and promote investment.AdvertisementThe militant attacks increased after Mr. Sisi led the military overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi in 2013 and began a sweeping crackdown on Mr. Morsi’s Islamist supporters. The government has struggled to combat the Sinai-based insurgency while trying to jump-start the economy after years of unrest.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: 4 Egyptian Police Officers Killed Near Cairo in Drive-By Shooting.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.