AdvertisementSupported byBy Josh Kron and Jeffrey GettlemanNAMUGONGO, Uganda — On the very spot where some of this nation’s first Christians were burned to death for adhering to their beliefs, Pope Francis offered a Mass for hundreds of thousands of Ugandans on Saturday.He spoke in solemn tones about how “worldly pleasures and earthly power do not bring lasting joy,” and he urged people to “reach out to those in need” and “build a more just society.”The crowd in front of him seemed to stretch to the horizon. All types of people were there: Catholics and Anglicans, taxi drivers and presidential hopefuls, clergy members, police officers, babies carried on backs and tiny children in tiny suits. Vendors worked through the lines, wads of Ugandan shillings in their hands, doing an excellent business selling clocks, fans, T-shirts and visors — all emblazoned with the pope’s face.The Namugongo shrines, just outside the capital, Kampala, are dedicated to the 19th century Anglican and Catholic converts in Uganda who were burned, speared and tortured by a local king after they refused to renounce their Christian beliefs. Twenty-two Catholic martyrs here were canonized by Pope Paul VI in 1964. Inside the halls, vivid sculptural displays depict the gruesome killings: one man tied at the ankles being dragged away, another splayed across a tree as a figure above him wields an ax. Before celebrating the Mass, Francis paused to bow his head in front of the shrines.Christianity in Uganda did not just survive. It flourished. Today, about 85 percent of Ugandans are Christian, with Roman Catholics accounting for half that amount. But the Pentecostal church has been growing fast, along with some very conservative religious beliefs.Western gay-rights supporters have accused some American evangelical Christian groups of promoting anti-gay sentiment in Uganda. Politicians in Uganda made worldwide news in 2009 when they proposed executing gay people. That measure was never put into law, partly because of intense international pressure, but last year, President Yoweri Museveni signed a bill imposing harsh sentences for homosexual acts, including life imprisonment in some cases. That law, however, was later struck down by a Ugandan court. Gay activists here said the legislation had created a dangerous culture of homophobia and in 2011, one  of the most outspoken gay Ugandans  was beaten to death with a hammer.The pope is not expected to directly address issues of gay rights in Uganda. It is not even clear where Francis stands. In the past, he has said, “If someone is gay and he searches for the Lord and has good will, who am I to judge?” But during his visit to the United States in September, he met with a county clerk in Kentucky who refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples.Frank Mugisha, executive director of Sexual Minorities Uganda, said the lack of public discussion about the country’s persecution of gays was disappointing, but he tried to remain optimistic that the pope had talked about it in private meetings. “If nothing comes out, it’s not him as a person, it’s the Vatican or the Catholic Church, that says you can’t talk about homosexuality in Uganda,” Mr. Mugisha said. “In his heart, I think it is something he would have loved to say.”In the past few weeks, Uganda has been scrambling to prepare for this visit. In one neighborhood, where brothels are open for business and drinkers and gamblers gather, a huge picture of Francis now hangs above the intersection. Pickup trucks ferried dozens of new streetlamps throughout the capital, and cleaners hosed down roads to get rid of the dust that Ugandans live with every day.Uganda is the middle stop on Francis’ first official trip to Africa. He spent the first part in Kenya, and on Sunday he is scheduled to head to the Central African Republic, which is in the midst of a deadly conflict between Christians and Muslims.Uganda has been affected by religious violence, too, in the form of terrorist attacks claimed by the Shabab, a militant Islamist group. Scores of people were killed in bombings in 2010 that were seen as acts of revenge against Ugandan troops who have been the backbone of an African peacekeeping force in Somalia battling the Shabab.Throughout this trip, the pope has stuck to his signature themes of concern for the poor and the need for greater dialogue between the adherents of different religions. Many Ugandans, though, want the pope to address the need for political and social change. Uganda has been led by Mr. Museveni for nearly 30 years, and he is running for re-election next year. Mr. Museveni, 71, has been steadily tightening his grip, detractors say, arresting opponents and intimidating others from speaking out.“You know, there’s no good thing about seeing an old man ruling us for so long,” said Jackline Apio, 28, a Protestant and a mother of three. She did not hold out much hope that Francis would broach contentious issues.“I think he’s not going to talk about politics,” Ms. Apio said. “You know, he’s a religious man.”Josh Kron reported from Namugongo, Uganda, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Nairobi, Kenya.Advertisement