By CEYLAN YEGINSUNOV. 28, 2015
ISTANBUL —  A prominent Kurdish lawyer and a Turkish police officer were killed on Saturday when clashes erupted after he spoke at a news conference in Turkey’s volatile southeast.The lawyer, Tahir Elci, the president of the Diyarbakir Bar Association, and the police officer were shot by gunmen who opened fire at security forces from a car in the southeastern district of Sur, said the interior minister, Efkan Ala. Another police officer was seriously wounded.No group immediately claimed responsibility, and there were conflicting reports about the intent of the gunmen.The Diyarbakir Bar Association said in a Twitter message that Mr. Elci had been assassinated.The pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party, or H.D.P., also condemned the attack as a “planned assassination.”Advertisement“In the place left by Tahir Elci, thousands more Tahir Elcis will carry on the work in the struggle for law and justice,” the party said in a written statement, which also called on people to “raise their voices” to protest the killing.AdvertisementLater on Saturday, hundreds of protesters marched in Istanbul, chanting “shoulder to shoulder against fascism.” The police fired tear gas and water cannons to disperse them.A video clip posted on the website of the privately owned Dogan news agency showed gunmen hiding behind the minaret of a mosque and firing on Mr. Elci and a group of activists. At least 11 people were wounded in the attack, according to initial reports.The semiofficial Anadolu Agency said that Kurdish militants from the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or P.K.K., had singled out Mr. Elci and a group of lawyers during clashes that broke out between the militants and Turkish security forces after the news conference.Kurdish activists denied that claim and said that Mr. Elci had become a target after he was charged last month with supporting Kurdish rebels.Violence has surged in the restive southeast since July, with the renewal of an old conflict between Kurdish militants and the Turkish state that has claimed nearly 40,000 lives since the 1980s.“We do not want arms, clashes, operations in this area, which has hosted numerous civilizations,” Mr. Elci said Saturday in the news conference before the attack.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Recep Tayyip Erdogan confirmed the reports of Mr. Elci’s death on Saturday and said the attack showed that Turkey was right to pursue its fight against terrorism.Mr. Elci, an outspoken activist who has argued many cases before the European Court of Human Rights, was arrested last month after being charged with terrorist propaganda for saying during a live news program that the P.K.K was not a terrorist organization.AdvertisementHis remarks prompted an outcry from Turkish nationalists, and a Turkish prosecutor said he could be sentenced to more than seven years in prison if convicted. Mr. Elci had been released from detention, pending the opening of this trial.After he was charged, Mr. Elci said that he had received hundreds of death threats from Turkish nationalists.“This is just a part of the job,” said Mr. Elci this month. “I’m not afraid, but I know that I am now in danger.”“I’ve been getting death threats on a daily basis,” he said at the time. “It’s quite worrying.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Prominent Kurdish Lawyer Is Killed in Southeast Turkey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.