AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Neil MacFarquharMOSCOW — Russia has a new Enemy No. 1.His name is Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey, or as the TV news program hosted by the Kremlin’s main ideologue described him on Sunday night, “an unrestrained and deceitful man hooked on cheap oil from the barbaric caliphate” — referring to the Islamic State.Not long ago, Mr. Erdogan earned about the warmest accolade possible from President Vladimir V. Putin. He described the Turkish president as “a strong man,” willing to stand up to the West. That was then.Ever since the Turkish Air Force shot down a Russian warplane last week that Turkey accused of violating its airspace, Mr. Putin has been calling Mr. Erdogan a back stabber. Mr. Erdogan has not taken on Mr. Putin directly, but even as he has softened his tone, he has refused to apologize for the downing of the fighter jet. And a pro-government Turkish newspaper recently ran a headline saying “Putin tries to deceive the world with his lies,” a reference to Moscow’s actions in the war in Syria.The animosity between Russia and Turkey has been growing for years because they back different sides in Syria’s civil war, with Russia intervening to buttress the government of President Bashar al-Assad, an Alawi Shiite, and Turkey backing the Sunni majority and pushing for Mr. Assad to leave office.But in the wake of the warplane’s downing, the two men’s personal styles — including an unwillingness to compromise — are further inflaming the tensions.Those resentments now threaten to at least prolong the bloody, intractable conflict in Syria, and have raised fears that NATO could be dragged in if the conflict between Russia and Turkey escalates.“The problem is that you have two presidents who are both highly status conscious and both high-risk players,” said Ivan Krastev, a political scientist who is chairman of the Center for Liberal Strategies in Sofia, Bulgaria. “Not looking weak is something very important for both Putin and Erdogan. Neither knows how to retreat, nor apologize. In that way they are like twins.”Both men are often described as combative, uncompromising, nationalistic and authoritarian. Mr. Putin changed jobs to keep running his country, switching between the post of prime minister and president; Mr. Erdogan has done the same and wants to revamp the Turkish Constitution to give more powers to the presidency.Both are trying to restore luster to the empires that were lost in World War I — Czarist Russia and the Ottoman Empire. One is sometimes derisively likened to a czar, and the other a sultan. Both nurse a sense of historical grievance that the West does not fully accept them.The two leaders profess to respect the rule of law but are widely criticized for ignoring it when it threatens their reach. They have unleashed the courts or the tax authorities to silence criticism from big business and opposition media.Mr. Putin is well known for cracking down on his opposition. Mr. Erdogan is building his own reputation for harsh treatment; scores of people have been investigated on charges of insulting the president and several foreign journalists have been deported.Both tend to blame external, global conspiracies for failures.Or as the Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny wrote on his blog last week: “They both talk foreign policy nonsense to distract citizens from internal problems. Both use imperial ambitions, imperial rhetoric to strengthen their personal power and personal enrichment. Both hate social and news media. Both call the West their enemy and appeal to traditional values, while they both are immoral.”They also enjoy soaring popularity ratings at home, which gives them a sense of impunity. The two men are such mirror images of each other, in fact, analysts said, that they are unlikely to be able to resolve the dispute over the plane without outside mediation.“They do not trust each other,” Mr. Krastev said. “There is too much ambition on both sides.”Mr. Putin has demanded a public apology for the downing of the military jet and compensation from the Turkish leadership. The extent of Mr. Putin’s pique is perhaps best reflected by the repeated accusations on Russian state television that Mr. Erdogan’s son is deeply involved in the black market trade in oil extracted by the Islamic State, the terrorist group that has taken over parts of Iraq and Syria — and whose Egyptian affiliate recently took responsibility for downing a Russian passenger jet in Sinai.Mr. Erdogan strongly denied the allegations. “They are lies; they are slander. We have never, never had this kind of commercial relationship with any terror organization,” Mr. Erdogan said in an interview with France 24 last week. “They have to prove it, and if they can, Tayyip Erdogan will leave office.”Still, Mr. Erdogan did seem to be trying to dial back after first demanding that Russia apologize over what Turkey said was a violation of its airspace, and direct military confrontation seems unlikely. By the weekend, he said, “We are truly saddened by this incident.”“In his own way he is trying to apologize, but I don’t think Putin is receptive,” said Asli Aydintasbas, a Turkish fellow with the European Council on Foreign Relations.Or as Dmitry Kiselyev, the Kremlin ideologue, said pointedly Sunday night, “The hotline has been switched off.” In the hourlong news program, which was devoted almost entirely to bashing Turkey, he added, “Has Erdogan lost his marbles?”It was not always thus. A year ago the two leaders seemed born allies as they agreed that Russia would invest in a major gas pipeline, known as the Turkish Stream, that would pump Russian gas through Turkey to Europe as an alternative to the one across the Balkans that the European Union had opposed. Indeed, the two leaders pledged to more than triple their roughly $30 billion annual trade to $100 billion dollars by 2020.The fact that Mr. Erdogan openly boasted about the project at a time when the West was calling for wider sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine crisis prompted Mr. Putin to call him a “strong man.”Right after the Russian military jet was shot down, Turkish trucks began to back up at the Russian border, as the government food watchdog suddenly discovered problems with the produce that it had praised a year ago as exceptional. It is not clear whether the Turkish Stream and other major projects will be affected by planned sanctions.It is also unclear if the two leaders will try to work out their differences this week. Both are due in Paris on Monday for the global climate change conference. Mr. Erdogan said that he had called the Kremlin to suggest that they meet on the sidelines to help defuse the crisis. Mr. Putin’s only public response so far was a decree issued late Saturday night ordering up a list of vaguely defined economic sanctions against Turkey.In the end, some analysts say, a continued confrontation with Turkey, hot or cold, could work to Mr. Putin’s advantage, possibly speeding his goal of lifting Western sanctions imposed after his country’s annexation of Crimea from Ukraine. Replacing Moscow’s heated anti-Western criticism with a new target might improve Russia’s estranged ties with the West.“If you are the military chieftain and there is no way to switch back to electoral legitimacy, you need enemies,” said Nicolai Petrov, a political scientist at the Higher School of Economics. “Turkey is the best candidate.”Ceylan Yeginsu contributed reporting from Istanbul.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.videoAdvertisement