AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris Stein and Somini SenguptaBANGUI, Central African Republic — Pope Francis made his first visit to a war zone on Sunday, landing in the capital of this divided and destitute country in a bid to support efforts at peace and reconciliation.The toll of the two-year sectarian war was on stark display just a few yards from where the pope’s plane landed, with thousands of people spread out in a makeshift camp on the edge of the runway.Christian and Muslim militias have clashed here since 2013, when a rebel group overthrew the president, François Bozizé, and split the mineral-rich but impoverished country of 4.6 million along religious lines. New fighting in the past two months alone has killed 100 people, according to Human Rights Watch, and even the pope’s visit did not entirely stanch the violence.It did not deter Francis. He traveled along Bangui’s potholed roads, waving from his partly open popemobile as heavily armed United Nations peacekeepers tried to hold back the crowds cheering from the sidelines and a helicopter circled overhead.In his first Mass here, on Sunday night, he said: “To all those who unjustly use weapons in this world, I appeal: Put down your weapons of death; arm yourselves instead with justice, love, mercy and authentic guarantees of peace,” according to The Associated Press.The stop in the Central African Republic was the last and most closely watched leg of the pope’s three-country tour of Africa. After speaking out against corruption and inequality in Kenya and Uganda, Francis arrived here as the country tries fitfully to recover from two years of bruising, bitter conflict. A referendum on a new constitution is scheduled in two weeks, followed by presidential and parliamentary elections that are due to take place, in phases, from late December and February.Francis’ visit is not expected to deliver a salve to a country torn by grisly killings and kidnappings that began as a political uprising that overthrew the president in early 2013 but quickly degenerated into sectarian strife, with Muslim rebels clashing with Christian militia.France, the former colonial power, sent in more than 1,000 troops to quell the fighting, but some of the soldiers were soon embroiled in accusations of child sexual abuse. The United Nations deployed peacekeepers in 2014, but their efforts have made them targets. Some of them have also been accused of sexual abuse and exploitation.The pope’s visit is a crucial test for the United Nations, as it prepares for the elections amid the prospect of greater violence. The United Nations envoy, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, halfjokingly reported one miracle already: A suitable popemobile had been located — no small feat for Bangui.And while he did not expect the visit to persuade the militias suddenly to make peace, he hoped the pope’s message of reconciliation would help the country sideline the spoilers — “to tell them,” as he put it, “that they’re not part of the history this country is now writing.”The United Nations mission in the country, with approximately 12,000 soldiers and police officers, has reinforced its ranks in anticipation of the pope’s visit and the elections due to begin soon.Stella Kanissa, a Roman Catholic, was one of many Bangui residents waiting at a traffic circle for the pope’s arrival on Sunday. “We’re a people that have known a lot of suffering,” she said. “Today, we’re hoping that the pope will be here in C.A.R. to bring us a message of peace and reconciliation.”The challenge was visible nearby. A mob briefly formed around a man who was accused of being a Muslim. It turned out he was not, and he was allowed to leave.The pope visited a Catholic church that has been turned into a displaced persons camp, where children held up placards that read “peace,” “justice,” and “reconciliation.” He made his way down the line of children, speaking to many individually.“What those children have written, love, forgiveness, peace, understanding, those are the most important words for people to live together again in Central Africa,” Francis said to those gathered.He also met with the country’s acting president, Catherine Samba-Panza, in the presidential palace. According to The Associated Press, she asked for forgiveness “in the name of the entire governing class of this country and also in the name of all those who have contributed in some way to its descent into hell.”On Monday, the pope is scheduled to speak to both Muslims and Christians in a tense area called PK-5, where Muslims have taken shelter since the violence exploded.PK-5 has been barricaded for months with the remains of burnt-out vehicles, with rival militias controlling who enters and exits. At one end of the boulevard, members of a mostly Christian militia sit and watch traffic pass, grenades in their hands. At the other end are members of the Muslim militia, known as the Seleka, ready to attack those who have wandered into their territory. Between them is a neutral zone of bullet-riddled homes and businesses.There, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga said, came what he called a second miracle on Sunday. After welcoming the pope, Christian and Muslim leaders went to the neighborhood locking arms and chanting slogans for peace.Chris Stein reported from Bangui, and Somini Sengupta from New York.Advertisement