By HERVÉ TAOKO and DIONNE SEARCEYNOV. 29, 2015
OUAGADOUGOU, Burkina Faso —  A country that has endured months of upheaval that ousted one president and nearly toppled an interim government cast ballots Sunday in national elections intended to steady its shaky political environment.Voters flocked to polling places, eager to have a say in what were the most democratic and competitive elections in decades, choosing from among more than a dozen candidates for president. The voters had reason to celebrate: After 27 years under the same president, they finally had a chance to choose from a wide slate.“I hope that the elections will end well and that true democracy settles in my country,” said Leon Kagoné, who was at a polling place in Ouagadougou, the capital, thrilled to be voting for the first time.Sunday’s highly competitive race could be a turning point for Burkina Faso, a small, landlocked nation that is suffering economically in part because of the political turmoil. Though front-runners have emerged in the presidential race, the victor was far from certain and officials said a clear outcome might not be known until Monday. Voter will also select a new Parliament.Advertisement“The people of Burkina Faso have decided to take control of their destiny,” said Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, a former prime minister and one of the leading presidential candidates. “Participatory democracy must be allowed and the people should have their say.”Thousands of observers put in place to monitor for irregularities amid heavy voter turnout reported a few logistical problems — some polling places opened late and without enough ballots and proper equipment. Tensions rose in the Karpala neighborhood in Ouagadougou as people lined up since 6 a.m. were not allowed to vote until later in the morning. Yet for the most part, voting went smoothly, and peacefully.Advertisement“Choose and decide now, and your choices will initiate an era of freedom, democracy and understanding in Burkina,” said Michel Kafando, the country’s interim president, as he cast a ballot in Ouagadougou.Bénéwendé Stanislas Sankara, a presidential candidate for the Union for Renaissance party, said the election itself was a victory. That was clear at the polling place, filled with exuberant voters, near his home in Yako in Passoré Province.“I defended this right for Burkinabé to vote freely and conscientiously for years,” Mr. Sankara said. “Together, we have achieved in this fight.”The nation had set up checkpoints on the peripheries of cities and sealed its borders for the elections. On Friday, security forces arrested 13 people on the border with Mali and seized weapons and bomb-making materials. It was unclear if the episode had anything to do with the elections. Mali has long been plagued by insurrection and bursts of Islamic extremism, most recently with the terrorist assault on a hotel in Bamako.The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, issued a statement Sunday calling on all national stakeholders in Burkina Faso to uphold their commitments to a peaceful and transparent vote.The last year has been a tumultuous one for Burkina Faso. President Blaise Compaoré was ousted after mass protests against his attempts to change the Constitution and prolong his time in office after he had already ruled for 27 years. Then in September, a security regiment that had guarded Mr. Compaoré staged a coup against the interim government that had been put in place. Elections for both the presidency and the Parliament had been scheduled for Oct. 11 but were delayed.AdvertisementThe coup, during which Amnesty International said 14 people were killed and more than 200 injured, fell apart after a week.A commission appointed to investigate the coup put the blame squarely on Brig. Gen. Gilbert Diendéré, the commander of the Presidential Security Regiment, known by its French initials, R.S.P., and formed under Mr. Compaoré. The regiment has been disbanded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Compaoré himself came to power decades ago in a coup.Political experts were optimistic about change in Burkina Faso but warned that any new government would have to give a voice to the military and to elements of the former government. Mr. Compaoré remains in exile.Many of Sunday’s presidential candidates once had ties to Mr. Compaoré, whose administration was marked by nepotism and corruption. Mr. Kaboré, for instance, split from Mr. Compaoré last year, before the uprising. Mr. Kaboré, who has the support of the nation’s business elite, is a longtime politician, serving in prominent posts in the National Assembly and in other positions.Another candidate is Zéphirin Diabré, a former official with the United Nations Development Program, who has the support of the international community. He has held several ministerial posts and in the late 1990s was a research fellow on a team of Harvard economists. He led the opposition to Mr. Compaoré’s move to extend his term.Others on the ballot included Mr. Sankara, an acolyte of Thomas Sankara, the Marxist former soldier who as president, from 1983 to 1987, changed the country’s name from Upper Volta (the two Sankaras are not related); and a lawyer, Tahirou Barry.A version of this article appears in print on November 30, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Eager Crowds Turn Out for Burkina Faso Vote.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.