By HERVÉ TAOKO and DIONNE SEARCEYNOV. 30, 2015
OUAGADOUGOU, Burkina Faso — A former prime minister who has served in several high-ranking government positions emerged early Tuesday as the winner of the presidential election here, the first time the nation has had a new leader in nearly three decades.The former prime minister, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, resoundingly won the vote in nearly 75 percent of precincts throughout the country and was declared the winner by the Independent National Electoral Commission.The election, which took place Sunday, represented the first free and competitive vote in Burkina Faso in decades. About three million people cast ballots, many of them celebrating as they crowded into polling stations to choose a leader after 27 years under President Blaise Compaoré.Supporters gathered at the headquarters of Mr. Kaboré’s party to watch results on a large-screen television. Several of Mr. Kaboré’s more than one dozen competitors, including Zéphirin Diabré, a leading contender, showed up to concede and congratulate him. Celebrations were expected to be cut short; a curfew for early Tuesday morning was in place.AdvertisementMr. Compaoré was toppled in October 2014 after protests against his attempts to change the nation’s Constitution and extend his time in office. A security regiment loyal to Mr. Compaoré staged a brief coup in September and has since been disbanded.AdvertisementMr. Kaboré, who heads the Movement of People for Progress, served in various posts under Mr. Compaoré. He and other members of the party split with Mr. Compaoré before the uprising, apparently fed up with his attempts to stay in office. Mr. Kaboré, who had the support of the nation’s business leaders, has a résumé that is almost entirely made up of political positions, including president of the national assembly, minister of state and special adviser to the president.Abdoulaye Mosse, the youth secretary for Mr. Kaboré’s political party, said the vote should serve as a rebuke to leaders who try to cling to power.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The transparent elections in Burkina are a victory over the forces of evil,” he said.Among Mr. Kaboré’s chief tasks will be to right a shaky economy for a nation that exports gold and cotton but has suffered from recent turmoil.Thousands of election observers were on hand. Some polling stations opened late and without proper materials, but for the most part Sunday’s vote went smoothly and peacefully, a major achievement for a nation where complaints about fraudulent elections had been rampant. The election was a source of national pride, and voters have high expectations for the winner.“I am especially proud that I know my voice, alongside thousands of that of other Burkinabe people, will help build democracy in our country,” said one voter, Djakaridja Savadogo.Even supporters of losing candidates were optimistic about the nation’s future.“I am very sad because we were beaten, but democracy triumphed and therefore I’m rejoicing,” Ariane Ouédraogo said. “The people of Burkina are the winners.”On Sunday, Mr. Kaboré also spoke of the historic nature of the election. “The people of Burkina Faso,” he said in an interview, “have decided to take control of their destiny.”Hervé Taoko reported from Ouagadougou, and Dionne Searcey from New York.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Burkina Faso Elects 1st New Leader in Decades.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.