By JANE PERLEZNOV. 30, 2015
SHANGHAI — Qin Yi was called the most beautiful woman in early Communist China. Now, at 93, as she sits in her apartment in the city where she appeared in more than three dozen movies, her pale complexion and dark eyes are still charming.Ms. Qin is the last surviving member of a group once known as the “four great actresses.” Their glamour onstage and on screen stirred audiences during the turmoil at the birth of modern China, nearly 70 years ago. When the Communists took over, these actresses concealed their affection for Ingrid Bergman and Bette Davis, tucked away their love of fashion and steered their careers toward movies that promoted proletarian values.The cinema was an important tool for the Communist Party as it strove to build a cohesive society, and as the sirens of the new leadership, the four women, often dressed in clean and pressed peasant clothes, played in heated anti-Japanese war movies and slightly implausible family melodramas. Their beauty dazzled audiences starved for distraction from hard times and made the propaganda about the new revolutionary society palatable.“The content was always designed to spread forward thinking,” Ms. Qin said as she recalled her starring roles in, among others, “Railway Guerrillas,” “Woman Basketball Player No. 5” and “Loyal Overseas Chinese.”The lives of the four actresses were outwardly romantic: Ms. Qin married China’s most famous actor of the postwar period, Jin Yan, known as the Rudolph Valentino of Shanghai. But beneath the glamour lay the chaos of wartime Shanghai and the intrigue of Chongqing, a city filled with spies and soldiers and run by the Nationalists. Then came the treacherous roller-coaster politics of the Mao Zedong era.AdvertisementShanghai has always considered itself the birthplace of Chinese cinema, starting with the silent movies of the 1920s that blossomed into the golden era of lavish productions of the 1930s.Now, on the outskirts of Shanghai, huge studios, some working in tandem with Hollywood, make multimillion-dollar blockbusters. People here take pride that the city is a relatively open place for moviemaking, new genre animation and the best film festivals, setting it apart from staid and political Beijing to the north.AdvertisementThe heady days of 1930s Shanghai movies were slowing down when Ms. Qin, still a teenager, escaped the city and settled in Chongqing, the wartime capital to the west.She slept in a tiny dormitory on a bamboo mattress on the floor with nine other girls, surviving on rice and soup. There, she met Zhang Ruifang, like her a fledgling actress, who had fled her bourgeois family in Beijing.Two other up-and-coming stars, Bai Yang and Shu Xiuwen, were also in Chongqing, leading a Communist playwright and polemicist, Xia Yan, who had taken up residence there, to call the group “the four great actresses.” In 1946, after the defeat of the Japanese, the four returned to Shanghai, a cosmopolitan city of grand buildings and sleek bars, great wealth and terrible poverty. Three years later, the city fell to the Communists.When Ms. Zhang had gotten to the city, she had styled herself after Ingrid Bergman, her favorite actress. Her second husband, Jin Shan, had served as a secret agent for the Communists in Chongqing.A photograph of the couple in 1943 shows Ms. Zhang in a well-cut black jacket with a heart-shaped silver pin on one lapel. Mr. Jin wears a tweed sport jacket, a shirt and tie, and a handkerchief in his pocket.Beneath her persona of old Shanghai elegance, however, Ms. Zhang was also an undercover Communist spy, said her grandson Zhu Feng, a movie director, in an interview here. The two found out about each other’s clandestine work when party members informed them after Mr. Jin’s marriage proposal, Mr. Zhu said.AdvertisementIn Chongqing, Ms. Zhang’s controller had been Zhou Enlai, who ran the Communist intelligence operation in the city and went on to become prime minister and his grandmother’s lifelong friend, Mr. Zhu said. (Mr. Zhou, considered the intellectual of the Communist Party leaders, later called Ms. Qin the beauty of China.)It was Mr. Jin, a bon vivant and denizen of bars, though, who was an especially skilled spy, maintaining good relations with the Nationalists of Chiang Kai-shek in Shanghai, Mr. Zhu said. Through Mr. Jin’s connections, a gang lord allied with the Nationalists married the couple in Shanghai.In postwar Communist Shanghai, Ms. Qin and Ms. Zhang began making movies again. “Railway Guerrillas” called for the cast to go on location to Wuxi, a city west of Shanghai.“It was summer and extremely hot, but we had to wear quilted jackets, as the scenes were supposed to be in winter,” Ms. Qin said. “The actors had to learn how to climb on and jump off a moving train. I learned to play the widow of a railway official killed by the Japanese. Then she cooked and spied for the guerrillas. It was 35 degrees Celsius,” about 95 degrees Fahrenheit, “and I had heat rash all over my neck.”In 1963, Ms. Zhang won a national best actress award, and a grainy black-and-white image of her in Mr. Zhu’s collection of photographs shows Mr. Zhou grinning broadly as his protégée accepts the prize.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But again, not all was as it seemed. By then, Ms. Zhang’s marriage had broken up after Mr. Zhou’s goddaughter, Sun Weishi, a theater director, had an affair with Mr. Jin, Mr. Zhu said. She later married him.Then, during the Cultural Revolution, the lives of the four actresses fell apart.Artistic figures who had been favored by Mao and Mr. Zhou were singled out for vilification. Mao’s wife, Jiang Qing, who had been a theater star in Shanghai, appears to have taken special pleasure in excoriating the women she had known in the 1930s.Ms. Zhang, perhaps because of her Communist pedigree from World War II, suffered the least. Although imprisoned, she was released after a year or two, Mr. Zhu said. For Ms. Qin, there were six years of hard labor away from Shanghai.AdvertisementRed Guards denounced Shu Xiuwen, who died of heart failure during the period. Bai Yang, who was deemed by the Red Guards to be even more bourgeois than her colleagues, was kept in solitary confinement in a dark cell for five years. (She died in 1996.)Ms. Zhang and Ms. Qin resumed acting after the Cultural Revolution, but it was never quite the same. Even now, though, awards for lifetime achievement keep arriving for Ms. Qin, who flew to Los Angeles several months ago to be honored by a Chinese American association.Five years before Ms. Zhang died in 2012, Xi Jinping, now the president of China, visited her when he was the Communist Party secretary for Shanghai, in a sign of the deep respect the party held for her.“Their careers flourished and then withered during the tumultuous Mao era,” Ying Zhu, a professor who studies cinema at the College of Staten Island, said of the four actresses. They believed in the Communist Party and immersed themselves in all their roles, she said, noting, “Given the little choice we had, many were indeed memorable roles that I grew up repeatedly watching.”For the government, the actresses were vital, said Hao Jian, a professor at the Beijing Film Academy. “Movies have been a very significant part of the red propaganda machine. The Chinese filmmakers like to quote Lenin as saying, ‘You must remember always that of all the arts, the most important for us is the cinema.’ ”An article on Dec. 1 about Qin Yi, 93, the only survivor of a group of Chinese women once known as the “four great actresses,” whose glamour on stage and screen stirred audiences during the turmoil at the birth of modern China, misidentified the position the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, held in Shanghai in 2007, when he visited Zhang Ruifang, another of the four actresses, a sign of the deep respect the Communist Party had for the women. He was the party secretary in Shanghai, not the mayor. The article also misstated the artistic background of Jiang Qing, a wife of Mao Zedong, who excoriated the “four great actresses” during the Cultural Revolution. Ms. Jiang, then known as Madame Mao, had been a Shanghai theater star, not an opera star.Yufan Huang contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on December 1, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Glamour Still Shines in the Last of China’s ‘Four Great Actresses’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.