AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew E. Kramer, Helene Cooper and Ceylan YeginsuMOSCOW — Russia signaled deepening intervention Monday in the Syria war, strongly hinting that its “volunteer” ground forces would soon be fighting there, as NATO officials warned the Kremlin after a Russian warplane invaded Turkey’s airspace.Russia called the air incursion an innocent mistake because of foul weather, a claim that the Americans rejected.The unfolding developments reflected a dangerous new superpower entanglement in the war, which has left a quarter-million people dead and half the country’s population displaced since it began more than four years ago.The addition of Russia ground forces to the assaults already underway by Russian warplanes particularly threatens to undermine Turkey’s Syria policy, which aims for the establishment of a “safe zone” along the Turkish border where some Syrian refugees could return in the future.Russia and Iran have moved aggressively in the past few weeks to strengthen their ally, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, to fight a range of insurgents. The assistance has raised the possibility of a new ground offensive by Mr. Assad’s forces against groups of fighters including those backed by the United States, Turkey and their allies, who want Mr. Assad to leave power.Russia’s escalation has come as the Americans and Turks are intensifying their aerial attacks to pressure the Islamic State extremist group, which has seized swaths of Syria and Iraq.The Americans see the Islamic State as the most dangerous immediate threat. They view Russia’s moves as prolonging and possibly widening the war, even if Russian forces also are hitting Islamic State targets as the Russians assert.Russia’s intervention already appears to have subverted diplomatic efforts to halt the war, led by a special United Nations envoy, Staffan de Mistura. Forty-one rebel factions that oppose Mr. Assad said in a statement on Monday that Russia’s “brutal occupation has cut the road to any political solution.”Criticism of Russia also flowed from Saudi Arabia, which strongly opposes Mr. Assad and his Alawite sect, a Shiite Muslim offshoot. Reuters reported that 53 Saudi clerics issued a statement on Monday calling Russia’s immersion in the conflict a Christian crusade against Sunni Muslims, the majority sect in Syria.Russia has openly acknowledged sending warplanes and other military equipment to bolster Mr. Assad. Although President Vladimir V. Putin has ruled out sending ground forces to Syria, a senior Kremlin defense official told Russian news agencies on Monday that military veterans who had fought in eastern Ukraine were likely to start showing up as “volunteer” ground forces in Syria.The statement by the official, Adm. Vladimir Komoyedov, head of the armed forces committee in Russia’s Parliament, asserted that such volunteers “cannot be stopped.”Admiral Komoyedov’s statement was the strongest signal yet of Russia’s intentions. It echoed Russia’s use of shadowy ground forces in other conflicts over the past year — most notably its seizure of Crimea from Ukraine in March 2014 and its assistance to insurgents in eastern Ukraine.The Russian warplane’s incursion into Turkish airspace, which happened on Saturday, elicited a blunt protest from Turkey, a NATO member. Turkish fighter jets intercepted the warplane.NATO officials issued a warning to Russia about the incursion on Monday, and the United States began what officials called urgent consultations with Turkey.Russia’s actions were “an unacceptable violation” of Turkish airspace, NATO’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said after meeting with the Turkish foreign minister, Feridun Sinirlioglu. Mr. Stoltenberg added, “Russia’s actions are not contributing to the security and stability of the region.”Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter, speaking in Madrid during a news conference with his Spanish counterpart, said that American officials were conferring with Turkish counterparts over next steps.The Russian military spokesman, Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, told a briefing in Moscow that the Russian jet’s pilot had mistakenly entered Turkish airspace in bad weather as the aircraft approached a base near Latakia, Syria, about 18 miles from the Turkish border.A senior American official rejected the claim. “The pilot would have known where they were,” said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the official was not authorized to comment by name. “I’m not a fighter pilot, but there was no way this was accidental. The notion that this was accidental is far-fetched.”Derek Chollet, a former senior Pentagon official and now an adviser at the German Marshall Fund, a Washington-based policy research group, said there was “no question” that the Russians were testing NATO with the incursion.“But what’s so worrisome is that this is affiliated with military operations in Syria,” Mr. Chollet said. “Each time they’ve tested, NATO has responded with fighters escorting them out of airspace. The worry is that this will lead to an unintended confrontation.”The episode in Turkish airspace occurred in the Hatay region, when a Russian warplane “exited Turkish airspace into Syria after being intercepted by two F-16s from the Turkish Air Force, which was conducting patrols in the region,” the Turkish Foreign Ministry said in a statement.The ministry summoned Russia’s ambassador to Ankara, demanded that the violation not happen again, and said that Russia would be responsible for any further escalation, Turkish officials said.“The steps Russia is taking and the bombing campaign in Syria are quite unacceptable to Turkey,” President Recep Tayyip Erdogan told reporters at Istanbul’s airport on Sunday. “Unfortunately, Russia is making a grave mistake.”Turkey and Russia enjoy a strong relationship, but those relations have soured in recent months because of deep differences over Syria and the stalling of a pipeline project to carry Russian gas to Turkey.When asked whether the episode would have a negative impact on Turkish-Russian relations, the Russian presidential press officer, Dmitri S. Peskov, told reporters on Monday that bilateral relations with Turkey were “comprehensive and have a very solid foundation in terms of mutually profitable relations.”Mr. Erdogan, however, warned on Sunday that the strikes would “isolate Russia in the region.”Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey said on Monday that Moscow had described its violation of Turkey’s airspace as a “mistake,” and said that it would not happen again.“I should express it clearly, even if it is Syria, Russia or any other country’s planes, Turkey’s military engagement rules are valid for all,” Mr. Davutoglu said in a television interview.In the air war, Russia has been gradually ramping up its activities. After a military spokesman said over the weekend that airstrikes in Syria would intensify, the Russian Air Force announced that it had flown 25 sorties overnight Sunday to Monday, after flying an average of 20 a day in the first four days of bombing.“Our airstrikes will not only continue, but grow in intensity,” the head of the operations in the general staff, Andrei Kartapolov, said at a briefing in Moscow on Saturday. Russia is targeting command points, ammunition and explosives depots, communications nodes, bomb factories and terrorist training camps.The Russian air offensive turned on Monday to the oasis town of Tadmur and the adjacent ruins of Palmyra, a symbolically important subject of global outrage over the Islamic State’s policy of destroying and vandalizing archaeological treasures. A spokesman for the Russian operation, Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, said at a briefing in Moscow that a pair of Su-25 fighter bombers had attacked a concentration of Islamic State armored vehicles near Tadmur, destroying 20 tanks, three rocket launchers and an ammunition depot. The strike was among the 15 daytime sorties by Russian pilots on Monday, he said.Russia’s incursion into Turkish airspace represents a challenge to President Obama and NATO almost as much as it represents one to Mr. Erdogan, Obama administration officials said. “I think it is fair to say that Vladimir Putin is trying to sticking his toe in, trying to see what the temperature is,” one administration official said on Monday. He added that Mr. Putin “would be wise not to continue to test the waters.”Publicly though, the administration’s line was far tamer, reflecting in part Mr. Obama’s own determination not to get into a proxy war with Russia in Syria. The president said as much during a news conference on Friday, and aides insisted that his chosen course, so far, was what they described as the more sensible and measured one.And so, administration officials who have spoken publicly about Russia’s actions in Syria have limited themselves to warning the Russians that they are headed into dangerous territory, without making overt threats.“Their approach, which is to support Assad rather than a political transition, while meanwhile fighting opponents of Assad, is doomed to fail,” Mr. Carter said at the news conference in Madrid on Monday. He said that the United States and its allies wanted to fight the Islamic State and to work toward a political transition in which Mr. Assad would leave office. “Russia seems to believe you can have one without the other,” Mr. Carter said. “Right now they’re way off track.”Andrew E. Kramer reported from Moscow, Helene Cooper from Madrid, and Ceylan Yeginsu from Istanbul. Reporting was contributed by Anne Barnard and Maher Samaan from Beirut, and Rick Gladstone from New York.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement