By JODI RUDOREN and DIAA HADIDOCT. 5, 2015
Video shows the funeral of a young Palestinian man who was shot and killed during a clash with Israeli forces, and the further violence that followed.JERUSALEM —  The Israeli authorities announced Monday that five Palestinian members of the militant group Hamas had confessed to fatally shooting an Israeli couple in front of their four children last week, as the intensifying violence that that attack touched off stretched into a fifth day, with Israeli forces fatally shooting two Palestinian teenagers — one 13.“We will act with a very harsh hand against terror and also against incitement,” Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said in a televised statement praising the arrest of the Hamas members. “We will not give any rioter or any inciter immunity in any place, and so there are no limitations of the actions of the defense forces.”Both Mr. Netanyahu and President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority convened emergency meetings Monday night to discuss the deteriorating security situation. Neither the Israeli crackdown nor the Palestinian uprising showed signs of abating: The Palestinian Red Crescent Society reported some 500 injuries in recent days as clashes raged. Pathways through the West Bank and East Jerusalem were cut off by new Israeli roadblocks, as well as by burning tires and stones hurled by Palestinian youths.Wafa, the official Palestinian news agency, reported that Mr. Abbas told members of his military council and leaders of his security apparatuses to be wary of Israeli efforts to inflame the situation and drag the region into a new cycle of violence. Earlier, Ahmed Majdalani, a member of the Palestine Liberation Organization’s executive committee, said on Voice of Palestine radio, “Israel is continuing with its escalation based on the rule saying what cannot be taken by force will be achieved with more force.”AdvertisementFour Israelis and four Palestinians have been killed in the last five days, the latest being Abdulrahman Obeidallah, 13, a resident of the Aida refugee camp in Bethlehem, where Palestinian youths threw rocks at an Israeli base Monday afternoon. Two witnesses said the boy was not involved in the rioting, but standing outside a community center where he frequently went after school.Advertisement“Abdulrahman is innocent and was shot in cold blood,” said Ahed Amira, 19, a university student who volunteers at the center and said the boy had been standing outside “with his school uniform still on and his school bag on his back.”A classmate, Osaid Mohammad Abu Srour, also 13, said he heard two shots fired and “Abdulrahman fell down right next to me, and when I looked down at him, blood had filled his entire shirt.”“None of us were throwing stones. We were just watching the other kids throw rocks at the army base,” Osaid said. “I guess that is what we get for being Palestinian and under occupation. I am just very lucky and thankful to God that the bullet didn’t hit me instead.”Earlier Monday, Israeli forces fatally shot Huthayfa Soliman, 18, in the stomach, according to a Palestinian medic, at a checkpoint near the northern West Bank city of Tulkarm. The Israeli military said he and others had thrown firebombs, firecrackers and rocks at Israeli soldiers.Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, a military spokesman, said that the shootings in Tulkarm and Aida would be investigated and that coordination with Palestinian security forces was “ongoing.”He said the four additional battalions deployed in the West Bank after Thursday night’s fatal shooting of the Israeli couple, Eitam and Naama Henkin, would remain in place “to contain potential hot spots and arrest people who could plan or carry out attacks.”Colonel Lerner added that soldiers had not seen “a substantial increase in the volume of participation” in Palestinian protests, but did “see more and more attempts to confront forces and a higher level of violence toward those forces and to civilians,” with firebombs and other weapons.AdvertisementThe main checkpoint from Ramallah to Jerusalem was clogged Monday as the military was more aggressive than usual, and an alternative exit was shut down by masked Palestinians who set up blazing barricades of tires and threw rocks and firebombs at soldiers. Palestinian drivers detoured to a twisty route through rural villages, where dark plumes hovered over a hill near an Israeli settlement, where another demonstration unfolded.In East Jerusalem, relatives of Nizar Qutri, 25, said he had been shot in the chest, apparently by Israeli civilians, and rushed to Maqasid Hospital, where a doctor later said his condition was stable. A clash erupted outside the hospital near midnight: Palestinians set an Israeli jeep aflame, and soldiers sprayed the gathering crowd with skunk water.Israel’s Army Radio also reported that hundreds of Palestinian citizens of Israel staged protests in five Israeli cities under the banner “the third intifada has started.”Israel’s security forces said the five Nablus men arrested in the Henkin murders had also been responsible for three other recent shootings in the West Bank. A news release said the cell had scouted the location earlier Thursday, and shot the couple from a vehicle first, then exited “and fired again from very close range.”One of the gunmen was accidentally shot in the hand during the attack and dropped his pistol, the authorities said. That weapon, and other forensic evidence, helped lead the authorities to the wounded gunman, who was being treated at a Nablus hospital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Palestinian leaders and advocates contrasted the swiftness of the arrests in the Henkin case with the failure, so far, to bring to justice the Jewish extremists who firebombed a home in the West Bank village of Duma on July 31, killing a Palestinian child and his parents.Mr. Netanyahu and other Israeli leaders had branded that attack terrorism and promised to vigilantly pursue those responsible, but no arrests have been announced. Israel has imposed a gag order on the investigation.Israel’s defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, was quoted last month as saying “we have assessments of who carried out the attacks,” but would not say clearly if anyone was in custody. Three Jewish zealots suspected of being involved in a shadowy network and previous arson attacks have been held since shortly after the Duma attack under administrative detention — without formal charges.Asked about the discrepancy in the pace of the Henkin and Duma cases, a senior Israeli security official said Monday night that the two “could not be compared.”Evidence at the scene of the Henkin shooting and other elements led to the speedy capture of the Henkin killers, the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity in line with his agency’s regulations; the Duma arson, he said, required “a different, more complex type of work.”Jodi Rudoren reported from Jerusalem, and Diaa Hadid from Jerusalem and Ramallah, West Bank. Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Bethlehem, West Bank; Jerusalem; and Ramallah; and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Five Hamas Members Confess in Killing of West Bank Settlers, Israel Says .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.