

      By KARIN ROBERTS

DEC. 2, 2015

Montenegro’s invitation to join NATO comes at a time of high tension between the alliance and Russia, most recently over a decision by Turkey, a NATO member, to shoot down a Russian warplane on the Turkey-Syria border.It also represents a reversal in Montenegro’s status from enemy to potential ally: In 1999, NATO warplanes bombed Montenegro and Serbia, joined at the time as a single country, in response to the killing of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, then a province of Serbia.AustriahungarySLOVENIAROMANIACROATIABOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINASERBIAAdriaticSeaMONTENEGROITALYkosovoPodgoricaALBANIA100 milesMontenegro, a Balkan country of close to 650,000 people on the Adriatic Sea, came into being as an independent country in 2006. Along with Serbia, it was one of the two states in the rump Yugoslavia left behind when that country broke apart in 1991.Since achieving statehood, Montenegro has extended its ties to Europe, joining the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. It has also applied to join the European Union, but has been told that it needs to make solid progress in eliminating corruption and organized crime, persistent problems in Montenegro and in other Balkan countries.A country about the same size as Connecticut, Montenegro has a military force more like that of an midsize city police department, with about 2,000 active-duty members in its army, navy and air force. Nevertheless, it sent 45 service members to Afghanistan as part of the NATO-led coalition fighting there, and participates in NATO and United Nations peacekeeping operations.The amount Montenegro spent on its military in 2014 was 1.7 percent of the country’s gross domestic product, which is below the benchmark of 2 percent set by NATO but higher than that of most other NATO members. Montenegro is well along in developing a market economy heavily dependent on tourism and the related service sector. The unemployment rate is 19.7 percent. The country ranks 31 out of 43 countries in the European region on the Heritage Foundation’s 2015 Index of Economic Freedom. It uses the euro, although it is not part of the eurozone.The country’s Adriatic coastline attracts thousands of tourists annually and is a favorite of wealthy Russians. Since 1999, about 85 percent of state-owned companies have been privatized, according to the C.I.A. World Factbook.Montenegro is seen by some scholars as a test case of NATO’s commitment to its “open door” policy toward prospective members. Given Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 and its complicating presence in the Syrian civil war, Western diplomats say that Montenegro’s joining NATO would show Russia that it cannot halt NATO expansion.Despite their leaders’ overtures toward the West, Montenegrins remain deeply split over membership in NATO. Ethnic Serbs, in particular, fiercely oppose membership. If it joins, Montenegro would be the 29th and youngest member of NATO.Advertisement