By ANDREA ZARATE and WILLIAM NEUMANDEC. 1, 2015
LIMA, Peru —  Lori Berenson, an American who has completed a 20-year sentence for aiding a rebel group that planned to take members of Peru’s Congress hostage, could be deported as early as Wednesday, a government official here said.Ms. Berenson said in an interview that she planned to return to the United States, where she will live for a time with her parents in New York City.She was jailed in November 1995 and imprisoned until 2010, when she was released on parole. Her sentence ended Sunday, and she has been waiting for the authorities to authorize her deportation so she can leave the country.“We are completing the paperwork so that she can return to her country,” said her lawyer, Aníbal Apari, a former member of the rebel group who met Ms. Berenson in prison and had a son with her.AdvertisementTheir son, who is 6 and was born in prison, will travel with Ms. Berenson to the United States.Ms. Berenson was accused of aiding the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, which was planning to storm the Congress and take hostages. She rented and lived in a house that the group used to store weapons and explosives and to plan the attack. And she was arrested after visiting Congress on the pretext of working as a journalist.In 2010, Simon Romero interviewed Lori Berenson who spent more than a decade in a Peruvian prison for collaborating with a Marxist terrorist group.Peru at the time was convulsed by political violence, in particular a lengthy war with a much larger guerrilla group known as the Shining Path.AdvertisementMs. Berenson was initially sentenced by a military court to life in prison for treason. But she was later granted a new trial in a civilian court and was given the 20-year sentence.Ms. Berenson has always denied knowing about the plot, but in 2010, she made a public apology as a condition of her parole.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Peruvian immigration official said Tuesday that Ms. Berenson could be deported as soon as Wednesday. The official, who requested anonymity to discuss the matter, said that the police would escort her to the airport.Ms. Berenson had a middle-class upbringing and attended LaGuardia High School in New York and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming involved in supporting leftist liberation movements in Latin America.She lived for a time in Central America before moving to Peru.Andrea Zarate reported from Lima, and William Neuman from Caracas, Venezuela.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: American Convicted in Peru Plot Plans to Return to U.S.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.