AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini SenguptaUNITED NATIONS — The world powers that met in Vienna for landmark talks aimed at ending the war in Syria could meet next in New York in mid-December, diplomats here said, as long as the latest tensions between Russia and Turkey can be calmed.The Vienna talks, as they are known, were hailed as an example of a new resolve to hammer out a peace deal for Syria, where a four-year war has killed an estimated 250,000 people, sent droves of refugees into Europe and helped spawn the Islamic State.“What more reason does one need?” asked a United Nations diplomat who did not want to be identified because of diplomatic protocols. He was one of three diplomats who said discussions were underway to organize the meeting in New York.The momentum for a peace deal was spurred by the Paris terrorist attacks in mid-November, but was threatened by Turkey’s downing of a Russian military jet last week. Diplomatic tensions followed, and President Obama has spoken with the leaders of both countries in Paris in recent days.“We have not seen this kind of momentum around the diplomatic and political track in a very long time, and arguably ever,” Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, said at a news conference Tuesday afternoon. She would not confirm if the meeting would take place in New York, saying only that the United States wanted the next round of talks to take place in December and that it was “open to a number of different venues, one of which is New York.”If the talks can take place, diplomats said, they will send an important signal that tensions between Russia and Turkey have not entirely quashed the newfound momentum.The parties at the table in two rounds of talks in Vienna in late October and mid-November included the United States and Russia, along with regional rivals Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as Turkey. All have deep stakes in the war.The next session is tentatively scheduled for Dec. 18. The talks could be accompanied by a nod from the United Nations Security Council, which is led this month by the United States.Several hurdles remain. The world powers that have agreed to talk have not yet agreed on the future of Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad. There is also the question of which Syrian opposition groups can be part of the peace process.Saudi Arabia is expected to assemble representatives from Syrian rebel groups in Riyadh in the coming days, with the goal of deciding on a list. The organizations on the list will not include the Islamic State or the Nusra Front, both considered banned terrorist groups. Other groups may also join the list of banned groups, as Moscow wants. Jordan is leading an effort to compile the list.The last Vienna meeting, in mid-November, set an ambitious deadline. It assigned the United Nations mediator, Staffan de Mistura, the task of organizing talks among the warring Syrian parties by Jan 1.Advertisement