By BEN HUBBARD and HWAIDA SAADDEC. 1, 2015
BEIRUT, Lebanon —  The Syrian branch of Al Qaeda on Tuesday released 16 Lebanese servicemen captured more than a year ago in a rare prisoner exchange brokered by Qatar that included a woman said to be a former wife of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the head of the Islamic State jihadist organization.Masked gunmen waving black flags and driving pickup trucks brought the servicemen, dressed in black and sporting long beards but apparently in good health, to the outskirts of the Lebanese town of Arsal, near the Syrian border, according to footage broadcast by Al Jazeera. After shaving and donning crisp uniforms, the men were driven to Beirut for an official celebration.The swap deal, which had fallen through before, only partially concluded a painful chapter in Lebanon’s struggle with the civil war in neighboring Syria, which has flooded the small country with refugees and increased tensions among its political factions.It also highlighted the power of Qatar, a tiny but fabulously wealthy Persian Gulf state that backs armed groups in Syria seeking to topple the government. This was the latest example of Qatar’s using its wealth and connections to Islamists and extremists in the Middle East to win the release of prisoners.AdvertisementThe servicemen, who included members of the Lebanese Army and its General Security force, were among a group captured in August 2014 during a joint attack on Arsal by militants from the Islamic State and the Syrian affiliate of Al Qaeda, the Nusra Front. Both groups took prisoners.AdvertisementEight of those captives were subsequently released. Two were killed in captivity by the Islamic State and two others by the Nusra Front. One other died of wounds sustained in the battle for the town.Tuesday’s swap freed only the remaining 16 captives held by the Nusra Front. They were exchanged for 25 prisoners held by Lebanon, including 17 women and their children, according to a statement by the Qatari Foreign Ministry.The Nusra Front also handed over the remains of one of the servicemen it had killed, Mohammad Hamiyeh.Nine Lebanese servicemen are believed to still be captives of the Islamic State, an enemy of the Nusra Front that split with Al Qaeda in 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Several released soldiers told television interviewers that they had generally been well treated by the Nusra Front, and they expressed hope that their colleagues held by the Islamic State would be released soon.The Lebanese and Qatari governments did not identify the prisoners Lebanon had released, but a Lebanese security official said on the condition of anonymity because of government protocol that Saja al-Dulaimi, believed by Lebanese officials to be a former wife of the Islamic State leader, was among those released. Ms. Dulaimi was arrested last year while trying to enter Lebanon with forged documents.At the time, Iraqi officials denied that she had been married to Mr. Baghdadi.In a brief interview with Al Jazeera, Ms. Dulaimi said that she and Mr. Baghdadi had been divorced for six or seven years and that she hoped to return to Beirut and then go to Turkey. The Lebanese news media also reported the release of the wife of a Nusra Front leader.The captives’ fates have transfixed Lebanon and fueled political wrangling at home amid a political stalemate that has left the country without a president for more than a year.In Beirut, the capital, where families of the captive servicemen had pitched tents and kept vigil to pressure the government to negotiate their release, citizens gathered to celebrate and welcome the freed men.Anne Barnard contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Lebanon Exchanges Prisoners With Qaeda Branch .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.