By MICHELLE INNISDEC. 2, 2015
Deputy Prime Minister Warren Truss of Australia said the Southern Hemisphere's summer months will offer better weather for searching for the lost Malaysia Airlines plane.SYDNEY, Australia —  Investigators have refined the possible flight path of a missing Malaysia Airlines jet using a set of probability tools that they say takes them closer to locating the jetliner in the southern Indian Ocean.The analysis, made public in a report on Thursday, emphasized a search area toward the southern end of the current search zone, which is a long strip of ocean known as the seventh arc, a remote area off the southwest coast of Western Australia.According to Martin Dolan, who is leading the Australian search team charged with finding the plane, investigators are on track.“We are searching in the right area,” Mr. Dolan, the commissioner of the Australian Transport Safety Bureau, said Thursday. “This work confirms it. So far, we have covered about half of our highest-priority area.”Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 disappeared on March 8, 2014, with 239 people aboard during an overnight flight to Beijing from Kuala Lumpur, the capital of Malaysia. Only one piece of debris, a wing part known as a flaperon, has been discovered. It washed ashore in July on the French island of Réunion in the western Indian Ocean.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Dolan said investigators had worked from two scenarios that pointed to a probable debris field in the southern Indian Ocean to the north along the seventh arc, and also to the south along the same arc. “The more northerly of those areas is no longer a priority,” he said. “All our attention is on an area to the south, but this remains a very large area.” The zone is close to 38,000 square miles.Australia’s deputy prime minister, Warren Truss, said at a news conference in Canberra that the report had been prepared for the bureau by the Australian Defense Science and Technology Group. “The key outcomes of this additional work validate what has happened so far,” Mr. Truss said.The report recalculated Inmarsat satellite communications data, aircraft dynamics, wind, air and atmospheric temperature, along with a re-examination of fuel consumption and engine efficiencies to map possible flight paths and then test their validity.The line that investigators say they believe to be the jetliner’s trajectory is thousands of miles off the southwest coast of Western Australia, where the ocean can be almost four miles deep.The seabed, which has been mapped for the first time, is marked by volcanoes, plateaus and ridges, all of which have made the underwater search using towed sonar devices and an autonomous underwater vehicle extremely difficult.The search area was defined about 10 days after the plane’s disappearance and was based on satellite signals that showed the jet, a Boeing 777, veered off its planned course less than an hour after takeoff from Kuala Lumpur. It stopped communicating with air traffic controllers, turned west across the Malay Peninsula and then south over the Indian Ocean, where investigators say it ran out of fuel and fell into the sea.The report noted it was unlikely that the plane had glided in a “controlled ditching scenario” onto the ocean’s surface.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Searchers Refine Possible Path of Lost Malaysian Jet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.