
Sinosphere By                     
 DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW
 
DEC. 2, 2015
BEIJING — What if “womanwomanwoman” were the English word for rape, defilement, adultery?That is roughly how the Chinese character “jian,” or 姦, translates, as it is made up of three characters for “woman,” 女.(In mainland China, the character 姦 was simplified to 奸 after the 1949 Communist revolution as an aid to literacy, but the three-woman version is still standard in Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and overseas Chinese communities, and widely recognized on the mainland.)Troubled by the word’s gender associations, curators made it the symbol of an art exhibition that had been scheduled to open in Beijing on Nov. 25, the United Nations’ International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women.The exhibition, “Jian, Rape: Gender Violence Cultural Codes,” was to have run until Dec. 10, Human Rights Day, signaling 16 days of global activism against gender violence with the hashtag #orangetheworld.AdvertisementThe exhibition was canceled.But curators, feminists and commentators say there is a pressing need for more awareness in China of the gender prejudices woven into the language.Advertisement“Why did one woman become three, and such a symbol of political and moral imagination and an object of enmity in traditional Chinese society and political theory?” asked Tong Yujie, the academic convener of the canceled exhibition, in an essay prepared for the show.As evidence, Ms. Tong offered examples from ancient Chinese history and political texts:• In the “Zuo Zhuan,” or “Commentary of Zuo,” dating from the fourth century B.C., “jian” is used to mean “evil”: “To cast away what is virtuous and give honor to what is evil is the greatest of calamities.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• In the “Guoyu,” or “Discourse of States,” from the same period, a “jian” is a traitor: “Rebels inside the country are scoundrels, while those outside the country are traitors.”Gender is written into all languages, but it is especially striking in Chinese because of the visual nature of the language, said David Moser, a linguist and the academic director of CET Beijing Chinese Studies at Capital Normal University.“In everyday language, how many Chinese speakers are aware that, in every set phrase with male-female gender reference, the male always comes first?” he said in an email.“A married couple is 一对夫妇, a husband and wife. Your parents are your 父母, father and mother, never 母父, or mother and father. Even a phrase like 男女老少, meaning everyone, literally ‘men, women, old and young,’ subconsciously reinforces a supposedly ‘natural’ hierarchy — men over women, old over young,” Mr. Moser said.In Chinese, tradition weighs heavily, with a language capable of great beauty and subtlety also offering enduring discrimination.“Reversing the order isn’t perceived as just a polarity flip in the interest of equality,” Mr. Moser said. “It would be simply perceived as ‘wrong,’ by most Chinese people.”Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »