
Sinosphere By                     
 DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW
 
DEC. 2, 2015
BEIJING — “It’s all so ‘jianghu,’  ” said the art historian Tong Yujie, after the cancellation last week of an art exhibition in Beijing on violence against women.“Jianghu,” or “rivers, lakes,” describes China’s swirling, muddled society, where intentions are often hidden and unknown factors determine events. Ms. Tong was the academic convener of the exhibition, “Jian, Rape: Gender Violence Cultural Codes,” and says she feels that that confusing mix is what led to its cancellation on Nov. 25, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women.Invitations had been sent for the 7 p.m. opening at Ginkgo Space, an art gallery. Chen Qingqing, an artist, brought a cloak covered in roses for her installation “Roses in the Dark Night.”But the doors remained shut.Ms. Chen displayed her gorgeous cloak outdoors in the bone-chilling cold, as a crowd gathered in disappointment. Xiao Lu, another artist, lighted cigarettes and stuck them in the snow.Advertisement“I didn’t have anything with me, but people had cigarettes. So I formed the characters ‘cold light,’ for hope,” Ms. Xiao said in an interview. “Because you have to have hope. This was such an unusual exhibition, the first time that women and men artists were equally represented in China. It was a real pity.”Ms. Tong and Ms. Xiao said they were unsure why the exhibition did not open. Some news reports suggested the government had banned the show, after the detentions in March of five feminists who planned to distribute leaflets and stickers protesting sexual harassment. Several participants said, however, that the gallery canceled the show, not the authorities.“Why would the government do that?” Ms. Tong asked. “It’s working on a law against domestic violence. It’s not against this topic.”Asked about the news reports, Wang Ping, the gallery manager, said, “It wasn’t such a big deal as that,” adding, “I don’t want to say too much.”The show was badly arranged, among other issues, Ms. Wang said. There were serious misunderstandings among the gallery, the curator, the sponsors and the artists, she said. “Promises were made to certain artists that could not be kept,” she said, declining to specify. There was sponsorship trouble, she said.Advertisement“From our point of view, we felt we’d provided the space out of the goodness of our hearts,” she said. “But in the end, it wasn’t in the public interest, and there were so many problems.”Some feminists blamed the male curator, Cui Guangxia, saying he had used the topic of violence against women to make broader political points — last year, Mr. Cui was detained for supporting Occupy Central, the democracy movement in Hong Kong — and tried to cram too much into a space that was originally to have shown just a dozen artists, angering the gallery.Large-scale art events need permission from the authorities, but Mr. Cui said he had not known that and had not applied.In an interview, he defended his work, saying he had not changed the direction of the show even as he expanded it to include 64 artists, half male and half female. “There were around 100 artworks,” he said. “And all were about feminism and gender violence.”Mr. Cui was quoted in some news reports as saying the reason for the cancellation was pressure from higher authorities. When asked about this, he was more ambiguous.“A few artists felt that the exhibition was a bit crowded, and the gallery was quite concerned that it was sensitive and risky,” he said. “But are those reasons to stop the show?”It was all very “jianghu.” The gallery tried quietly to shutter the event, but that backfired because of the news coverage. The feminists went along until the last minute with Mr. Cui’s evermore ambitious program, despite misgivings, because they wanted the show to open. The role of the authorities — if any — was unclear.And feminists mourned a missed opportunity.“It’s so rare for women’s art to be equally represented in shows here,” Ms. Xiao said.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.Vanessa Piao contributed research.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »