By SHUAIB ALMOSAWA and KAREEM FAHIMDEC. 2, 2015
SANA, Yemen —  Militants belonging to Al Qaeda’s local affiliate seized control of two towns in southern Yemen early Wednesday, including a provincial capital, in their latest move to take advantage of turmoil during the country’s civil war.Al Qaeda’s local affiliate already controls Al Mukalla, Yemen’s fifth largest city, on the southern coast, having captured it in the weeks after war erupted in March. On Wednesday, members of the militant group, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, routed rival militias in Abyan Province, storming the town of Jaar and consolidating their control of the province’s capital, Zinjibar, according to residents of Abyan, which is west of Al Mukalla.The militants have been able to operate with relative freedom during the war, which pits Yemen’s Houthi rebels, based in the north, against an Arab military coalition that is fighting to restore Yemen’s exiled government to power.The coalition, led by Saudi Arabia, has carried out thousands of airstrikes against the Houthis and sent ground forces to the battle. But the Arab armies have avoided attacking Al Qaeda, whose members have supported the fight against the Houthis.Supporting Yemen's deposed governmentSaudi ArabiaLeading a coalition of Sunni nations that includes Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan and Egypt. The country has also recruited Sudanese fighters for the campaign. United Arab EmiratesIn addition to sending its own special operations troops, the U.A.E. has sent more than 400 Colombian troops to Yemen who had been training in the Emirati desert. United StatesHas provided intelligence to help targeting for airstrikes, as well as refueling aircraft and other logistical support.      Against Yemen’s governmentHouthi rebelsThe Shiite group that pushed the Yemeni government out of Sana, the capital. IranAlthough Iran has not officially acknowledged its role in the conflict, it has provided military and financial support to the Houthis over the years. The United States has conducted several missile strikes using drones against Al Qaeda since the war started, though recent data by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, which tracks such strikes, said none were recorded in October and November.AdvertisementResidents said Al Qaeda advanced into Jaar in a hunt for rival militia leaders belonging to local groups known as the popular committees. The committees were formed in 2011 to provide security and beat back previous advances by Al Qaeda in Abyan Province. The Qaeda fighters, meeting little resistance on Wednesday, killed Ali al-Sayed, a popular committee leader, according to one of the residents, who lives about 10 miles from Jaar.AdvertisementThe militants withdrew the bulk of their forces, leaving a few members behind, and consolidated their control in Zinjibar, farther south, residents said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Zinjibar is roughly 20 miles from the port city of Aden, which serves as the headquarters of Yemen’s exiled government while the Houthis remain in control of Sana, the country’s capital. Yemen’s president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, recently returned to Aden from Saudi Arabia.Also on Wednesday, the medical aid group Doctors Without Borders said an airstrike by the Saudi-led coalition had hit one of the group’s mobile clinics in Taiz Province in the south, wounding at least seven people. The group said its medical staff had evacuated the clinic before the airstrike.The attack was the coalition’s second on a Doctors Without Borders medical facility in less than two months. In late October, coalition airstrikes destroyed a small hospital run by the group.Shuaib Almosawa reported from Sana, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Militants From Qaeda Affiliate Seize 2 Yemeni Towns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.