AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsMsgr. Richard Albert, a Bronx native who spent the last four decades in the West Indies helping Jamaicans escape grinding poverty and violence, died on Monday in Kingston, Jamaica. He was 69.The Roman Catholic archdiocese of Kingston announced his death without specifying a cause.That Monsignor Albert was assigned to Jamaica in the first place was more or less a mistake of geography: He was living in a Brooklyn rectory and about to be ordained as a Franciscan priest in 1976 when he applied for what he thought was an assignment in Jamaica, Queens.But he readily accepted the assignment when he learned that it was in the West Indies, and he rapidly became an outspoken religious figure there. Through his St. Patrick’s Foundation and the Stella Maris Foundation, both  in Jamaica, and other philanthropies, he established centers to provide food, education, health and child care, job training and services for drug addicts and people who are H.I.V.-positive. He created homes for older people and for people with leprosy.As an advocate for the poor, Monsignor Albert challenged the church hierarchy to join his crusade against corruption and injustice in Jamaica.In 2001, he received the Servitor Pacis Award from the Vatican’s Path to Peace Foundation. In 2004, he was awarded the $1 million Opus Prize, an annual humanitarian award established in 1994 through the nonprofit group Helping Hands for the Poor.Richard J. Albert was born in the Bronx on June 29, 1946, the son of Jerome Albert, a steamfitter whose father was a Jewish immigrant, and the former Margaret Kehoe.He is survived by a sister, Rita Mulvey.He was raised in Peekskill, N.Y. In 1960, he joined the Franciscan Friars of the Atonement in Garrison, N.Y., where he was ordained in 1965.He received a bachelor’s degree in philosophy and a bachelor of sacred theology degree from the Catholic University of America in Washington.Monsignor Albert spent his first years in St. Catherine parish in southeastern Jamaica. In 1979, he was installed with the Rev. Calvin Golding at the Church of Reconciliation in Jamaica, a joint Anglican-Roman Catholic parish. He also championed the poor from the pulpit of his middle-class Stella Maris parish in Kingston and on fund-raising visits to the United States.His cousin, the Rev. John P. Duffell, the pastor of the Church of the Blessed Sacrament in Manhattan, said that Monsignor Albert had considered being a college chaplain, but that he “fell in love with the people of Jamaica and with working with the poorest of the poor” and decided to remain a missionary, rejecting a transfer to London.“The challenge for the modern Christian is no matter what profession you are in, you have to stand shoulder to shoulder with the poor,” Monsignor Albert told The New York Times in 2001.“You can’t talk about meeting and talking with the Lord just in church,” he said. “You must bump into him, eat with him and cry with him in the poor. I keep telling the congregation, all that they have, they can’t keep to themselves. Besides, I never saw a Brink’s truck follow a hearse.”Advertisement