AdvertisementSupported byBy Elisabetta PovoledoVATICAN CITY — Major film premieres usually involve paparazzi, screaming fans and catty scrutiny of red carpet fashions, and often end with swag bags crammed with luxury goodies.But when the occasion is the premiere at the Vatican of a biopic about Pope Francis, expect a no-frills ceremony (save for a rare command performance by the Swiss Guard band) and goody bags filled with sandwiches, fruit and a can of tuna for refugees, the elderly and homeless people invited to the showing.All of the tickets at the premiere on Tuesday were reserved for the needy and the volunteers who care for them, said Msgr. Diego Ravelli, of the Office of Papal Charities, which put together the guest list for the world premiere of “Chiamatemi Francesco,” or “Call Me Francis,” a film about “the people’s pope,” as the tagline on one poster read.“The pope wanted to offer the lowly and the poor their rightful place of honor,” he said.They came in droves. Among them were people from refugee centers in Roman suburbs and some of the homeless people who wash in the Vatican’s public showers just a few steps from the colonnade that surrounds St. Peter’s Square.“Just being invited to be here, in the heart of the Vatican, made people happy,” said Daniela Pompei of the charitable Community of St. Egidio, which brought about 500 people, including some who were disabled and others who were members of the Roma, or Gypsy, community.Depicting what the director Daniele Luchetti described as the “salient moments” of the life of Jorge Mario Bergoglio before he became pope, the film opens with a flashback to 1960s Buenos Aires and a young Bergoglio sneaking a kiss with a girlfriend, a scene that prompted nervous titters from one group of young nuns. (The same group laughed when the future pope, still a Jesuit novice, was told by his superiors that he “prayed badly.”)The 90-minute movie focuses mostly on the difficult years when Argentina was under the dictatorship of Jorge Rafael Videla, a time of widespread human rights abuses and disappearances, when Father Bergoglio was the provincial superior of Argentina for the Jesuit order.“The pope passed through some hells, and even a purgatory or two, before getting to where he is now,” Mr. Luchetti said.Though Mr. Luchetti and the film’s production team repeatedly tried to contact the pope for guidance, he never responded.The director breathed a sigh of relief only after the film was seen by Msgr. Guillermo Karcher, a pontifical master of ceremonies and longtime Argentine associate of the pope’s who decreed that it was “truthful.”The film opens in 700 theaters throughout Italy on Thursday, an exceptionally high number for an Italian release. “Distributors believe in the film,” said Pietro Valsecchi, the producer of the movie, which cost 13 million euros, or nearly $14 million, to make.If audience reaction was anything to go by, the pope is as popular on film as he is in person. People applauded when Father Bergoglio helped save a Buenos Aires neighborhood from being torn down. They applauded whenever he said “Pray for me,” one of his catchphrases. They cheered when he was elected as pope and made his first appearance on the St. Peter’s balcony with the opening words “Brothers and sisters, good evening.”Mr. Valsecchi said he did not think the pope had seen the film yet. “I hope that if and when he does, he’ll react like someone looking at a photograph who says, ‘Hey, I don’t look that bad,’ ” he said.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement