AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven ErlangerLONDON — For the first time in six years, NATO on Wednesday invited a new member to join the military alliance, prompting a heated response from Russia and further underscoring escalating tensions between the Cold War adversaries.The invitation, to tiny Montenegro, came nine years after the Balkan nation began the process of accession. But the timing of the offer came at a particularly delicate moment as the West is trying to persuade Russia to link forces to help defeat the Islamic State and end the civil war in Syria.In Moscow, the offer to Montenegro — which has a population of about 600,000 and little military capacity — prompted fury and threats. Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said that a NATO expansion would be met with unspecified retaliatory measures from Russia.“The continuing expansion of NATO and NATO’s military infrastructure to the East, of course, cannot but lead to response actions from the East, namely the Russian side,” Mr. Peskov said.After attackers linked to the Islamic State killed 130 people in Paris on Nov. 13, President François Hollande of France flew to Washington and to Moscow in an effort to create a broader alliance against the extremist group. Mr. Hollande judged that the Paris attacks and the downing of a Russian civilian airliner over Egypt, also claimed by the Islamic State, had altered Russian calculations.Montenegro’s invitation to join NATO comes at a time of high tension between the alliance and Russia.But his effort has crumbled under these new tensions, which have accentuated the differing goals of the countries involved. On Tuesday, President Obama said no one should be “under any illusions” that Russia, which has made a priority of propping up President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, would shift its focus to attacking the Islamic State’s positions in Syria. On Wednesday, the British Parliament approved joining the United States and France in bombing Islamic State targets in Syria.After years in which Russia and NATO coexisted with relatively little overt rancor, diplomatic, economic and military strains have been building steadily. Russia and NATO have been at odds over Moscow’s annexation of Crimea and military involvement in eastern Ukraine, and over Russian fighter jets entering NATO airspace, especially in the Balkans and most recently over Turkey, a NATO member. Last week, the Turks shot down a Russian fighter entering Turkish airspace to bomb Turkmen tribesmen in Syria, raising questions about whether NATO could be drawn directly into a military conflict with Moscow in defense of Turkey.NATO no longer regards Russia as a “strategic partner” but as a country seeking to undermine the post-Cold War order and restore its sway over the old Soviet empire, prompting a degree of confrontation that is reminiscent of the Cold War in tone.Adm. Vladimir Komoyedov, chairman of the Duma’s defense committee, said, “They are ready to admit even the North Pole to NATO just for the sake of encircling Russia.” The invitation to Montenegro, he said, means that NATO “was and remains an adversary of Russia.”Secretary of State John Kerry, who was present when the invitation was made by the NATO secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, denied any such intentions, saying that the alliance “is not focused on Russia per se or anyone else.” He added that inviting Montenegro, which was eager to join, was “another step toward the full integration of Europe and toward the common defense.”The quandary for Washington and Europe is that any solution in Syria requires Russian participation and influence with Mr. Assad and the government in Damascus. But Washington, NATO and the European Union are not prepared to link progress on Syria to other issues, in particular any easing of sanctions imposed on Russia after its annexation of Crimea.Russia wants to bolster its position in the Middle East and has much less interest in attacking the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. Turkey is most concerned with blunting Kurdish aspirations toward independence, while Saudi Arabia and other Sunni-dominated Persian Gulf countries are most interested in defeating Mr. Assad and his Shiite allies, rather than attacking the Sunni Islamic State.The United States, for its part, wants Mr. Assad to leave power, but not necessarily to destroy his government, which would create further chaos and even more refugees and migrants — the issue that preoccupies most of the European members of NATO.“The problem with the Hollande effort had nothing to do with Montenegro or Turkey, but with the fact that the parties he’s trying to pull together don’t see the problem the same way,” said Ivo H. Daalder, a former United States ambassador to NATO and president of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.“Only for the United States, France, Britain and some Western allies is the problem predominantly ISIS. Hollande failed in Moscow not because of Turkey, but because Putin has no real interest in going after ISIS. Everybody thought everything would change on Nov. 13,” the day of the attacks in Paris, Mr. Daalder said. “But nothing has really changed.”While everyone wants to avoid Russia-NATO tensions, “There are lots of reasons for those tensions, like Ukraine, the Baltics and the Black Sea,” said Camille Grand, director of the Foundation for Strategic Research, a policy institution in Paris. “But that doesn’t necessarily mean we can’t reasonably work together on issues where we have at least overlapping interests.”Mr. Grand said that France believed it could work with Russia on Syria and that Europe could compartmentalize its other security issues with Moscow. “The issue is difficult to manage but doable perhaps so long as we avoid Putin’s effort to link everything, and NATO countries are clearly unprepared to go down that route,” he said. NATO’s supreme commander, Gen. Philip Breedlove, said on Wednesday that there was little chance that Russia would meet a year-end deadline for a peace deal in eastern Ukraine, saying the calmer situation there did not mean the end of the conflict was near. “Russia still supports its proxies in eastern Ukraine,” General Breedlove said. “It is not very likely that we can get everything we need in Minsk by the end of the year,” he added, referring to the 12-point peace deal signed in the capital of Belarus in February.Mr. Daalder, the former NATO ambassador, said that tying NATO membership offers to Russian responses would be fatal to the alliance. “Any overt linkage between what you do in NATO and with Russia in Syria has bad consequences,” he said. “You’d be saying that membership is not dependent on the NATO treaty but on what we want from Russia.”In any case, he said, the successful negotiation of a nuclear treaty with Iran with complete Russian participation, during a fierce confrontation over Ukraine, showed that business could be done if interests aligned.“If there is a cease-fire and movement in Syria, it won’t be because Russia wants to do anyone a favor, but because Russia judges that it is in its own interest,” he said. “We could have a confrontation over Ukraine yet cooperate on Iran, and the same should apply to Syria.”James Kanter contributed reporting from Brussels, Neil MacFarquhar from Moscow, and Alison Smale from Berlin.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement