The European edition of the New York Herald Tribune tracked the flight of Gemini-7, a spacecraft manned by Frank F. Borman and James A. Lovell Jr. that blasted into orbit on Dec. 4, 1965. When it returned nearly two weeks later, Gemini-7 had set 11 records for manned spaceflights. Below, a few clips from our archives, from before liftoff to the spacecraft’s return. Gemini-7 was launched into space on Dec. 4, 1965, from Cape Kennedy Air Force Station in Florida. British Pathé.Gemini Astronauts to Fly in Long JohnsWASHINGTON — There’s no other way to phrase it: the Gemini-7 astronauts plan to spend ten days in orbit in GI underwear. If their funnel-shaped Gemini spacecraft doesn’t spring a leak, Air Force Maj. Frank Borman and his co-pilot, Navy Lt. Cmdr. James Lovell, intend to doff their silver spacesuits and continue the 14-day flight in regulation Air Force long johns. (Read more) — Nov. 2, 1965Rocket Heads for New MarksHOUSTON – Gemini-7 astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell Jr., who blasted into orbit yesterday [Dec. 4] atop a Titan-2 rocket aiming for the world’s longest ride and first true rendezvous in space, today whirled peacefully toward their goals with only a few minor but intriguing problems. The space twins today got the “go” for at least 30 orbits. Officials said they saw no problems that would keep them from going a record 14 days in space. The two 37-year-old novice astronauts flushed from Cape Kennedy’s Pad 19 yesterday exactly on time at 2:30 p.m. After a perfect countdown, a pale white flame shot from the giant Titan-2 Rocket, which boosted them aloft in a thunderous roar. — Dec. 6, 1965Delayed Meeting in SpaceA two-inch-wide plug dropped prematurely out of the Titan-2 launch rocket today [Dec. 12] and stopped the blast-off of the Gemini-6 space capsule. A trouble-sensing electronics system detected the failure and automatically shut off the Titan’s engines – postponing for at least three days the historic U.S. attempt for a mid-space rendezvous between Gemini-6 and the already-orbiting Gemini-7. The postponement could easily have been forever. But the craft’s two astronauts saved their ship to fly again by calm thinking. — Dec. 13, 1965Gemini-6 and 7 Fly Nose to NoseHOUSTON – The United States took another major leap toward the moon today [Dec. 15] as Gemini-6 and 7 spacecraft met in a historic first space rendezvous. Speeding around the earth nose to nose at 17,500 miles an hour, as close as six to ten feet apart, the two pairs of Gemini astronauts for the first time demonstrated a key technique for manned lunar travel. Gemini-6 approached so close to 7 that astronauts Walter Schirra and Thomas Stafford claimed they could see the 11 days’ growth of beard on Frank Borman and James Lovell in their sister ship. — Dec. 16, 1965Gemini-7 Gets Go-Ahead to Return HomeHOUSTON – Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell raced down the home stretch in their marathon space journey today [Dec. 17] after officials decided a power-unit problem was not serious enough to cut their flight short by a day. They swept on toward their 14-day goal and landing in the Atlantic Ocean about 9 a.m. (1400 GMT) tomorrow, when they’ll bring back to earth every manned space flight record. After keeping cautious watch on Gemini-7’s power-producing fuel cell through the night, flight directors gave the spacemen a go-head for their full 207 orbits while they were near Bermuda. — Dec. 18, 1965American Astronauts Fit After FlightHOUSTON – Gemini-7 astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell splashed down safely in the Atlantic yesterday to end man’s longest odyssey in space. The astronauts were pronounced in far better condition than doctors had believed possible. When their spacecraft came down at the end of its 206th orbit right on schedule at 14:05 GMT southwest of Bermuda, it had traveled 5.7 million miles in 330 hours 35 minutes – just a few hours short of 14 days. Air Force Col. Borman and Navy Capt. Lovell were picked up by helicopter after landing in calm waters only 12 miles from the aircraft carrier Wasp. “We’re glad to be here,” said the happy Col. Borman on arrival at the Wasp. “You don’t know how glad we are.” The two weeks “seemed like a month and a half,” he said. — New York Herald Tribune, European Edition, Dec. 20, 1965