Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版The sun shone above the thousands of people thronging the Gate of Heavenly Peace at Tiananmen Square in Beijing last Friday, celebrating the weeklong National Day vacation marking the founding of the People’s Republic of China on Oct. 1, 1949.Hawkers did a quick trade in bottled water and small, rainbow-colored umbrellas that people wore on their heads like hats. Red-and-gold national flags glistened on children’s cheeks. Adults sported tiny flags in their hair, next to green sprouts and red toadstools on stalks, the latest fad.Then, a flash of dystopia in the apparent utopia: Shouting broke out near one of the stone lions by the gate, as uniformed and plainclothes police officers and security agents seized a middle-aged man. They twisted his arms high behind his back in a double arm lock, forcing him to bend. ‘‘No pictures!’’ a uniformed police officer shouted at me.Until seconds before, I had been photographing the holiday crowds and their imaginative headgear. I lowered my smartphone.‘‘What’s happening?’’ I asked another uniformed officer.‘‘Nothing!’’ he barked.The police dragged the man through the crowds to a barrier that separates the broad sidewalk there from Chang’an Avenue. Other officers stood ready to let the group through.They pushed the man to the ground where he squatted by the roadside. A black jacket was draped over him like a cloth over a birdcage.Close by was a crumpled, yellowish ball of what looked like paper on which something appeared to have been written in black ink, an object that the police had carried as they took him away and then placed next to him. The man’s T-shirt, too, looked as if it had something written on it in black ink. The two items gave the impression the man had been protesting, though about what was unclear.A police van arrived. The officers threw the man in, and it drove off. Then they began moving through the crowds, checking IDs. The whole affair was over in just three minutes.‘‘What happened?’’ I asked bystanders.‘‘I don’t know,’’ several said, melting away.Attempts to pin down the man’s identity through social media failed. A man answering the telephone at the Beijing Public Security Bureau requested that questions be submitted by fax, but by the time of publication, there was no response.It was a completely ordinary event, despite its violence, some Chinese said. The police would have seized anyone holding up a sign.‘‘It doesn’t actually matter what your sign says,’’ said Gong Xinhua, 45, a former employee at an architecture and design office in Jiangxi Province, who has been detained in the past for protesting injustices in public.‘‘Nowadays, no matter what the message on your banner says, they’ll seize you if you raise one in public,’’ Mr. Gong said in a telephone interview.‘‘I once saw a guy in Suzhou holding up a sign saying, ‘Rule the Country by Law,’ ’’ he said. This is an official slogan put out by the Chinese government since it began trying to improve the administration of justice. Still, said Mr. Gong, ‘‘They seized him.’’In a Weibo post, Mr. Gong wrote, perhaps surprisingly, that the authorities, fearful of pushing social tensions even higher, have learned to accept the existence of democracy advocates in their midst, as expectations of rights rise in China along with education, prosperity and global connectedness.But only if they do nothing, Mr. Gong wrote.‘‘As long as you don’t take to the streets, gather, uphold your rights, uncover abuses, riot, express radical views on the Internet, or just express radical views overall, you won’t be suppressed,’’ he wrote.Or hold up a banner, as the man at Tiananmen perhaps did.
Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.
