By DAVID E. SANGER and SOMINI SENGUPTADEC. 3, 2015
NICOSIA, Cyprus — Secretary of State John Kerry said Thursday he believes that if an agreement can be reached to ease President Bashar al-Assad of Syria from power, a coalition of Americans, Russians and Syrian forces could wipe out the Islamic State “in a matter of literally months.”Mr. Kerry’s comments, in a speech to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in Belgrade, Serbia, on Thursday morning, were the first in which he publicly offered an estimate of how quickly a well-organized effort might be able to defeat the radical Sunni group. He also said that “without the ability to find some ground forces that are prepared to take on Daesh,” using an Arabic acronym for the group, “this will not be won completely from the air, and we know that.” But he was not specific about where those ground troops would come from. His aides later said they would have to be indigenous.For weeks Mr. Kerry, who arrived in Cyprus later in the day to help advance the first real chance the island has had in decades to unify Greek and Turkish Cypriots under one flag, has argued that his diplomatic effort in Syria had to be matched with military pressure.Yet while American officials say they want to see Mr. Assad leave office, they clearly do not want to have that transition happen too quickly. An abrupt removal of Mr. Assad could create a vacuum in Damascus that the Islamic State would probably try to exploit. “Just imagine how quickly this scourge could be eliminated — in a matter of literally months — if we were able to secure that kind of political resolution,” Mr. Kerry said.AdvertisementThe first step in Mr. Kerry’s plan is to negotiate a cease-fire among rebel groups and Mr. Assad’s forces — but one that does not include the Islamic State or terrorist organizations like the Nusra Front, an offshoot of Al Qaeda. Determining who is on and off that list is enormously complex. The Assad government and its backers in Russia and Iran have a far more expansive definition of who constitutes a terrorist than the West and its Arab allies. President Obama said several days ago he expected Russia would be slow to stop bombing some groups that the United States is supporting.But at the United Nations, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said he hoped to clear the way for a cease-fire in Syria “as early as January.” The next big step to negotiate terms seems likely to occur around Dec. 18 in New York, when the United States and Russia seek to corral their allies in the region for a third time in three months to come to the negotiating table. Two meetings took place in Vienna in October and November, bringing together the regional rivals Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey — all with deep stakes in the Syrian war.AdvertisementTalk of peace comes alongside intensifying airstrikes on Syria that stand to exacerbate the already dire humanitarian crisis there.The Norwegian Refugee Council on Thursday said aid delivery routes had been blocked and that fighting had destroyed hospitals, schools and bakeries, forcing the group to suspend most its operations in much of northern Syria.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As humanitarian actors on the ground we fear that intensified military intervention will once again undermine hopes for real peace talks,” the secretary general of the council, Jan Egeland, said in a statement. “We are left with the impossible task of caring for ever more families forced to flee.”Mr. Kerry’s arrival in Cyprus, where he met both Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders, was intended to nudge along another seemingly intractable regional dispute that appears on the brink of a breakthrough. Mr. Kerry’s aides are clearly hoping that in a region marked by division and upheaval, an end to the division of Cyprus, perhaps with a weak federal government and two strong regional authorities, could set an example.Talks on how to sort out the ownership of property, and regional voting rolls that reflect where Turkish and Greek Cypriots live and vote, are getting close to a solution, American officials said. “It has become clear the ground is really shifting,” Mr. Kerry told reporters as he headed to dinner with Cypriot leaders from both sides. “I am more convinced than ever that a resolution to the longstanding division of Cyprus is within reach.”David E. Sanger reported from Nicosia, and Somini Sengupta from the United Nations.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerry Urges Deft Removal of Assad to Crush ISIS.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.