AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisBy Simon RomeroRIO DE JANEIRO — Brazil’s economy has lost more than one million jobs this year in the most severe recession in decades. Families are still searching for people missing in the  sludge released when a dam burst, one of the country’s worst environmental disasters. Police officers are clashing with students on the streets of São Paulo over school closings.Brazil’s leaders are facing major crises on multiple fronts. But instead of addressing them head on, they are consumed by a power struggle in the capital, culminating in the start of impeachment proceedings against President Dilma Rousseff.Even for some who support ousting Ms. Rousseff, who has come under broad criticism and official scrutiny for her handling of the economy, the way in which the impeachment process started and the possibility that it could drag on for months have led to a sentiment that Brazil’s scandal-plagued political establishment may have reached a new low.Many Brazilians were particularly frustrated that the person who started the impeachment proceedings, Eduardo Cunha, the speaker of the lower house, is himself fighting calls to resign over undeclared Swiss bank accounts and charges that he accepted millions of dollars in bribes in the kickback scheme surrounding Petrobras, the national oil company.“Our politics are a joke,” said Aroldo Casagrande, 60, the owner of a company that sells marble. “The only person who can oust the president is someone corrupt with zero credibility.”Critics of Ms. Rousseff contend that the impeachment case against her is strong, including a ruling by an auditing court in October that she improperly used funds from state banks to cover budget shortfalls.Beyond that, Ms. Rousseff faces widespread anger over a range of issues, including the fact that she was at the helm of the Petrobras board when the graft scheme was flourishing. Witnesses have testified that the bribes were used to finance her presidential campaign, a claim she denies. And voters across the nation are indignant, with many contending that she deliberately misled them about the depth of the nation’s economic problems during her 2014 re-election bid.With no testimony surfacing to indicate that Ms. Rousseff took any bribes herself, Mr. Cunha, the conservative house speaker, opted to move ahead with the case involving the use of funds from state banks.But Mr. Cunha has earned plenty of ire as well. Critics say he is pushing impeachment to exact revenge against the president after legislators in her leftist Workers Party moved this week to seek his ouster as speaker.The battle over the impeachment proceedings could last months, consuming the authorities at a time when Brazil’s economic crisis is growing more severe. But the political infighting had already taken a toll on the nation’s ability to confront the tumbling economy, with congressional leaders repeatedly blocking approval of the president’s proposed austerity measures this year.“The start of the impeachment on the basis of Cunha’s personal vengeance crowns a year marked by the irresponsibility of the principal political players,” said Bernardo Mello Franco, a columnist for the newspaper Folha de S. Paulo.Others go further, calling into question the Federal Court of Accounts, the auditing body tied to Brazil’s Congress that ruled against Ms. Rousseff over her handling of funds from large state banks.Joaquim Barbosa, a former chief justice of Brazil’s highest court, calls the audit court a “playground of failed politicians.” The audit court, which is largely made up of former legislators, has come under scrutiny with at least four of its own members under investigation into claims like buying votes in legislative elections and taking bribes.In fact, it is hard to find a political institution in Brazil whose standing has not been damaged by corruption battles, regardless of where its leaders stand in the ideological spectrum.About 40 percent of the 594 members of Congress are facing charges of one type or another in a long list of scandals, according to a prominent watchdog group. One of Brazil’s most well-known military figures, a retired navy admiral who devised a secret nuclear program in the 1970s, is under arrest on bribery charges related to the construction of a nuclear plant.Then there is the close circle around Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president who anointed Ms. Rousseff as his political heir. The authorities have arrested José Carlos Bumlai, a powerful rancher and friend of Mr. da Silva, on fraud charges, while the police recently raided the offices of a company owned by one of Mr. da Silva’s sons as part of a bribery investigation.Even with the economy set to shrink more than 3 percent this year and Brazil enduring more homicides than any other nation, corruption has emerged as the public’s most pressing concern, with 34 percent of Brazilians naming it ahead of the lamentable public health system and unemployment, according to Datafolha, a polling company. The poll, conducted on Nov. 25 and 26 in interviews with 3,541 people, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 2 percentage points.As the impeachment battle gets underway, some Brazilians say that the proceedings are less about corruption than the competition for political power. Thiago de Aragão, a political risk consultant in Brasília, said that the fight around impeachment could drag on for as long as seven months.“Every political party that we have is despicable,” said Moura Ferreira, 53, a security guard in a shopping center here in Rio de Janeiro. Mr. Ferreira said that he doubted that Ms. Rousseff’s impeachment would improve prospects for ordinary Brazilians.“The economy is terrible, and political instability contributes to that,” said Mr. Ferreira, noting that he disapproved of Ms. Rousseff but also doubted the motives of her opponents. “If Dilma is forced to leave,” he added, referring to the president by her first name, “the instability will continue.”Mariana Simões contributed reporting.Advertisement