AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — The Israeli government has in recent days been arresting young Jewish extremists suspected of being a part of a terrorist network that carried out a deadly attack against Palestinians, the national security agency Shin Bet said on Thursday.The agency did not release names or any other details about the people who were arrested, or even how many there were, citing an official gag order imposed on the case. But it said that they were suspected of “belonging to a Jewish terrorist organization” and that there were “concrete suspicions” connecting them to an arson attack in July in the West Bank village of Duma that killed a Palestinian toddler and his parents.The Israeli authorities determined early on that Jewish extremists were behind the attack, in which 18-month-old Ali Dawabsheh burned to death. His parents and older brother, Ahmad, who was 4 at the time, sustained critical burns over much of their bodies; the father died after a week, and the mother after five weeks. Ahmad is still being treated in an Israeli hospital.Israeli leaders vehemently condemned the violence, but the investigation by the police and Shin Bet appeared to be making little or no progress for months. Many Palestinians have cited the unresolved case as one of the grievances in a buildup of popular anger against Israel and Israelis.That anger has erupted over the last two months in a wave of violent attacks by Palestinians on Israelis. Most of those attacks appear to have been carried out almost spontaneously, by individuals with no known affiliation with militant organizations.Four more attacks were reported on Thursday. A Palestinian gunman drove up to an Israeli military checkpoint in the West Bank and opened fire on the soldiers there, according to the military. The assailant was shot and killed, and one soldier and one bystander were wounded. Palestinian news outlets identified the gunman as an officer in the Palestinian Authority’s intelligence service.Hours later, in Jerusalem, an Israeli police officer was stabbed by a Palestinian resident of the West Bank, the authorities said. A Palestinian doctor from a nearby clinic gave first aid. Police officers at the scene fatally shot the assailant. At night, a gunman fired at an Israeli vehicle near a West Bank settlement, causing no injuries. And two Palestinians stabbed a soldier in Hebron and were subsequently killed.Critics have compared the slow pace of the Duma investigation with the swift arrest of Palestinian suspects in other recent deadly attacks, and something the Israeli defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, said in September raised further questions about the way the case was being handled.Mr. Yaalon was quoted as saying that the authorities had a good idea of who had committed the Duma arson, but that there was not enough evidence to press charges and that Israel was worried about compromising its intelligence sources.The United Nations special coordinator for the Middle East peace process, Nickolay Mladenov, said in a statement this week that he was “concerned by the slow progress” and called on the Israeli authorities “to move swiftly in bringing the perpetrators of this terrible crime to justice.”His statement followed oblique Israeli news reports hinting at significant developments in a case related to Jewish terrorism, presumably referring to the arrests announced Thursday.Shin Bet has pointed in recent months to the existence of a shadowy group of Jewish extremists who compiled a manifesto, “The Revolt,” advocating an anarchic vision of redemption. The far-right extremists, many of whom live in unauthorized settlement outposts in the West Bank, call for fomenting unrest to bring about the collapse of the State of Israel, with its democratic government and courts, and replacing it with a Jewish kingdom based on religious law. The manifesto was followed by a manual on how to set fire to buildings like mosques and Palestinian houses.Soon after the Duma attack, three Israeli Jews were detained on suspicion of involvement in such a network and in previous arson attacks. The three are being held under administrative detention orders, without formal charges. One of them, Meir Ettinger, is the grandson of Meir Kahane, the American-Israeli rabbi regarded as the father of far-right Jewish militancy.Shin Bet did not indicate in its statement on Thursday whether the recent arrests were connected to those earlier detentions, or whether the terrorist organization it referred to was the network responsible for the manifesto and arson manual.Hussein Dawabsheh, a grandfather of the children who were burned in Duma, expressed hope that the perpetrators would be severely punished. “It won’t bring my family back,” he told Ynet, a Hebrew-language news site, “but I want the murderers to look little Ahmad in the eye and see what they have done to him, how they have killed his family.”A prominent Israeli lawyer, Zion Amir, said Thursday that he was representing one of the youths arrested this week. Mr. Amir said on Israel Radio that his client was a minor and had been in custody for two or three days, and that he had not had any access to his client.Describing the treatment of the youth as “draconian,” Mr. Amir said that he had been told only that his client was suspected of involvement in the killing of the members of the Dawabsheh family. Beyond that, he said he did not “know anything about anything.”Advertisement