By KAREEM FAHIMDEC. 3, 2015
LUXOR, Egypt —  Scarcely half an hour after police officers arrested Talaat Shabeeb at a cafe here last week and accused him of selling drugs, his body was returned to his family with signs of torture, marked by broad blue bruises, his relatives said.Egyptian officials are traditionally impervious to criticism about the mistreatment of detainees at the hands of the police, reflexively batting away accusations of brutality, human-rights activists say. But a string of cases like Mr. Shabeeb’s in recent weeks have made the problem hard to ignore and posed an unexpected challenge to the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.Officials have appeared defensive as the torture allegations have spurred protests in the streets and criticism in the news media, including from government loyalists. Wanting to be seen as responsive, the authorities transferred four officers accused in the beating of Mr. Shabeeb to other police stations, pending an investigation, according to local news reports.The Interior Ministry even released a statement, claiming there would be “no complacency in dealing with individual transgressions by some policemen.” And on Thursday, Mr. Sisi made a surprise visit to the Police Academy in Cairo, vowing to punish officers who commit abuse while asserting that the incidence of such cases was “limited.”AdvertisementThe security forces have enjoyed broad powers under Mr. Sisi’s rule, arresting thousands of Islamists and political opponents in dragnets that have raised little public outcry. But this government, like its predecessors, has found it harder to blunt anger at what is seen as a pervasive and commonplace police violence that makes no distinction between the state’s enemies and citizens who keep far from the peril of Egyptian politics.AdvertisementThe government is keenly aware of the risks. The 2010 killing of a young man named Khaled Said in the custody of plainclothes investigators in Alexandria crystallized the protests that began on Jan. 25, 2011, and eventually toppled President Hosni Mubarak.Like Mr. Said, Mr. Shabeeb was no dissident. He stayed away from politics and supported himself selling papyrus to tourists, his family said. His death was followed by large protests in Luxor, a southern town that is one of Egypt’s most important tourist destinations and hardly known for opposition to the government. And within days of his death, at least one other person died in police custody, in Ismailia, where there were also protests.Mr. Shabeeb’s nephew, Muhammad Rashid Muhammad, said the family was waiting for the results of an autopsy, and would organize more protests if the officers who killed him were not punished.“All the families here are in solidarity,” he said, sitting with other relatives in the Awamiyya neighborhood in Luxor, where Mr. Shabeeb lived. “We will take Talaat’s rights by law.”Human-rights groups say that despite the perennial official promises of change, dozens of people still die in custody every year. Though reliable figures are hard to come by, the problem is believed to have worsened in the last two years as the authorities have cracked down on Islamists after the ouster of the Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi.At least 13 people died in Egyptian detention facilities in November alone, according to Al Nadeem Center for the Management and Rehabilitation of Victims of Torture, a nongovernmental group that tracks abuse in prisons.Aida Seif al-Dawla, the co-founder of the group, said that despite the sudden burst of attention — and the remorseful statements by officials — there were unlikely to be any broad changes in the Interior Ministry, which oversees the police.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What is new is people’s reaction,” she said, mentioning the protests in Luxor and Ismailia. “The street is a red line for the government.” Even so, the statements were for “public consumption,” she said, by officials embarrassed by a cluster of abuse cases.AdvertisementSince Mr. Shabeeb’s death, there had been other beatings in police stations, she said, adding: “The torture has not stopped for one day.”In recent days, Mr. Sisi and his interior minister, Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, have repeated the longstanding official contention that the abuses are isolated and do not reflect wider police practices. But the barrage of criticism suggested that those arguments might not quiet the anger.“It is unimportant whether there are higher instructions for torture or humiliating people on purpose. What is important is there an atmosphere that allows it,” Emad Eddin Hussein, the editor in chief of the daily newspaper Al-Shorouk, wrote in an editorial this week.Relatives of a 29-year-old man who died in police custody in late October made the unusual decision to bring legal action against the authorities, according to Heba Morayef of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, which is handling the case.Such cases are uncommon, she said, because the families of the victims are often pressured by the authorities not to proceed, or are offered settlements.The victim in the court case, Adel Abdel Samea, was arrested on a theft charge in early October. He was held in one of the country’s most infamous police stations, in the Cairo neighborhood of Matariya, where half a dozen or more people are believed to have died in custody this year.His relatives noticed signs of abuse when they visited Mr. Abdel Samea in the station, including blood on his shirt and scratches on his arms. But he refused to speak about what was happening to him, Ms. Morayef said.On Oct. 22, the family received a call from the station, saying they should come check on Mr. Abdel Samea, but the police refused to let the relatives see him.When they eventually did see him, it was in the morgue, Ms. Morayef said.Asmaa al-Zohairy contributed reporting from Luxor, and Amina Ismail from Cairo.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Middle East; Egypt: Firebombing at Club Kills 16.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.