By JOE COCHRANEDEC. 3, 2015
JAKARTA, Indonesia — The head of the Indonesian unit of the United States mining giant Freeport-McMoRan testified to lawmakers here on Thursday that the speaker of Parliament had tried to extort a 20 percent stake in the local company in exchange for helping it get its operating contract extended. The testimony of Maroef Sjamsoeddin, president-director of Freeport Indonesia, corroborated earlier testimony by Indonesia’s energy minister, Sudirman Said, who spoke on Wednesday before an ethics tribunal convened by the House of Representatives to investigate allegations against Speaker Setya Novanto.The ethics tribunal hearings are being aired live on national television, and local news media have called the case the biggest political scandal in the history of Indonesia, which, despite moving toward democracy and making economic overhauls for more than 15 years, remains one of the most corrupt countries in Asia.Mr. Sudirman had reported the speaker to Parliament’s ethics council last month and submitted an audio recording of Mr. Setya purportedly demanding shares in Freeport Indonesia, estimated to be worth around $4 billion, during a private meeting in June with Mr. Maroef. The speaker was accompanied to the meeting by Muhammad Reza Chalid, a prominent Indonesian oil businessman.AdvertisementThe recording, which was secretly made by Mr. Maroef and played to the ethics council on Wednesday, captured the voice of the speaker asking for the entire 20 percent divestment of the stake in Freeport Indonesia that Freeport-McMoRan is required to make as part of extending its operating contract. Freeport-McMoRan controls more than 90 percent of the company. Mr. Setya is heard saying that the shares should be channeled through him — for free — to be given to President Joko Widodo and Vice President Jusuf Kalla.AdvertisementMr. Joko has categorically denied any knowledge of the episode, and on Wednesday, Mr. Kalla was quoted by the local news media as saying that the speaker had acted alone with “extraordinary audacity” and “greed.”During his testimony on Thursday, Mr. Maroef, a former deputy director of Indonesia’s national spy agency, said he had secretly recorded the meeting because it was “unethical and inappropriate” for the speaker of Indonesia’s Parliament to try to broker a contract extension, rather than the government.He said Mr. Setya had repeatedly tried to secure a meeting with him after he was appointed president-director of Freeport Indonesia last January.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Freeport Indonesia’s Grasberg mining operation in the eastern province of Papua has the world’s largest gold mine and third-largest copper mine. The company’s current contract expires in 2019, and Freeport-McMoRan officials have been negotiating with Mr. Joko’s government for an extension until 2041.Freeport-McMoRan has pledged $17 billion in new investment to expand production as part of a proposed contract extension agreement. The company’s Indonesia unit is the largest taxpayer in the country, but it is a frequent target of labor unions, local environmental groups and nationalist politicians who want it to pay higher royalties.“The speaker and his associate, Reza Chalid, asked for a 20 percent stake,” Mr. Maroef testified to lawmakers. He said they had also asked for a stake in a hydropower plant that Freeport Indonesia was considering building as part of the expansion of its mining operations in Papua.Mr. Maroef testified that he reported the meeting to James R. Moffett, known as Jim Bob, the founder and chairman of the Arizona-based Freeport-McMoRan.AdvertisementMr. Maroef said that Mr. Moffett had reacted angrily to the alleged shakedown, saying he feared that any acquiescence to the Parliament speaker’s demands would violate United States and Indonesian criminal laws.“Jim Bob said, ‘If you do that, you put me in prison,’” Mr. Maroef testified. “That was his answer.”After the scandal broke last month, Mr. Setya initially denied demanding shares in Freeport Indonesia in exchange for securing its contract extension, or invoking the names of Indonesia’s president and vice president.After a transcript of the audiotape of the meeting was published by the local news media, however, Mr. Setya acknowledged asking for the shares but said he was “just joking.”Mr. Setya is expected to testify before the ethics council in the coming days. He is currently not facing any criminal investigation by the Indonesian police or the independent Corruption Eradication Commission, but analysts said that could change if the Parliament’s ethics council found him guilty of misconduct.This is Mr. Setya’s second run-in with the ethics council in recent months. He was recently reproached after appearing next to Donald J. Trump, the American presidential candidate, at a news conference in September at Trump Tower in New York.A version of this article appears in print on December 4, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Indonesia: Testimony Links Lawmaker to Extortion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.