AdvertisementSupported byBy Salman Masood and Niki KitsantonisISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Pakistan sent 30 migrants back to three European countries on Thursday after refusing to allow them to disembark from a chartered plane at an airport in Islamabad, officials said, a move that reflected growing frustration over the treatment of asylum seekers.Sarfraz Hussain, a spokesman for the Pakistani Interior Ministry, described the migrants as “unverified deportees,” most of whom were sent back from Greece, saying the authorities would not permit anyone to enter the country without proper documentation.A Greek police official, speaking on the customary condition of anonymity, said all 49 passengers on the plane were Pakistani citizens. “They had Pakistani Embassy documents,” he said. “Why would Pakistani Embassy staff give documents to people who are not from Pakistan?”The Pakistani interior minister, Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, said last month that European countries were sending people back to Pakistan without identifying their nationality. But the episode Thursday was the first time that the country had refused to admit deportees.In a statement, the European Union said on Thursday that Pakistan was requiring identification information about the deportees above and beyond what was called for in a readmission agreement reached in 2010, and that the case illustrated the need to improve the accord.Officials said none of the passengers, who were flown to Benazir Bhutto International Airport, were initially allowed to leave the plane. The passengers were questioned, and the authorities then allowed 19 people to disembark after they were confirmed to be Pakistani citizens. They were taken into custody by a unit of the Interior Ministry that deals with human trafficking.Greece is the most popular entry point for asylum seekers in Europe, and on Thursday, its migration minister said the country would take steps to address the deteriorating situation along the border with Macedonia.Pakistanis have been among the huge flow of asylum seekers into Europe this year, but unlike those from Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, who are fleeing war at home, Pakistanis are rarely allowed to remain because they are viewed as economic migrants.The Greek police official said “action will be taken” when the migrants returned to Greece, but he did not elaborate, noting that the flight was organized by Frontex, the European Union’s border monitoring agency.He said 39 had been deported from Greece and the other 10 from Austria and Bulgaria. Of the 30 who were not allowed to enter Pakistan, 26 had been deported from Greece. Pakistan tightened its policy on readmitting migrants last month, and Mr. Khan said an agreement to take migrants back in was the subject of “blatant misuse” by several European countries. Yiannis Mouzalas, the Greek migration minister, said it was the responsibility of the European Union to intervene.Mr. Khan said many of the 90,000 citizens of Pakistan who were deported last year had been treated unfairly, and he expressed concern that many from his country who were found traveling without proper documents were being labeled terrorists.After a meeting on Nov. 23 between Mr. Khan and Dimitris Avramopoulos, the European Union commissioner for migration, both sides agreed to enhance cooperation. On Thursday, however, Mr. Hussain said Greece had violated the agreement, complaining of “immoral, inhuman and illegal” conduct.In Greece, Mr. Mouzalas said the authorities were determined to resolve peacefully the situation at the border with Macedonia in the next 10 days.The International Organization for Migration said that the borders had been closed because of protests and rioting, and that a 22-year-old Moroccan citizen had died after being electrocuted.The police and local aid workers said he was killed after he touched a high-voltage cable when he climbed on top of a stationary train near the border.Salman Masood reported from Islamabad, and Niki Kitsantonis from Athens.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement