Sixty years ago, on Dec. 1, 1955, Rosa Parks made history by refusing to sit in the segregated area of a bus in Montgomery, Ala. A few months later, Robert S. Bird, writing in The New York Herald Tribune, recalled how her arrest led to the Montgomery bus boycott:The bus boycott began Dec. 5. A series of incidents culminated in the arrest of one Rosa Parks, a Negro woman, for insisting on sitting in front of the segregation line imposed, as was the custom, arbitrarily by the driver.Whether or not this case was a “plant,” as has been charged, all that seems to have been intended at the beginning was a Negro demonstration of protest to last several days. But on the first day of the protest the police turned out in force at the most important bus stops in the Negro sections. The idea, supposedly, was to “preserve order.” If there is anything a Negro fears in the South it is a policeman. And if any non-protesting Negroes had intended that day to board the buses despite the protest, the city police made certain by their presence on the street that these Negroes vanished fast. That show of police strength on the first day consolidated the Negro boycott.Later, efforts were made to compromise the matter, but by this time the Negroes had organized an intricate “car pool” operation, and they were taking their time about any compromise. So then the police began to crack down on the car pools for all sorts of traffic violations. This entrenched Negro resistance further. Mayor W. A. Gayle and the other two city commissioners called off “negotiations.”Thousands of her personal letters, photographs and other items became accessible to researchers for the first time this week at the Library of Congress.Finally, as the boycott began to affect the whole life of the city, negotiations were reopened. About this time the Negroes filed a Federal court action of broad scope to have the bus segregation ended. Suddenly the draft board decided that the Negro lawyer who filed this suit should be reclassified from exempt status to non-exempt. A few days later, he was arrested for malpractice when one of the five Negro women who signed a petition in the suit affirmed to the authorities that she had not realized what she was signing.By this time the case was attracting national attention, and the pressure to have it ended became enormous. But also by this time, the mayor and two city commissioners had joined the White Citizens Council, which is committed in no uncertain terms to preserving segregation.While a committee of leading citizens took over the negotiations in behalf of the city, the grand jury next intervened in the matter and began hearing testimony in the boycott situation. By this time, it was perfectly clear to the Negroes that while the right hand was trying to bring about an acceptable settlement of the matter, the left hand was ready for punitive action.The night word got around that the grand jury was about to indict over a hundred of their stalwart workers in the movement, the Negroes coldly turned down all settlement offers. The mayor said he was through trying to deal with the Negroes. The Negroes replied that spring is now here and the walking is nicer. Their leaders waited calmly in their homes the next day to be arrested. They are now out on bail and the boycott movement is dug in deeper than ever. — New York Herald Tribune, Paris Edition, March 3, 1956