AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — Getting down to work after a whirlwind global tour, Justin Trudeau, Canada’s new Liberal prime minister, presented Parliament with a sweeping legislative agenda on Friday.Mr. Trudeau’s program contains promises for conventional measures like middle-class tax cuts and pension improvements. He also promised to push for several major changes, including the legalization of marijuana, a revamping of how Canadians elect the House of Commons, and the elimination of the partisan element in Senate appointments, allowing any Canadian to apply for those positions.But above all, Mr. Trudeau made it clear that he intended to roll back many measures, large and small, introduced by the Conservative government of Stephen Harper over the past decade.Under Canadian parliamentary tradition, Mr. Trudeau’s agenda was presented by the country’s governor general, David Johnston, the representative of Queen Elizabeth II, in a “speech from the throne.” But the words were Mr. Trudeau’s, and for the most part they reflected his campaign promises as well as his election-night declaration that “sunny ways” had come to the country.“Canadians have been clear and unambiguous in their desire for real change,” Mr. Johnston told a joint session of the House of Commons and the Senate. “Canadians want their government to do different things, and to do things differently.”Under normal circumstances, Mr. Trudeau, 43, who was sworn in as prime minister a month ago, would probably have waited until well into the new year to recall Parliament. The comparatively rapid opening of the new session, which will sit for only a week before starting a prolonged winter recess, appears to have been a signal that Mr. Trudeau wants to move quickly on his promises.The timing was not the only break from tradition on Friday. When Mr. Johnston arrived at Parliament, he and Mr. Trudeau were greeted by David Charette, an Ojibwe artist who drummed and sang an aboriginal honor song. Then as they passed down the hall of honor, where a radical Islamist gunman was killed by security forces just over a year ago, the two leaders were met by a large crowd of new Canadian citizens, recent Syrian refugees to Canada and schoolchildren, rather than the usual cluster of dignitaries.At just under 15 minutes, the speech was also unusually brief, perhaps to the relief of the many politicians, judges, diplomats and dignitaries who formed the standing room only crowd in the Senate chamber. But its brevity was offset by the sweep of its broad promises.Some of the proposals have been heard before. The speech affirmed the government’s commitment to admit 25,000 refugees from Syria by the end of February, an extension of its earlier promise to reach the target by the end of this month. Military bases have been readied and an abandoned terminal at Toronto’s airport has been reopened to accept the refugees, the first of which may begin arriving next week. That program, however, has encountered at least one unforeseen snag. Many refugees, apparently hoping that they will be able to return to Syria, have turned down invitations to come to distant Canada. Only 6.3 percent of those contacted by the United Nations in Jordan and Lebanon during the last half of November said they were interested.The speech said the government would seek to rebuild relations with “our closest friend and partner, the United States,” a relationship that was strained under Mr. Harper. But it made no mention of Mr. Trudeau’s pledge to pull Canada’s modest contribution of fighter jets from the American-led coalition’s campaign against the Islamic State while increasing the number of Canadian ground troops for training purposes. Nor did it clarify Mr. Trudeau’s position on the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, which was endorsed by Mr. Harper and championed by President Obama, beyond promising to “negotiate beneficial trade agreements.”While it is unclear how long it will take Mr. Trudeau to transform his promises into action, he has a considerable advantage over an incoming American president. He controls a solid majority of the votes in the House of Commons, and Canadian members of Parliament must vote their party line on important legislation or join an opposition party or sit as independents, moves that are often political poison.But many of his promises, like a national climate change plan and a new national public health care accord, will require the cooperation of the 10 provinces. While only one, Saskatchewan, is now governed by a party associated with the federal Conservatives, regional interests often clash with federal priorities.Similarly, Mr. Trudeau has pledged a new relationship with Canada’s aboriginal population. In particular, he promised on Friday to move ahead on adopting the 94 recommendations of a commission that examined the effects of a longstanding policy that forced aboriginal children into government-funded boarding schools, a system it called “cultural genocide.”Many of those recommendations, like the formation of a panel of inquiry to investigate why a disproportionately large number of aboriginal women are murdered or go missing, can be easily met. But others, like improving the level of health care in native communities, may require substantial expenditures. And some key recommendations, particularly related to the powers of native groups and the recognition of aboriginal laws, may prove thorny.The Conservatives, who now lead the opposition, found nothing to praise in the speech. Rona Ambrose, who became the acting party leader after Mr. Harper’s resignation, criticized its lack of references to major industries like forestry and automaking as well as the absence of any direct mention of the Islamic State.“There’s no mention of the private sector,” she said, after characterizing its contents as being “big government, big taxes.”Mr. Trudeau has repeatedly boasted that he won election while avoiding the negative campaign tactics and exploiting polarizing issues, tactics favored by Mr. Harper. But Friday’s speech was not above taking some shots at the former government’s ways, without directly naming it.“Canadians elected a government to bring us together, not to set us against one another,” Mr. Johnston read. “Canada is strong because of our differences, not in spite of them.”videoAdvertisement