By KATIE ROGERSDEC. 4, 2015
A Turkish man’s freedom may hang on a question put to a panel of “Lord of the Rings” experts: Is Gollum evil?More significantly, was it an insult to compare Turkey’s president to the slimy, bug-eyed creature from the films based on J.R.R. Tolkien’s trilogy?A physician, Dr. Bilgin Ciftci, is accused of sharing a meme that juxtaposes Gollum, as played by Andy Serkis (and advanced digital effects), with Recep Tayyip Erdogan in several situations: while laughing, while surprised, while eating. Insulting the president is a crime under Turkish law.
            A medical doctor's job is terminated by the state for sharing this picture
#BilginCiftci #AKP @RT_Erdogan pic.twitter.com/C7E87t1KQ7 The punishments were swift. Dr. Ciftci lost his job with the Public Health Institution of Turkey after sharing the meme, and he faces a two-year prison sentence, the Turkish newspaper Today’s Zaman reported. After a judge said he did not know enough about the Tolkien creature to make an appropriate decision, five experts were ordered to conduct an investigation into Gollum’s moral character before the next phase of the trial begins in February.AdvertisementMichael D. C. Drout, an English professor at Wheaton College who edits an annual review of Tolkien’s works, is observing the situation from America. He said that those experts will be assessing the most complicated character in the English writer’s already complex world.Advertisement“I don’t think there’s any consensus that Gollum is evil,” Mr. Drout said in an interview. “He is the most tragic character in ‘The Lord of the Rings.’ ”Middle Earth, the place where Gollum began his life as a creature named Sméagol, is full of complex characters and allegiances. But a single gold ring, forged with a dark lord’s evil powers, has the power to rule them all. Sméagol catches a glimpse of the ring, murders for it, and possesses it for centuries until it is mislaid and found by another hobbit. Sméagol struggles to redeem himself, but his obsessive bloodthirst for the ring wins out. He accidentally destroys himself and the ring, but also saves Middle Earth in the process. (It is the hobbit hero Frodo who gets most of the credit.)“The context is this: Gollum accidentally, not intentionally, saves the entire world,” Mr. Drout said.Mr. Drout said that no one would’ve appreciated the existential debate over Gollum more than the author who created him. Painfully and pitifully, Sméagol almost succeeds in overcoming his evil side, but fails. It is a scene that is said to have upset Mr. Tolkien to the point of tears as he wrote it, Mr. Drout said.“He didn’t see him as irredeemably evil,” he said of Mr. Tolkien. “He saw him as someone who had been destroyed by this evil ring.”As word of Dr. Ciftci’s predicament continued to spread, high-profile experts stepped into the fray to point out a crucial technicality.Peter Jackson, the director of the “Lord of the Rings” trilogy, and two screenwriters, Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens, said in a joint statement given to the website The Wrap that the images the court will analyze are of the character Sméagol, not Gollum.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Sméagol would never dream of wielding power over those weaker than himself,” the statement read. “He is not a bully. In fact he’s very lovable. This is why audiences all over the world have warmed to his character.”AdvertisementStephen Colbert, the talk-show host who knows so much about Tolkien that he was asked by Mr. Jackson to clarify elements of “Return of the King” during an interview on “The Colbert Report,” declined to comment through a publicist.Still, it might be a tough sell for a Turkish court to believe in the goodness of Gollum. It’s easy to see why he wouldn’t inspire sympathy: On the surface, Gollum’s hunched, pitiful, bug-eyed figure looks creepy, Mr. Drout said.“But in the end he’s going to save us all,” Mr. Drout said. “I don’t know if that would get me off from the two years in jail or not.”Dr. Ciftci’s lawyer also offered an assessment.“The character itself is a war between good and bad,” Hicran Danisman said, according to Reuters. “He is basically seen as a victim of society.”The society that Mr. Erdogan helps lead is developing a reputation for not tolerating name-calling on social media. The debate over Gollum might seem silly if Mr. Erdogan was not the president of a country and the outcome did not involve prosecution and possible jail time.In another case, Mr. Erdogan took Merve Buyuksarac, the former Miss Turkey, to court after she was accused of violating a law against criticizing public servants by posting a poem on her Instagram account in January. In March, Bahadir Baruter and Ozer Aydogan, two cartoonists who work for a Turkish satire magazine, were fined $2,700 for publishing a cartoon that showed Mr. Erdogan joking about killing a journalist. Their original sentence, converted to a fine by a judge, had been 11 months and 20 days in jail, according to Al Jazeera.Journalists are facing a wave of similar crackdowns. In November, after Mr. Erdogan’s Justice and Development Party regained its parliamentary majority in elections, thousands protested because they saw the arrest of two prominent reporters as evidence of growing hostility to oppositional news media.In Dr. Ciftci’s case, Elijah Wood, the actor who portrayed the hobbit Frodo in the movie franchise, perhaps offered the bluntest assessment of the situation.“That Bilgin Ciftci faces jail time for comparing Erdogan to Gollum/Smeagol, regardless of whether he’s good or bad, is horrifying,” Mr. Wood wrote on Twitter.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Is Gollum Good, or Evil? Turkish Doctor’s Fate Rests on Answer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.