By ROD NORDLANDDEC. 4, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan —  One of the best ways to measure improvement in a nation’s health is the maternal mortality rate, and American officials have long held out Afghanistan’s striking improvement there as an important legacy of Western aid.In 2002, when maternal health was surveyed soon after the American-led invasion that ousted the Taliban, the mortality rate was 1,600, meaning that 1,600 women died for every 100,000 live births — a rate comparable to the Middle Ages in Europe. In 2010, a study financed by the United States Agency for International Development determined that Afghanistan’s maternal mortality rate had dropped to 327, a stunning improvement.Now a group of experts in the maternal mortality field have come along and said, in effect, that if it sounds too good to be true, it is.In a paper commissioned by the British and Irish Agencies Afghanistan Group, an organization representing aid groups from the British Isles, researchers from Harvard, the University of Aberdeen, the Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, and HealthProm, a charity based in Britain, compared the two studies and found the improvement in maternal health implausible.Advertisement“A fall as steep as signified by these two surveys has never occurred in any country, except in industrialized countries related to the discovery of antibiotics,” the authors wrote. They noted that in Sri Lanka and Malaysia, both considered success stories in improvements in maternal health, comparable progress took five decades or longer — in societies without the rugged geography and protracted warfare of Afghanistan.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The authors took a critical look at the 2010 study financed by the United States aid agency, called the Afghanistan Mortality Study, questioning the methodology of the survey on which it was based, carried out by untrained personnel with often limited access in conflict areas. Although the authors were prominent in their fields, the group’s paper has not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal.Advertisement“The reported mortality ratio is too good to be true,” said Rachel Arnold, a British midwife who is completing a doctorate in maternal care, who has worked in Afghanistan frequently over the past 17 years, training Afghan midwives and traditional birth attendants. “I wish it were true, but I can’t believe that it is true.”Ms. Arnold cited another report financed by the agency, this one by the United Nations Population Fund, titled State of Afghanistan’s Midwifery 2014. It noted that even if the current rate of training midwives in Afghanistan was doubled, and the retention rate of those trained was doubled, the country would still only have enough midwives to attend to 31 percent of the country’s mothers by 2030.The British aid groups’ paper said that a much more plausible maternal mortality rate for Afghanistan, based on computer modeling and other health indicators, ranged from 885 to 1,600. The difference is important because it could affect how many resources donor countries and agencies decide to put into the reproductive health sector.A statement from the U.S.A.I.D. office in Afghanistan in response to the aid groups’ report said the 2010 study showing a maternal mortality rate of 327 was “the best available data at the time.” Today, however, the agency said it uses the World Health Organization figure of a maternal mortality rate of 396, and it is financing a new health survey to be completed by next year.“While the 2010 data showed a dramatic improvement in maternal mortality rates, Afghanistan’s maternal mortality rate still remains one of the highest in the world,” the agency said.It took issue with the aid groups’ analysis that an erroneous mortality-rate figure would affect funding for maternal health, noting a new agency investment of $60 million this year in that field. “Progress-to-date in reducing the maternal mortality rate has not ‘affected funding decisions to the detriment of the women of Afghanistan and their newborns,’ as the BAAG analysis conjectures,” the agency said.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Health Report on Childbirth by Afghans Is Challenged.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.