
The Saturday Profile By                     
 ALISON SMALE
 
DEC. 4, 2015
COLOGNE, Germany — Jan Böhmermann, a 34-year-old comic, has two of the toughest assignments in Germany.First, he is supposed to lure millennials from the web back to traditional TV offerings, which are more often than not tailored for the increasingly geriatric viewers of an aging country. Then, he has to make Germans laugh.Rightly or wrongly, the stereotype of the humorless Teuton is one of the most enduring images of Germany, one that critics have identified Mr. Böhmermann as having a strong chance of puncturing.He has been in and out of radio and TV comedy for years, but he garnered the most attention when ZDF, one of Germany’s two big public broadcasters, gave him a mainstream spot — albeit late night, on Fridays — in February. The show, “Neo Magazin Royale,” has won plaudits and decent ratings, but Mr. Böhmermann is still fighting for the kind of fame, or notoriety, attached to his idols — David Letterman, Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert.AdvertisementAnd as Mr. Böhmermann made clear in a pair of conversations, Nazi history still weighs on all Germans, making a political comic’s task especially delicate.AdvertisementGermans, he said, live “with this huge incision, which we cannot explain and which will never go away.”“The only thing that helps,” he said, “is to treat it ironically, in homeopathic doses, in full consciousness of the horror, the fright and the dimensions.”Even then, he added, “the fact that some dressed-up uniform fetishist, a vegetarian with bad teeth, bad breath and bad digestion, a morphine user to the last, an asocial man with phobias, that we in all seriousness believed that this is a good idea — that is completely incomprehensible.”Culturally, he noted, it led to the great tragedy that “there is no more Jewish culture, no more Jewish culture of entertainment.”“We killed the people who did good entertainment,” he said. “We robbed our own culture out of ignorance, and anything which comes after that, of course, bears its stamp.”Mr. Böhmermann does not take himself quite seriously enough to proclaim a mission. But it is clear that restoring some of what he called “the world-class humor” — overwhelmingly Jewish — of Berlin’s cabarets of the late 1920s and early ’30s is a guiding thought.To hear him tell it, Mr. Böhmermann was predisposed to his current role. Credit, he said, goes first to his mother, who noticed early “that she had a rather strange son” who liked to mess about. She enrolled him in circus lessons and drama clubs — unusual, he said, in a staid society in which “you get arts lessons only if you are the best violinist.”AdvertisementWhen his father, a policeman in Bremen, died of leukemia when Mr. Böhmermann was 17, he had to earn money. So while his peers were out partying, Mr. Böhmermann started writing newspaper reviews of weekend cabaret acts, at 40 pfennigs (a few cents) a line.That work led to Radio Bremen, the local public broadcaster, where he joined an Internet department mostly seen as a parking place for underperforming journalists. “They had absolutely no idea,” Mr. Böhmermann said, “and so, at 18, I just hung out on computers and thought it was interesting.”From there he “slid in” to his first radio show when he was 19. “I liked moderating, though I also did an apprenticeship as a journalist and even thought about going to Washington,” he said. “But it did not work out, and anyway humor was more fun.”Eventually, armed with a rare twin knowledge of computers and comedy, Mr. Böhmermann made it to Cologne and the country’s biggest public service broadcaster, WDR, or Westdeutscher Rundfunk. He worked with one of Germany’s best-loved comics, Harald Schmidt, writing sketches and doing some on-air work. “As it goes in life,” Mr. Böhmermann said, “you eventually land somewhere.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The big break came in 2012, when he and Charlotte Roche, the author of a frank best seller on a young woman’s sex life, began a television talk show with a 1960s vibe and a cult following. A dispute over a TV prize prompted Ms. Roche to quit in 2013, leaving Mr. Böhmermann and his team of 20- and 30-somethings to produce the show — monologue, sketches and music — in a former rug warehouse in Cologne.This year, the comic burst briefly into Anglo-Saxon consciousness with an English-language clip in which he simultaneously mocked the Greek finance minister at the time, Yanis Varoufakis, and his German adversaries. In March, he then sowed utter confusion and lifted his ratings with a mystery about whether Mr. Varoufakis had unceremoniously given Germany the finger in a speech months before he took office in January.Mr. Böhmermann, around six feet tall, bearded, with blue-gray eyes and the elastic facial gestures often associated with comics, shares the taste of his American role models for irreverent but also probing insight on the news.After the Paris terrorist attacks, he asked 100 questions that beg for answers. (No. 1: Why?)Days later, he pilloried the gaffe-prone German interior minister for canceling an international soccer match and refusing to say why, because, as Mr. Böhmermann put it, that “might unsettle parts of the population.”American and British television remain his guides, he said. “That degree of self-mockery and irony, that is what we don’t know here in Germany,” he said. “To take things lightly is not usual.”AdvertisementMr. Böhmermann discovered the Nazi past in seventh grade. He grew up in Bremen, a port city that is traditionally leftist, and says he had a good history teacher. “We went on anti-Fascist hikes,” he said, and “he showed us where the Nazis committed some of their crimes” and where the synagogue once stood.Near his home, the Nazis built a huge bunker, known as Valentin, to house submarines. “It still stands, because if you blew it up that whole part of town would sink into a big hole,” he said.Another indelible piece of history, of course, was the reunification of Germany in 1990. All the school atlases, even though new, were replaced to show one country instead of two.His father, who had once served on the East-West German border and did not believe it would stay open, hurriedly took his family on an excursion east, days after the Berlin Wall fell on Nov. 9, 1989.But it is the Nazi past, and the loss of Jewish life, that weigh heaviest on Mr. Böhmermann. Right after he got his driver’s license, at 20, he drove alone to Auschwitz. He had been researching his family’s history — his ethnic German mother grew up in Poland and came to Bremen only in the 1970s — and paid the first of three visits so far to the infamous death camp.He has established with relief that no relative, on either side of his family, was implicated in Nazi horror. Those tough times resonate at home only in injunctions from the older generation not to discard food.“You can never have a food fight on German television,” he said. “We did it once,” and formal complaints swiftly ensued.How long German television itself will draw new audiences is a worry. The average age of viewers for the public broadcaster ZDF, which carries Mr. Böhmermann’s show, is 61. Young people are fleeing to YouTube.“I think we are the last generation making television who still stand with one leg in TV and with the other in the Net and must serve both,” he said. “I always wanted to do TV. That was always my absolute dream.”The Saturday Profile article on Dec. 5, about Jan Böhmermann, a German political comic who aims to restore the top-flight Jewish humor of 1930s Berlin to a country that bears the weight of Nazi history, imprecisely attributed a phrase he used when criticizing the German interior minister for refusing to say why he canceled an international soccer match after the Paris terror attacks. The phrase, “might unsettle parts of the population,” was Mr. Böhmermann’s paraphrase of the minister’s actual remarks, not a direct quotation. (The minister, Thomas de Maizière, said, “Parts of my answer might unsettle the population.”)Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 5, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Comic’s Task: Getting Young Germans to Log Off, Tune In and Laugh Out Loud.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »