By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 5, 2015
DAKAR, Senegal —  A triple suicide bombing at a market on an island in Lake Chad killed at least 15 people and wounded 130 on Saturday, Chad’s government said. A top police official claimed that the Nigerian extremist group Boko Haram was responsible.The three explosions on the island, Koulfoua, were carried out by women, said Chad’s police spokesman, Paul Manga.The police, military and local officials earlier said that at least 27 people were killed and 90 wounded. The government on national radio later said at least 19 died, including four attackers, in three explosions.The Lake Chad region, which straddles the borders of Chad, Cameroon, Niger and Nigeria, has been regularly attacked by the extremists. Chad’s government in November imposed a state of emergency in the area.AdvertisementChad’s director general of the gendarmerie, Gen. Banyaman Cossingar, said Boko Haram was suspected in Saturday’s attacks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two suicide bombings by women killed at least three people in November in the village of Ngouboua near Lake Chad. Five coordinated suicide bombings in October killed at least 36 people and wounded 50 others in the western village of Baga Sola near Lake Chad that is home to thousands of Nigerians who have fled the extremists’ violence.Boko Haram’s six-year uprising has killed at least 17,000 people. The Nigerian militants have this year expanded their attacks into Cameroon, Chad and Niger, countries contributing troops to a regional force formed to wipe out the extremists. Forces from Nigeria and neighboring Chad earlier this year drove the extremists out of cities and towns in northeastern Nigeria where they had proclaimed an Islamic caliphate.AdvertisementTroops from Cameroon, Nigeria, Chad and Benin had last week carried out operations in the Lake Chad region and the Sambisa Forest, arresting 100 militants, killing 100 others and freeing 900 hostages, according to Cameroon’s government.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Chad Suspects Boko Haram in Island Attacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.