By MICHAEL FORSYTHEDEC. 6, 2015
HONG KONG —  A 44-year-old businessman who became one of China’s wealthiest people as he forged ties with some of the Communist Party’s top leaders before suddenly falling out of favor has died in prison.The death on Friday of the businessman, Xu Ming, was reported by several news agencies, including the financial newsmagazine Caixin and the Chinese government-owned Wen Wei Po, a newspaper in Hong Kong. China’s principal state-run news outlets, however, have said nothing about Mr. Xu’s death.Caixin reported that Mr. Xu died of a heart attack in the city of Wuhan, in central China, and on Sunday his ashes were taken to the northeastern port city of Dalian, where his career began. He was to be released next September, according to Wen Wei Po and Caixin.A multimillionaire before he turned 30, and a billionaire shortly after, Mr. Xu’s most prominent political patron was the mayor of Dalian, Bo Xilai, whose government in the 1990s gave the young businessman lucrative contracts to beautify the city. Mr. Xu’s Shide Group expanded into building materials and real estate and in 1999 bought Dalian’s championship soccer team from the city’s other powerful and politically connected businessman, Wang Jianlin, the chairman of Dalian Wanda Group.AdvertisementMr. Xu’s fortune swelled as Mr. Bo rose through the ranks of the party’s leadership. He became China’s eighth-richest person in 2005, according to Forbes, and focused many of his investments on the country’s growing insurance industry.AdvertisementMr. Bo’s downfall in March 2012 was quickly followed by Mr. Xu’s own detention, under circumstances that have never been explained by the authorities. When Mr. Bo was indicted in 2013, prosecutors charged that he had received millions of dollars in payoffs from Mr. Xu, including a villa on the French Riviera. Mr. Xu was also accused of paying for extravagant trips for Mr. Bo’s son, including one to Africa.Yet Mr. Xu maintained close ties to many prominent leaders, including rivals of Mr. Bo. In Beijing, Mr. Xu shared an office floor with the wife of former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, and was a co-investor in several businesses with Wen family members. Close associates said he had dated Mr. Wen’s daughter, Wen Ruchun.“He was a public relations genius,” Larry Cheng, one of Mr. Xu’s longtime business partners, told The New York Times in 2013. “He was helping everyone in the leadership. He knew just who to get close to and how to do it.”Mr. Xu’s fall from grace highlighted the delicate position of many ambitious businesspeople in China. To become successful, they make themselves indispensable to party officials and their families. Often those relationships involve corruption, and if the party officials get into trouble, their business associates can be dragged down with them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not known whether an autopsy was performed. But only two days passed between Mr. Xu’s death and his ashes being brought to Dalian. It recalls the mysterious death and hasty cremation of a British business associate of Mr. Bo’s, Neil Heywood. His death in November 2011 set off a chain of events that led to Mr. Bo’s downfall. Mr. Bo’s wife, Gu Kailai, was convicted of Mr. Heywood’s murder and is, like her husband, in prison for life.For Mr. Xu to die so young, in custody and less than a year before his scheduled release, and then to be “cremated so quickly would certainly appear like there is prima face evidence for this to be investigated properly by the authorities,” said Steve Tsang, head of the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies at the University of Nottingham in Britain. “Even if he had died of a heart ailment, had it happened in the U.K., I would expect an autopsy to be conducted and the family duly consulted before the case is closed.”“But the P.R.C. is the P.R.C. and normal standards we have in Europe or North America do not always apply,” Mr. Tsang continued, using the abbreviation for the People’s Republic of China.Mr. Tsang added, however, that there was no evidence suggesting foul play or anything other than a natural death. “But there is at the moment no credible evidence pointing to any particular explanation,” he said.Attempts to contact prisons in the Wuhan area to obtain confirmation of Mr. Xu’s death and cremation were unsuccessful.Kiki Zhao contributed research from Beijing.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 7, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Businessman, 44, Dies in Prison, Reports Say.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.