By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEDEC. 7, 2015
GENEVA —  Facing mass movements of refugees and human suffering on a scale unseen since World War II, the United Nations asked governments on Monday for more money than ever before to fund its humanitarian operations in 2016.The humanitarian aid coordinator of the United Nations, Stephen O’Brien, appealed for more than $20 billion to provide urgent help to the most vulnerable people in 37 countries, estimated to total 87.6 million.“This amount is five times the level of funding we needed a decade ago, and it is the largest appeal we have ever launched,” Mr. O’Brien told reporters in Geneva, citing wars in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and South Sudan as the major drivers of humanitarian needs.The money sought is not nearly enough to provide help to all the people worldwide who need aid, which Mr. O’Brien estimated at 125 million.AdvertisementHe said the United Nations needed $8 billion just to deal with the fallout from the five-year-old war in Syria, including aid for 13.5 million people trying to survive the war inside the country and 4.7 million refugees who had fled to neighboring countries.AdvertisementThe appeal was also nearly a quarter more than the $16.4 billion the United Nations requested a year earlier, a figure that climbed to $19.9 billion by the end of the year as the impact of wars and natural disasters worsened.Donor governments, however, have provided just $9.7 billion, less than half the total amount sought for this year, United Nations officials pointed out, leaving a record shortfall in funding.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The international humanitarian system is all too often the only safety net that exists for people fleeing wars,” said António Guterres, the United Nations high commissioner for refugees. “It has to be funded on a scale that’s realistic and commensurate with today’s immense challenges.”“Of course it is a lot of money,” he said of the appeal, “but if you compare with military expenditure or bailouts of the financial system, it’s perfectly affordable.”At present levels of funding, however, “we are not able to provide even the very minimum in both core protection and lifesaving assistance,” Mr. Guterres said, causing what he described as a progressive deterioration in the living conditions of people displaced by wars and disasters.Aid agencies have warned that cutbacks in assistance caused by lack of funding are a major contributor to the surge in Europe-bound Syrian refugees, who have left the countries where they had initially found shelter.Countries that cut overseas aid budgets and, at the same time, access for refugees “seem to be playing with fire,” Mr. Guterres said.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Seeks Record Amount for Humanitarian Aid in 2016.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.