By STEPHEN CASTLEDEC. 7, 2015
A man stabbed several people at a London underground station on Saturday before being arrested by police, who said they were treating the attack as a "terrorist incident."LONDON —  Two days after a knife attack in a London subway station left one man seriously injured and prompted a terrorism investigation, Prime Minister David Cameron praised the reaction of one bystander, who told the attacker, “You ain’t no Muslim, bruv.”The suspect in the attack — identified as Muhyadin Mire, 29, from East London — appeared in Westminster Magistrates’ Court on Monday dressed in a T-shirt and tracksuit pants. He was charged with attempted murder. He spoke only to confirm his name, age and address.The 56-year-old man who was injured suffered a five-inch neck wound that required five hours of surgery. Two other people also were injured in the attack, which took place in the ticket hall of the Leytonstone station on Saturday evening.Three days before, Parliament had authorized airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria, an issue that has provoked a heated public debate in Britain. British news reports have suggested that Western intervention in Syria was the motive for the knife attack.AdvertisementThe events at the subway station have spurred a debate of their own, after images of the attack taken by bystanders circulated on social media.AdvertisementSome people have criticized bystanders for filming what went on rather than intervening to help. But the amateur videos have also drawn attention to the man heard telling the attacker, “You ain’t no Muslim, bruv.” The phrase is being cited as a rallying call for unity and a rejection of violence.Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain at an event on Monday discussed a terror-related knife attack in a London metro station this weekend.Mr. Cameron, who pressed for the airstrike authorization, described the episode at Leytonstone station as “a hideous attack,” and praised the police, who reached the scene within minutes and used a Taser to incapacitate and arrest Mr. Mire.“First of all, full credit to the person and people who took on this attacker, and full credit to the very brave police officers who managed to subdue him,” said Mr. Cameron, speaking in Burton-on-Trent. “Let me also pay credit to the person — you can’t quite see who it is — from the film who made that brilliant statement about ‘You ain’t no Muslim.’ ”Mr. Mire is accused of knocking the 56-year-old man to the ground with a punch, kicking him repeatedly and then grabbing hold of his head and slashing his neck.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is also accused of brandishing his knife at others and aiming it at the throat of at least two people.Prosecutors are calling the attack an act of terrorism, the Press Association reported. The news agency said that images of flags associated with the Islamic State were found on Mr. Mire’s cellphone after the attack, along with images of the recent terrorist attacks in Paris, and of a British police training exercise on how to deal with a gunman.Mainly because of the threat posed by Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq, British officials consider a terrorist attack in Britain to be highly likely, though not imminent. Before last week’s parliamentary vote, Britain was attacking Islamic State targets only in Iraq, not in Syria.The British authorities say that seven terrorist plots were detected and prevented in the past year, though the scale of those planned attacks is not clear.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 8, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Cameron Praises Retort After Attack .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.