By JAMES DAOSEPT. 30, 2015
The base was not much to behold when the American soldiers arrived in Kunduz in 2010. Nestled atop a vast plateau, it was little more than a collection of stucco buildings with chipping paint, a small airstrip on one side, a graveyard of rusting Soviet vehicles on the other. And everywhere was the Afghan dust, so fine it would puff like dry mountain snow with every step.In the months to follow, the Americans greatly expanded the base. Seabees, members of the Navy’s construction unit, used heavy equipment to build walls from containers of dirt that encircled an area large enough to hold a second airstrip.A small city of yellow, air-conditioned tents, with a basketball court and a chapel, rose in the field of dust. So did a sprawling maintenance bay for the armada of armored trucks.The soldiers of the First Battalion, 87th Infantry out of Fort Drum, N.Y., could never quite fathom the reason behind the expansion, and by 2013 American forces were being withdrawn from the province.AdvertisementToday, the airstrip has become a refuge for hundreds of Afghan soldiers and civilians besieged by the Taliban forces that now control the city of Kunduz.AdvertisementLooking back at photos of the base, it is hard not to think of it as anything but a monument to futility.I had gone to Kunduz with the battalion to chronicle its experiences as part of the American troop increase in Afghanistan, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal’s strategy for quelling a resurgent Taliban. Provinces like Kandahar and Helmand in the south were focal points for the American push.But Kunduz in the north was nearly as important, the capital of a lush — by Afghan standards — region of rice and wheat fields, a gateway for trade in petroleum, manufactured goods, drugs and weapons to Tajikistan and other former Soviet republics to the north.It was my second time in Kunduz. I had spent a week there in early 2002 after the American invasion of Afghanistan. Kunduz had been the Taliban’s last stand. Just hours before the city fell to marauding militias commanded by local warlords and aided by American air power and Special Forces, Taliban commanders were airlifted to safe havens.The city I saw then was battered and frightened, ringed by cratered roads that took hours to navigate.But it was also hopeful: I watched as local teachers opened a school for girls, its buildings refurbished thanks to American money.Eight years later, Kunduz was a new world. Small stores and coffeehouses lined its streets; the bazaars brimmed with locally grown produce and fresh meat. The city felt secure.AdvertisementYet the insurgency showed its face now and again. Girls at a local school were sickened by what the police said was poison gas. A hotel that was home to Western aid workers was briefly seized by militants. Late in the battalion’s deployment, a suicide bomber killed the provincial governor.Outside the city center, evidence abounded that the Taliban and their allies were waiting patiently in the shadows. The province of Kunduz is one of Afghanistan’s most ethnically diverse, with nearly equal numbers of Tajik, Uzbek and Pashtun residents, and scatterings of Turkmens and Hazaras.Yet loyalties to the Pashtun-led Taliban remained strong in enclaves like Archi, Chardara and Gor Tepa. For months, American patrols would not venture into those districts without mine-sweeping trucks, and when they did, firefights often ensued.I met an American farming expert whose story said much about the region’s simmering fears of its once and perhaps future overlords.The expert, Eric Imerman, a child of Iowa, had gone to Kunduz to teach modern growing techniques. I met him at a meeting between Ministry of Agriculture officials and local farmers to discuss planting winter wheat. But when Mr. Imerman pulled up in a convoy of American armored trucks, the government officials became nervous and left.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He told me later that he was stunned by the backwardness of Afghan farmers; so much knowledge seemed to have been lost during decades of war.Yet because he had to travel under the protection of American soldiers, and because local farmers were afraid the Taliban would kill them if they were seen with Americans, he was repeatedly frustrated.He said that while serving in the Peace Corps in the Philippines in the 1980s, “Some of the best meetings I ever had with farmers was when you sit down under a shade tree and just talk with them. No agenda, just sit and talk. And you can’t do that here.”In the final months of 2010, soldiers from the battalion pushed deeper into Chardara, Gor Tepa and Taliban enclaves near the far northern city of Imam Sahib. By spring 2011, they declared much of the province cleared of insurgent fighters.
            The New York Times followed the stories of the men and women of the First Battalion, 87th Infantry of the 10th Mountain Division, during their yearlong deployment to Afghanistan in 2010 and 2011.        
                The New York Times followed the stories of the men and women of the First Battalion, 87th Infantry of the 10th Mountain Division, during their yearlong deployment to Afghanistan in 2010 and 2011.
            I was dubious, but one experience made me believe that perhaps they were right.Shortly before the battalion was to return home, a friendly officer took me on a day trip with a few of his soldiers. We piled into small green pickup trucks driven by Afghan police officers and sped off onto dirt back roads I had never traveled before.AdvertisementJust as we crossed a small wooded stream that seemed perfect for an ambush, we entered a wide, rolling plain.In the distance, we could see scores of men on horses, kicking up dust in a roiling scrum. They were playing buzkashi, the Afghan national sport, in which  horsemen on competing teams vie for control of a headless goat.The contest was being run by the local police commander, who the Americans believed profited handsomely from the region’s thriving weapons and drug trade. But he was the host that day, and he graciously offered us horses and a place in the game.The hillside was lined with families who had made a daylong picnic out of the event. As I watched two soldiers trot off — one at Sancho Panza pace, the other whipping and wheeling his animal with the skill of a Texas cowboy — I could not help thinking: Maybe, just maybe, this place might find its way to peace.In the years since their deployment, the soldiers from the First Battalion, 87th Infantry have returned to American life.One died in a shootout with the police outside a bar. Others went to graduate school or wrote books. A wisecracking private became a tough-guy sergeant. Another recently buried a child. Some have tried to ignore the news out of Kunduz. Many others are watching in dismay.“It’s difficult to not feel a sense of meaninglessness,” one former soldier wrote to me on Facebook this week. “The feeling was already there regarding Iraq. My area of operations in Iraq is under ISIS control and now Kunduz via the Taliban. You wonder what all that effort and sacrifice was for.”He paused, and then continued writing. “I always hated the GWOT/Vietnam comparison in the past,” he said, referring to the Pentagon’s official shorthand for the global war on terrorism. “But, now I can’t help but draw parallels. I wonder if this is the same feelings Vietnam vets felt watching as the South collapsed.”A version of this article appears in print on October 1, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: As a City Falls, Wondering What U.S. Sacrifice Was For.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.