By STANLEY REEDDEC. 8, 2015
Paul Polman, chief executive of Unilever, called for private sector financing to address climate change during The International New York Times Energy for Tomorrow conference in Paris.PARIS — Unilever. Total. Bank of America. Patagonia. Ikea. Some of the world’s largest companies — and brands — announced their commitment on Tuesday to cutting carbon emissions and participating in practices that would support sustainable energy.Speaking at The New York Times Energy for Tomorrow conference, being held in concurrence with the international climate talks outside Paris, executives from a number of companies said they accepted the need to help reduce the carbon dioxide emissions blamed for global warming.Also, representatives of the Chinese government, the world’s No. 1 carbon emitter, released new climate goals that called for a substantial buildup of alternative energy sources like wind and solar.To be sure, the executives were self-selective, agreeing to appear on panels because of their interest in embracing climate goals, which are being intensely discussed by representatives of 195 countries at a converted airplane hangar north of Paris in Le Bourget. The deadline for a deal is Friday.
      We’re tracking developments from the COP21 climate conference in Paris.
    Get daily news and analysis by email from the climate change conference in Paris. You will also be among the first to receive our new Science newsletter.But the array of companies — from furniture to food, investment funds to insurers — acknowledging the need for rapid and strong action to offset the worst effects of climate change was nonetheless notable.Advertisement“Science shows that climate change will reduce food productivity and food security at the same time our world’s population is growing and requiring us to feed more people with fewer natural resources,” said John Bryant, the chief executive of the Kellogg Company, who announced that by 2050 the company would cut its emissions by 65 percent and help reduce those of its suppliers by 50 percent.AdvertisementThe business executives spoke of the need to address the problem and the profit-making opportunities solutions could offer.Only the business community is likely to have sufficient funds to underwrite the multitrillion dollars in investments that will be required to shift from a high carbon economy that runs on fossil fuels to a more sustainable one, many executives said.“We are not going to solve this at government level,” said John Kerry, the United States secretary of state, speaking to an audience largely drawn from the business community at the American ambassador’s Paris residence on the eve of the conference. “You are going to make the difference.”K. K. Chan, the chief executive of a company that invests in renewable energy sources in China, said that the market was “very difficult” for outsiders, during The International New York Times Energy for Tomorrow conference.In a passionate speech, Mr. Kerry said that he thought the current United Nations-organized negotiations to tackle climate change were different from past efforts because “something is happening at the grass-roots level of countries around the world.”Mr. Kerry forecast that the business community would produce breakthroughs in areas like clean energy. But, some said, what may be even more powerful is the business world’s realization that operations that produce low emissions and that are otherwise sustainable are now good business, rather than a luxury that few can afford.Business leaders on Tuesday concurred.“Business isn’t stupid; we are not putting money into a bottomless pit,” said Paul Polman, the chief executive of Unilever, the maker of consumer goods.Mr. Polman said that Unilever’s recent investments in new plants running on clean energy and other new technologies were producing hefty 23 percent returns on capital.AdvertisementIn the medium term, though, the shift is likely to be disruptive and uncomfortable, especially for companies wedded to outdated business models, some said.Dan Reicher of Stanford University discussed Germany’s introduction of renewable energy sources during The International New York Times Energy for Tomorrow conference in Paris.Particularly hard hit will be electric utilities, which are struggling to adjust to an environment in which the power they produce from natural gas and coal is being squeezed out by wind and solar energy. There are even questions about whether the traditional electric power system will survive.Among the highlights of the conference:• Representatives from China provided details about new goals to increase its reliance on wind and solar power.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• Germany was praised for pursuing and sticking with an ambitious plan to reduce carbon emissions despite the strains it imposed on the electric grid — a government policy known as “Energiewende,” that also helped bring down the price of solar panels worldwide, one speaker said.• One of the world’s largest investment funds discussed its commitment to disinvest from polluting companies, and put its money toward sustainable energy.• Insurance companies talked about the need to prepare for major climate-related weather events, and adjust insurance premiums accordingly.The conference continues Wednesday morning with a scheduled discussion between Mr. Kerry and Thomas L. Friedman, an Op-Ed columnist for The New York Times.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »