By DAVID JOLLY and TAIMOOR SHAHDEC. 8, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — Taliban insurgents on Tuesday attacked Kandahar Airfield, a major base for American military and intelligence forces as well as the Afghan Army, leaving at least nine dead, according to Afghan officials.Several suicide bombers penetrated the base’s security around 6:20 p.m., barricading themselves into an old school building that now contains shops and battling with Afghan soldiers, said Samim Khapalwak, a spokesman for the governor of Kandahar Province.After hours of intense fighting, the battle appeared to be over around 11 p.m., according to a senior Afghan Army officer at the base, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he had not been authorized to brief the news media. At least nine people were killed and about 15 wounded, most of them apparently civilian shop owners who had been trapped by the battle, the officer said. Some of the bodies were badly burned.The officer said it was still unclear how many Taliban insurgents had conducted the attack. A pro-Taliban website said that “a number of martyrdom seekers armed with heavy and light weapons entered Kandahar air base undetected” and attacked “invaders and hirelings.” Qari Yusuf Ahmadi, a Taliban spokesman, said the insurgents had sent 10 suicide bombers wearing Afghan Army uniforms.AdvertisementKandahar Airfield is the most important government base in southern Afghanistan, and it is home to American military and C.I.A. operations in the region. Through years of war, the base’s security perimeter had never been breached — though it has been the site of at least one so-called green-on-blue insider attack against Western forces by an Afghan soldier.AdvertisementOne Western official who had been briefed on the attack said that the attackers did not appear to have penetrated farther than the first level of base security, far from the runway and most barracks and other sensitive facilities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“After finishing prayers we heard shooting,” said Wali-Mohammad Khan, a soldier at the base. “Later we found out that some armed men had taken shelter at a school building.”The building is close to the base for coalition forces, and very close to Afghan Army family housing and schools, he said.“We do not know from which gate the bombers entered Kandahar Airfield or how they managed to get in,” he said.Mr. Khan said that NATO helicopters and aircraft were targeting the school building, and that Afghan commandos had also engaged with the attackers.“Now the school is in flame and a few shops are also burning,” he said. “The shooting stopped for a while, and I have no idea if there are any casualties.”David Jolly reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan. Mujib Mashal contributed reporting from Kabul.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page A19 of the New York edition with the headline: Taliban Insurgents Kill 9 at Kandahar Base.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.