By SAPHORA SMITHDEC. 8, 2015
Members of the American band Eagles of Death Metal performed in Paris for the first time since the Nov. 13 attacks. They joined U2 on stage Monday night at the AccorHotels Arena, a few miles from the Bataclan.Members of the rock band Eagles of Death Metal returned on Tuesday to the Bataclan concert hall in Paris for the first time since their performance on Nov. 13, when gunmen stormed the building and killed 90 people.The American band spent about 10 minutes outside the concert hall in a heavy rain, laying flowers at a makeshift memorial site and reading tributes to the dead.Television crews and news photographers had waited for hours for the band, whose possible return to Paris to accompany the Irish band U2 in concert had been rumored. Spectators clapped and cheered when vehicles bearing members of the American band arrived.Asked if he could describe how he felt, Jesse Hughes, a singer and guitarist for Eagles of Death Metal, only shook his head.AdvertisementAlthough the musicians survived the assault, part of a series of coordinated attacks in and around Paris for which the Islamic State has claimed responsibility, the band’s merchandise manager, Nick Alexander, was killed.Eagles of Death Metal joined U2 onstage Monday night at the end of their performance at the AccorHotels Arena, a few miles from the Bataclan. U2 had postponed shows on Nov. 14 and 15 in Paris, citing France’s nationwide state of emergency.AdvertisementThe bands played a rendition of Patti Smith’s “People Have the Power,” which Ms. Smith had performed with U2 on the same stage Sunday night.An article on Dec. 9 about a return performance at the Bataclan music hall in Paris by the American band Eagles of Death Metal, which was playing there the night of the terror attacks, misstated the number of people killed at the venue. Ninety died there, not 89.A version of this article appears in print on December 9, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Band Returns to Pay Tribute.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »