AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter BakerKIEV, Ukraine — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. urged Ukrainian leaders on Tuesday to curb the power of the business moguls dominating society and to fulfill the promise of the popular revolution that pushed out a pro-Moscow government last year.Addressing the Ukrainian Parliament, Mr. Biden sternly lectured lawmakers to put aside their own self-interests and to transform this former Soviet republic into a model of democratic change.Citing the failure of the Orange Revolution of 2004 to deliver enduring change, he urged Ukrainians not to let this opportunity slip by as well.“This is your moment,” he told them. “This is your responsibility. Each of you — if you’ll forgive me for speaking to you this way in your body — each of you has an obligation to seize the opportunity that the sacrifices made in the Maidan, the sacrifices of the Heavenly Hundred. Each of you has an obligation to answer the call of history and finally build a united, democratic Ukrainian nation that can stand the test of time.”By invoking the memory of the roughly 100 protesters killed during protests in Maidan Square last year, Mr. Biden hoped to infuse today’s legislative battles with the moral imperative of the uprising, which led to a pro-Western government. Many in Ukraine worry that the new leaders have become so paralyzed by their own power struggles that they will squander the chance for change.For Mr. Biden, who has made it his mission to nurse Ukraine through its transition, it was a classic performance from the lectern in the grand chamber of Parliament, known here as the Rada. At times, he shouted at the lawmakers, gesturing sharply. At other points, he practically whispered. At still other moments, he wagged his finger.Citing John Adams, Thomas Paine, Edmund Burke and Daniel Webster, Mr. Biden talked about the United States’ own struggles to build democracy. He also cited a quotation from an American politician he did not identify: “In your heart, you know it’s right,” he said. (The phrase is actually a variation of a slogan in an ad made for the Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater in 1964.)But it was not clear whether Mr. Biden’s message really got through. Lawmakers, many listening to an interpreter through earphones, sat silently during the long lecture on corruption and applauded only when Mr. Biden assailed Russia for its intervention in Ukraine. The one standing ovation they gave Mr. Biden came when he said that Russia had infringed on Ukrainian sovereignty and that the United States would never recognize the annexation of Crimea.“Russia has violated these ground rules and continues to violate them,” he said. “Today, Russia’s occupying sovereign Ukrainian territory. Let me be crystal clear: The United States does not, has not, never will recognize Russia’s attempt to annex Crimea.”How Russia aims to achieve its goal of keeping Ukraine isolated from the West.He added that he would tell the world about Nadiya V. Savchenko, the Ukrainian helicopter pilot being held in Russia; her picture was displayed on a poster on the lectern from which Mr. Biden spoke, with the slogan “Freedom for Nadiya Savchenko.”And the vice president committed to keeping American sanctions on Russia until Moscow complies with a cease-fire brokered in Minsk, Belarus. “There can be no sanctions relief unless and until Moscow meets all, all of its commitments under Minsk,” Mr. Biden said.But his main message to the Ukrainians was, in effect, to get their house in order. The day before, he had suggested that many in Europe were waiting for Ukraine to fail so that they would have an excuse not to continue confronting Russia.With Ukraine’s rapidly sinking economy, that time often seems close at hand.The gross domestic product per capita, a broad measure of Ukrainians’ well-being, will be just $1,600 per person this year, down from $3,900 in 2013. That was the year before the new government took power partly on the promise of bringing living standards closer to those in Europe.Over all, Ukraine’s gross domestic product is projected to shrink by 15 percent this year after falling 6.8 percent the year before, according to Standard & Poor’s, the ratings agency. Much of the drop is attributable to a collapse in the value of the national currency, the hryvnia, and to uncertainty created by the conflict with Russia.And Ukraine remains one of the world’s most indebted countries, trailing only the Seychelles, according to one estimate.“It’s a struggle to see who will invest in this economy, who will commit to put in private capital,” Charles Robertson, the London-based chief economist of Renaissance Capital, said in a telephone interview.Mr. Biden called for an overhaul of the office of prosecutor general, change in the energy sector, transparency about official sources of income and other measures.“If you fail, the experiment fails,” he said. “It’s no exaggeration to say the hopes of freedom-loving people the world over are with you.”But analysts said it was doubtful that the Ukrainian government, no matter how well intentioned, could stamp out corruption anytime soon.“Ukraine has a fundamental problem,” Mr. Robertson said. “You cannot put good people just on the top, and hope their good policies permeate through the old apparatus that has been there for something like a century. It’s not going to happen in a year. It’s probably going to take a generation.”Andrew E. Kramer contributed reporting from Moscow.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement