
Sinosphere  
 DIDI KIRSTEN TATLOW
 
DEC. 8, 2015
Families in Beijing waited anxiously on Monday evening to hear whether schools would shut the next day, posing unexpected child-care challenges, after the city issued its first-ever red alert for heavy smog about 6:30 p.m. and advised school closings in an effort to protect students’ health and reduce traffic on the roads, among other measures.Finally, around 10 p.m., teachers at one prominent Beijing elementary school contacted parents on WeChat, the Chinese messaging app: The city’s education commission had ordered schools to close for three days.“At last. I’ve been waiting,” responded a mother with the WeChat handle “haohao.”China’s air pollution problem is a focus of considerable anger. Despite the significance of the city’s first red alert, the smog this week is not the worst the city has seen this year. Days of heavy smog starting in late November produced levels over 500, or “beyond index.” The United States Embassy’s air-quality index in Beijing recorded 367 at 1 p.m. Tuesday, a level rated as “hazardous at 24-hour exposure,” with readings earlier on Tuesday registering about 290.Also on Tuesday morning, other cities in the surrounding province of Hebei and across the North China Plain recorded readings around 500, or “severely polluted,” according to a Chinese government air-quality index.
            UPDATE Beijing issues 1st red alert for #smog since emergency response plan created in 2013 https://t.co/fAQ0Rvz0Y8 pic.twitter.com/kdGqGNo2BX But an attempt by a major news portal to put the situation in context — by comparing Beijing with another smog-ridden city, New Delhi, the capital of India — appeared to backfire.Advertisement“Smog Capital: New Delhi Is Surpassing Beijing,” the headline of an article on Tencent News said. It drew on reporting of the problem by overseas news outlets, citing Deutsche Welle, the German state broadcaster, as a source.Residents of the Chinese capital on Tuesday expressed mixed emotions about the air pollution that is blanketing this metropolis.“In the list of most polluted cities in the world, New Delhi is surpassing Beijing,” the report said. “In China’s capital, residents’ awareness of air quality has risen markedly, and the government has taken measures to bring it under control. But New Delhi is only just beginning to realize the seriousness of the problem.”AdvertisementOn Tuesday morning, pollution in New Delhi was around 420, according to the United States Embassy’s air-quality index. The United States government rates 301 to 500 as “hazardous.”The article drew about 3,000 comments, but rather than feeling comforted, many people said they were annoyed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Don’t darn well talk about other people, our own pollution is worse than others’ and you still dare to talk like this!” Wu Chenggang said.“So we’re second in the world. That’s really great,” said a person who gave only one name, Ming.“What an honor,” Pai Huazi wrote.“This is embarrassing. Our own buttocks are showing and we’re making fun of someone’s flowery underpants?” said Datoubing.“It’s like when your kid does badly at an exam and you say, ‘There are others that did worse!’ Be prouder. Compare yourselves to those who are doing better,” Yuxiaoyu wrote.Follow Didi Kirsten Tatlow on Twitter @dktatlow.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »