AdvertisementSupported byBy Alison SmaleBERLIN — A German woman suspected of being the last surviving member of a neo-Nazi group accused of killing nine immigrants and a policewoman from 2000 to 2007 broke her long silence on Wednesday, admitting to a Munich court that she was “morally guilty” of failing to prevent crimes but denying any part in the murders.The woman, Beate Zschäpe, 40, had refused to make any statement to the court since her trial opened in May 2013. Two years earlier, she had walked into a police station after two male associates were found dead in the wake of a failed bank robbery.The case shook Germany because the killings of the immigrants and policewoman had gone unsolved for years and because the neo-Nazi group, the National Socialist Underground, had seemed to escape official attention for a long period. Ms. Zschäpe’s refusal to discuss her potential role had added to the interest in the trial.On Wednesday, her lawyer read from a 53-page statement in which Ms. Zschäpe said she had gone underground with the two men in 1998. She denied, however, that she was a member of a far-right organization, and said she had not taken part in the killings of the immigrants and had not had any knowledge of the deeds. She also rejected having had a role in two bombings in Cologne, in January 2001 and June 2004, of which she is also accused.“I feel morally guilty that I could not prevent 10 murders and two bomb attacks,” she said in the statement read by the lawyer, Mathias Grasel.Ms. Zschäpe is not accused of direct involvement in the 10 killings, but prosecutors have charged that she was complicit and that the three-member group made decisions jointly.The group’s name was a play on the name of Hitler’s Nazi party, the National Socialists.In her statement, Ms. Zschäpe denied that she was a member of the group, which is accused of killing eight men of Turkish descent, a man of Greek descent and the policewoman.In addition, the three members of the group are suspected of having carried out the two bombings in Cologne. Prosecutors say the intent of those assaults was to kill “as many people as possible only because of their non-German origin.” Twenty-three people were wounded in the attacks, though no one died.Ms. Zschäpe’s lawyers did not immediately make a copy of the statement available to The New York Times.German reporters in the courtroom said much of the statement dwelled on what Ms. Zschäpe described as a difficult childhood in East Germany. She met the two men, Uwe Böhnhardt and Uwe Mundlos, when she was a teenager, and she is said by the German authorities to have disappeared with them in 1998.She resurfaced in November 2011, when she walked into a police station and told officers, “I am the one you are looking for,” shortly after she had set fire to an apartment where she had apparently lived for some time with the two men.Her case has been closely watched at home and abroad as a test of relations between Germans and ethnic minorities, particularly the estimated 3.5 million Turks in the country.The recent influx of hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing war and persecution in the Middle East and in other countries now dominates the national conversation, however, and the trial of Ms. Zschäpe had dragged on largely out of the spotlight.Her decision to break her silence, albeit indirectly, refocused attention on the case, and the Munich courtroom was packed.Mehmet Daimagüler, a lawyer representing several of the victims’ family members, rejected Ms. Zschäpe’s statement as insincere, the German daily Süddeutsche Zeitung reported, quoting a statement from the lawyer to Bavarian Radio.The accused “cannot come after 249 days of trial proceedings and build us such a construction of lies,” Mr. Daimagüler was reported to have said.Gamze Kubasik, the daughter of a man of Turkish descent who ran a kiosk in Dortmund, Germany, and was killed in 2006, was equally critical of Ms. Zschäpe’s statement.“Another punch in the face” from the protracted trial, she told reporters in Munich.Ms. Kubasik added in a statement distributed by her lawyer, Sebastian Scharmer, that Ms. Zschäpe was “trying to duck responsibility.”Her hopes of finally clarifying her father’s murder had been dashed, Ms. Kubasik said, adding, “For me, this is all pure tactics.”It was not clear whether the five judges would question Ms. Zschäpe orally or in written form, and whether she would respond in either eventuality.When the case came to light, it exposed a series of weaknesses and mistakes that damaged the reputation of Germany’s security services.The head of the domestic intelligence agency resigned in July 2012 because an official in his office had shredded material that may have contained evidence from paid informants about the group.Domestic intelligence chiefs in the states of Thuringia, Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt, all in the former East Germany, also stepped down as a result of the case.A parliamentary committee was set up in early 2013, in part to investigate charges that the government had indirectly supported members of far-right groups through payments to confidential informants.The panel concluded its work that summer but left several central questions unanswered. That prompted the Bundestag, or lower house of Parliament, to form a second committee last month.Melissa Eddy contributed reporting from Paris.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement