By DAN BILEFSKYDEC. 9, 2015
LONDON —  More than 360,000 people, angered by Donald J. Trump’s call to ban the entry of Muslims into the United States, have signed a petition accusing him of hate speech and asking the British government to bar him from the country.So many people have signed the online petition that Parliament is now required to consider debating the matter.The text of the petition, titled “Block Donald J. Trump from U.K. entry,” cited British laws against hate speech.“The U.K. has banned entry to many individuals for hate speech,” it says. “The same principles should apply to everyone who wishes to enter the U.K. If the United Kingdom is to continue applying the ‘unacceptable behavior’ criteria to those who wish to enter its borders, it must be fairly applied to the rich as well as poor, and the weak as well as powerful.”AdvertisementThe petition is limited to citizens and residents of Britain, although there is no effort to verify the status of signers, who are asked to provide a British address and to check a box that reads, “I am a British citizen or U.K. resident.”AdvertisementAlthough Mr. Trump, a Republican presidential candidate, received support from some conservative commentators, his call for the United States to shut its borders to Muslims has prompted an outcry by leading political and cultural figures across the political spectrum around the world.Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, criticized Donald J. Trump’s plan to stop Muslims from immigrating to the U.S., saying Mr. Trump was "clearly out of his mind."Prime Minister David Cameron has denounced Mr. Trump’s position as “divisive, unhelpful and quite simply wrong,” while in Egypt he was castigated by the country’s highest religious authority.Britain, like other European countries, has been grappling with how to tame the threat of Islamic radicalism, and critics have condemned Mr. Trump’s comments for their potential to further inflame tensions.Politicians and law enforcement officials here were especially outraged by comments by Mr. Trump, who leads in most polls, in an interview on the MSNBC program “Morning Joe.” The candidate said parts of London and Paris were so “radicalized” that the police were afraid for their own lives.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tulip Siddiq, a member of Parliament for the opposition Labour party, was quoted by the BBC as saying that Mr. Trump should be refused entry into Britain. She called him “poisonous.”“I would say to him, You are not welcome in our country, in the same way that you want to ban people like me going into your country,” Ms. Siddiq said.But George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said that though he found the remarks objectionable, it would be better to respond to them with robust democratic debate rather than a ban.In Scotland, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has withdrawn Mr. Trump’s status as a business ambassador to Scotland, the BBC reported, while  Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen has stripped Mr. Trump of an honorary degree it bestowed upon him in 2010 in recognition of his business achievements.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 10, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Petition in Britain Calls for Trump to Be Denied Entry to Country.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.