By CORAL DAVENPORTDEC. 9, 2015
At the United Nations climate conference, Secretary of State John Kerry announced a United States' plan to double spending on helping poor countries mitigate the effects of climate change by 2020.LE BOURGET, France — Less than two days before their deadline to conclude a sweeping new climate accord, negotiators from nearly 200 countries have yet to resolve major issues, such as how and when pledged cuts to carbon emissions would be verified.Lead negotiators said they were confident that a deal could still be reached — and perhaps in time to meet the Friday deadline. But some outside observers who have been monitoring the talks said that the compromises necessary to bring it across the finish line could weaken the deal so much as to make it nearly toothless.At the heart of the proposed deal are a set of pledges from 186 countries, representing over 90 percent of the global economy, to cut their emissions. But a draft text published on Wednesday did not include any details on how those emissions cuts would be monitored and verified.Meanwhile, even if enacted, those pledges would cut emissions about only half as much as necessary to curb greenhouse gases to the level needed to prevent the atmosphere warming by 2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit. At that point, scientists say, catastrophic effects would kick in, such as devastating floods, droughts, food shortages and intense storms.AdvertisementA group of countries led by the United States, Europe and small island nations, known as the “High Ambition” coalition, have pushed for provisions that would require countries to submit to verification of their cuts by an outside body, and to return to the table every five years with more stringent pledges.AdvertisementDeveloping nations like China and India have strongly resisted such provisions — particularly the demand to ratchet up their emissions commitment. Some nations have expressed concerns that the verification demand would infringe on their sovereignty and lock them into actions that could become untenable.While the draft released on Wednesday discussed all those issues, it left blank the key details.“We need to press forward for ambition,” said Todd Stern, the lead negotiator for the United States. “The text that came out is a step forward. We need clear, strong cycles for countries to communicate either an update or revision of their targets, and we need that to start early.”He added, “We need a strong transparency article so we know what’s going on with those 186 pledges.”India, the world’s third largest carbon polluter, has resisted the demand that it return to the table in five years with more ambitious plans for cutting emissions.
      We’re tracking developments from the COP21 climate conference in Paris.
    Get daily news and analysis by email from the climate change conference in Paris. You will also be among the first to receive our new Science newsletter.“There needs to be flexibility,” said Ashok Lavasa, secretary of India’s Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. “Countries that can put forth every five years can do so. But without a technology breakthrough, other countries will need 10 years.”Tony deBrum, the climate change envoy for the low-lying Marshall Islands, a country that is vulnerable to the devastation of sea level rise due to climate change, said, “We will not accept a minimalist or low-ambition package.” However, he added, “I’m encouraged to see many of the elements we have argued for are there but we have a long way to go.”In an effort to help smooth the passage of an accord, Secretary of State John Kerry threw more money into the fund to help poor countries adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate. He announced on Wednesday a proposal to double the amount of pledged grants by 2020 to $860 million, from $430 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The issue of money has been a crucial sticking point in the talks, as developing countries demand that richer countries open their wallets to help pay for them to adapt to the ravages of climate change, such as increased floods and droughts.AdvertisementSecretary Kerry, who has been attending the international climate change talks since the first summit meeting in Rio de Janiero in 1992, plans to remain here all week to help facilitate the deal.Observers said the announcement appeared explicitly intended to give a boost to the stalled climate talks.China and India are resisting a push by the United States to create an aggressive outside monitoring system for emissions, and to require countries to come back to the table every five years with more stringent pollution reduction plans.“This impasse has slowed progress to a crawl, with the U.S. lacking leverage and China and India seemingly content to wait out the process,” Paul Bledsoe, a former climate adviser in the Clinton administration who is attending the talks, said by email. “The decision to double U.S. adaptation funding itself is a strategic play to head off loss and damage calls by developing nations. This is why Kerry is pushing these lines right now.”Others agreed that the pledge could help move things along. “The doubling of public commitments for adaptation is a very helpful development as we head into the final days in Paris,” said Andrew Steer, president of the World Resources Institute, a research organization. “We are entering crunch time.”No matter the shape of the deal that emerges, it is certain to require governments which have already committed to substantial emissions cuts to begin looking at how they can do still more.“We’re going to get a deal,” said Durwood Zaelke, president of the Institute for Governance and Sustainability, a research organization. “It’ll be good enough to drink the champagne. And the next day we’ll wake up with hangovers and realize we have a lot more work to do.’Sewell Chan contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »