By EDWARD WONGDEC. 9, 2015
BEIJING — The Chinese capital endured another day under an air quality “red alert” on Wednesday, with schools still closed, half of all cars kept off the roads and factories shut. But in other cities across northern China, tens of millions of people went about their daily routines in toxic air that was far worse than Beijing’s.In Anyang, Henan Province, the air quality index read 999 at 3 p.m., three times worse than in Beijing and at the top of the scale. Handan, in Hebei Province, was not much better, at 822. And in the same province, the city of Shijiazhuang, a bit closer to Beijing, registered 460.By United States standards, anything above 300 is “hazardous,” meaning people should stay indoors.So while Beijing officials issued their first code-red alert, cities that are even more polluted enacted milder emergency plans, or none at all. There was no wholesale shutdown of coal-burning factories. Children continued to attend schools without air purifiers.AdvertisementThe patchwork policies pointed to a major shortcoming of efforts by Chinese officials to battle air pollution and protect residents from its effects.AdvertisementThe variety of emergency plans and rules means that many residents of northern China are living under much looser health and safety standards than their counterparts in Beijing. The red alert in the capital has led residents to take more precautions — many more people are wearing facemasks outdoors now, for example. Even members of the People’s Armed Police marching in Tiananmen Square wore masks for the first time.The laxer policies outside the capital also mean that the sources of pollution that afflict Beijing are not being addressed by the red alert regulations: Most of the pollution comes from coal-burning factories in Hebei, Henan and other provinces, not from Beijing itself.Some experts said that Beijing’s red alert was a watershed moment, though, and that other provinces could feel pressure to impose stricter measures during awful smog attacks — if only to lessen some of the pollutants from their factories blowing to Beijing, a showcase metropolis of more than 20 million people and home to the Communist Party leadership.“There will be pressure on them, but whether they will do it or not is a question,” Wang Tao, an energy and climate scholar at the Carnegie–Tsinghua Center for Global Policy, said of provincial officials. “The responsibility will be on them.”With the disruptions to daily life and economic losses, Beijing will find it hard to consistently issue red alerts under the standards it has set for itself. It appeared the city’s mayor and colleagues took the extraordinary step of issuing this alert, which took effect Tuesday, as a rejoinder to widespread criticism of their inaction during the last bout of severe smog. That occurred as Chinese leaders were arriving in Paris for the start of climate change talks on Nov. 30, and global news reports and photographs of the bad air were an embarrassment for officials, Mr. Wang said.The central Ministry of Environmental Protection has been pushing for greater uniformity in air emergency plans across cities and also for more consistent enactment of those plans, but it is still facing resistance, environmental advocates and scholars say.Local officials are generally encouraged to maintain social stability and economic growth above all else, and those officials often seek to protect the operations of factories under their watch. In Hebei, for example, steel production is the dominant industry, and many factories are already struggling in an economic slowdown.AdvertisementAn environmental protection law enacted this year requires counties and cities to make available to the public a list of companies or factories that violate pollution limits and other regulations, but many local governments have avoided doing that.“Each city is still fighting its own game,” said Ma Jun, director of the Institute of Public and Environmental Affairs, a nongovernmental organization that promotes transparency in pollution reporting. “It’s still very hard to trust what the others are talking about. We need a new level of transparency if we want to coordinate this regional pollution control.”Mr. Ma and others praised the Beijing government for sounding a red alert on Monday night, after pollution had been building for 24 hours, and ordering it kept in effect until noon Thursday. Beijing has had a color-coded emergency pollution plan for two years but had never issued a red alert. Still, environmentalists said that without a coordinated strategy to tackle pollution across the entire region, the red alert measures in Beijing would not do much to stem the toxic fumes.“The pollution in Beijing is not just about our city. It’s about the entire North China Plain,” Mr. Ma said.Based on data analysis, his group has concluded that the current bout of toxic air and the previous one, which battered Beijing the last weekend of November and was even worse, occurred because winds blew pollutants northward from factories in provinces south of Beijing. Those pollutants then became trapped around the capital.“On Nov. 26, in just eight hours, the air quality here deteriorated so dramatically,” Mr. Ma said. “There’s no way for the local pollution to build up in such a way.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Monday night, Chen Jining, the minister of environmental protection, held a meeting on fighting pollution and praised Beijing’s issuing of the red alert, according to a report on the ministry website. By then, the ministry had sent 12 inspection teams to the cities of Beijing and Tianjin and three northern provinces, the report said.The hodgepodge of color codes and policies across northern China can be dizzying. Shijiazhuang in Hebei issued a yellow alert on Sunday, then upgraded it to orange on Tuesday night. Six cities in Henan have issued orange alerts. Tianjin, a coastal metropolis east of Beijing, went first to yellow, then upgraded to orange, even though its air quality index readings have been about equal to those of Beijing, which is at red. (The lowest alert, below yellow, is blue.)Tianjin, which has 15 million people, has the same criterion for issuing a yellow alert that Beijing does for a red. Only an air quality index of more than 500 — what the United States Embassy once called “crazy bad” — triggers a red alert in Tianjin.AdvertisementWhen Tianjin imposes a strict odd-even license plate driving restriction under orange and red alerts, it does so only in six urban districts. In Beijing, that restriction, imposed under a red alert, applies to the entire municipal area.Some environmental advocates say the Beijing government also suffers from transparency problems, despite its willingness to finally issue a red alert. They say there have been other recent instances when the city should have sounded the highest alarm, since the emergency plan mandates that Beijing do so if there is a prediction of heavy pollution of above 200 that will last for more than 72 hours. (Pollution levels are predicted based on wind and weather patterns.)The fact that city officials did so this time but not in the past confounds people, though the system does allow officials leeway since they can say a smog prediction was inexact.“The public wonders why there was no red alert last week, and there is one this week,” said Wang Yongchen, the founder of Green Earth Volunteers, a nongovernmental organization. “It shows a lack of order and lack of transparency. What qualifies as a red alert? What are the standards? Was the red alert issued because of the public outcry last week? Was it issued because some government officials just arbitrarily decided to do so? We don’t know.”Cai Yong, 36, who works for a video production company, said Beijing’s announcement of the alert on Monday night was so abrupt that people were left in the dark about what to do the next morning or heard nothing at all for a long time.“The first alert it sent out this week was in such a rush,” he said. “Everything happened all of a sudden, and many people didn’t prepare for it. Many probably didn’t even know anything about this information.”Only in the last two or three years have government officials at various levels been more open with citizens about air quality.Propaganda officials allowed state news media outlets to report broadly on air pollution only after all of northern China was hit with an “airpocalypse” in January 2013.AdvertisementBeijing did not begin announcing levels of a dangerous particulate matter called PM 2.5 until January 2012, even though it had been monitoring concentrations for some time. Since then, the central government has had cities across China publicly release the data, and it can now be seen online hourly.“In the beginning, there was no mention of PM 2.5, no media reports,” said Yan Ruiying, 29, a mother in Beijing. “So if you consider that as a starting point, there have been many improvements.”Those came about after a buildup of public pressure. Prominent Chinese online commentators had been lobbying the government for years to release real-time data, as the United States Embassy had been doing on a Twitter feed, @BeijingAir. The embassy has its own air monitoring equipment.In July 2009, a Chinese Foreign Ministry official, Wang Shu’ai, told American diplomats to halt the Twitter feed, which was posting PM 2.5 numbers. He said that the data “is not only confusing but also insulting,” and that it could lead to “social consequences,” according to a State Department cable.Some officials are still embarrassed by the embassy data, which continues to be made available. Before a summit meeting of world leaders in November 2014 in Beijing, officials told the local makers of a cellphone air pollution app that included the embassy numbers to keep the numbers off the app. The makers complied. That app recently began publishing the numbers again.“This air quality panic shows that there is something wrong with China’s entire ecological environment,” said Ms. Wang, the environmental advocate. “It is damaged and fragile, like a frail old man.”Mia Li and Kiki Zhao contributed research.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.