By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISOCT. 6, 2015
HAVANA —  The United States commerce secretary, Penny Pritzker, told Cuban officials on Tuesday that the Obama administration wants to create as many business opportunities as possible in their nation for American companies despite the long embargo and more than five decades of Cold War estrangement.“We want to make sure that you understand how our regulations work, because I think there’s business opportunity in that,” Ms. Pritzker said as she toured a newly built port and economic development zone in Mariel.“What we’re trying to do is be as open as we can until the blockade is lifted,” she added, using the term Cubans use for the American laws that have banned most trade and commerce between the two countries.Ms. Pritzker, the first commerce secretary to visit Cuba since 1950, is the second member of Mr. Obama’s cabinet to make the trip since Mr. Obama and President Raùl Castro announced last year that they would begin normalizing relations. It comes as American and Cuban commerce and finance officials begin a round of technical discussions of the process this week.AdvertisementHer assignment is a tricky one, highlighting the obstacles to the opening that Mr. Obama has championed.AdvertisementDespite the regulatory changes that have followed the president’s groundbreaking announcement, including new Treasury and Commerce rules to allow more travel and limited business activities between the United States and Cuba, the embargo is still in place, leaving strict limits on the vast majority of commerce, including tourism.“We’re leaning in — the president is leaning in — to this relationship,” Ms. Pritzker said of the Cubans in an interview on Tuesday, “but we’re limited in what we can do to help them.”“The signal, hopefully, that they’ll understand is that we’re trying to lean in as far as we can under the law,” she added.On Tuesday, Ms. Pritzker witnessed both the frozen-in-time glamour and the poverty of Cuba, where the average wage is now about $20 a month.She rode on highways dotted with colorful 1950s-era automobiles and palm-tree-lined boulevards replete with stately Spanish colonial homes, then passed ramshackle houses and apartment buildings in communities where shortages of food and other daily necessities are common.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She dined on Tuesday night with Cuban entrepreneurs and plans to participate in the technical talks on Wednesday, when she will also meet with senior government ministers.Her mission comes amid questions about how quickly Cuba is willing to make changes in its state-run economy to accommodate closer commercial ties, and whether the impoverished nation could even absorb the onslaught of business that might follow.John S. Kavulich, the president of the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council, said the Cubans would likely use Ms. Pritzker’s trip as “bait” to further its relationships with other countries, while stalling on making any changes to facilitate business ties with the United States.Advertisement“Her visit should not have been scheduled until the Cuban government had, at minimum, formally responded to each of the initiatives announced by President Obama since December, and then put into regulation, so this trip is premature,” he said.“No matter what our rules are, the Cuban government is unlikely to permit American businesses to have a presence in Cuba. It neither trusts the intentions of U.S. companies nor the intentions of the U.S. government.”Touring the port — it was financed largely by Brazilian capital, operates on Chinese equipment and is managed by a Singapore firm — Ms. Pritzker saw firsthand the degree to which the long-running feud between the United States and Cuba has translated into lost American business.“We do have a certain hamstring in terms of handling traffic from the United States,” one port official told Ms. Pritzker, noting that United States law requires that any foreign shipping vessel that docks in Cuba must wait six months before docking in the United States.“If you could take that message back to Washington,” he told Ms. Pritzker, “we’d be thrilled.”An earlier version of a capsule summary with this article misstated the surname of the United States commerce secretary. She is Penny Pritzker, not Pritchard.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Commerce Chief Makes a Pitch in Cuba .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.