By JOSH KRONDEC. 10, 2015
KAMPALA, Uganda — One of the prime suspects wanted for atrocities in the 1994 Rwandan genocide was arrested this week in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, the United Nations has announced.Ladislas Ntaganzwa, 53, a former mayor, is accused of helping organize the massacre of more than 20,000 Tutsis during the genocide in Rwanda, in which nearly one million people were killed over all.Mr. Ntaganzwa was one of nine remaining Rwandan genocide fugitives sought by the Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, which was set up by the United Nations to continue the work of international tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia, according to a United Nations statement.The United States had offered a $5 million reward for information leading to his capture.Nearly 22 years ago, Mr. Ntaganzwa was in his early 30s and a mayor, exercising “absolute authority, control and effective control over his subordinates” during the Hutu government’s genocide against the minority Tutsis, according to his 1996 indictment.AdvertisementFrom his position, Mr. Ntaganzwa oversaw the murder of thousands of his countrymen in the area he administered, as well as the rape and sexual violence committed against women, the United Nations said in its statement. On April 14-15, 1994, his indictment said, Mr. Ntaganzwa distributed weapons to civilians surrounding a parish where thousands of Tutsis had taken shelter, then used a megaphone to order them to shoot into the crowd. Several days later, it said, he helped organize another massacre on a nearby hill.“He personally participated in these crimes,” his indictment says.Mr. Ntaganzwa might stand trial in Rwanda, as the country requested. Mr. Ntaganzwa is accused of five counts, including genocide and rape as a crime against humanity.AdvertisementDuring its tenure, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has sentenced 61 suspects in the genocide, and acquitted 14. Ten have also been referred for national trial, according to the tribunal’s website.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of years that have passed since the Rwandan genocide. It took place nearly 22 years ago, not nearly 21.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Africa; Rwanda: Genocide Suspect Is Arrested.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.