By ALAN COWELLDEC. 10, 2015
LONDON — It has seemed, almost, a land of two narratives, one in fear of jihad, the other confronting an older hazard: rain.In London, a man wielding a knife attacked travelers at a subway station at Leytonstone, in the east of the city, reportedly telling victims that this was payback for the war in Syria, where Parliament had, days earlier, authorized airstrikes as part of the American-led coalition against the Islamic State.Hundreds of miles to the north, the heaviest downpour on record in the Lake District — a month’s rain in one 24-hour period — sent floodwaters cascading through thousands of homes and severed electric power supplies to tens of thousands more, closed and destroyed bridges, cut rail services between England and Scotland, and left victims to draw bitter conclusions about official neglect.The floods came after inundations in 2009 that were described as a once-in-a-century calamity. “We were sort of surprised” that a second devastating rainfall came so soon, said Paul Titley, the mayor of the Lake District town of Keswick.AdvertisementThere was, of course, no formal link between the two events, beyond a creeping sense that Britain, like much of Europe, has entered an ominous time of no quick fixes, when likely outcomes to epochal struggles seem only to recede into a murk of uncertainty.AdvertisementAnd, vying for the headlines these past few days, the parallel tales of terror and weather seemed to evoke England’s perennial disjunction between north and south.In London, after prosecutors said they were investigating the Leytonstone attacks as terrorism, citizens seemed partly alarmed and partly comforted by the ability of the police to Taser the assailant into submission. A bystander, his words recorded on smartphones, was heard to tell the fallen assailant: “You ain’t no Muslim, bruv.”That coaxed some relief among Britons, including Prime Minister David Cameron, anxious to depict militant Islamists as a small, if perilous, minority, set apart from the mainstream of Muslim opinion. Indeed, the attacker’s family went on television to say he was mentally ill and was known to the authorities as suffering from schizophrenia.After the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., and in Paris, this was small beer. No one died. No gunshots were fired. But an instant brush fire of alarm on social media showed a city on edge, reinforcing concerns that Britons might conflate their apprehensions about terrorism with qualms about Islam itself. (Not surprisingly, Donald J. Trump’s call this week for a ban on Muslims entering the United States drew much attention here.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Up north, the battle was more elemental, on a broader front, against an inexorable adversary. But that challenge, too, went beyond its obvious imagery: waters washing through towns and villages, rescuers loading citizens onto inflatable boats to take them to dry land, sodden furniture abandoned on sidewalks as the waters receded.The Lake District and the surrounding county of Cumbria are no strangers to rain. The village of Seathwaite is said to be the wettest inhabited place in England. The town of Cockermouth is said to have flooded 14 times since 1761.Studies relayed by the blogger Paul Homewood record 34 major floods since the early 17th century. Some environmental campaigners blame sheep farming for stripping the mountains of cover.“Rain that percolates into the ground is released more slowly than rain that flashes off the surface. But Cumbria’s hills are almost entirely treeless,” the columnist George Monbiot wrote in The Guardian.AdvertisementThe flooding coincided with international efforts just outside Paris to draw up a new global agreement on climate change. But big talk in distant places never trumps the adage that all news is local — in Leytonstone, or in Cumbria, or in the gulf between them.Government ministers, The Daily Telegraph said in an editorial, speak of a “One Nation government” embracing north and south alike.“They should show they mean it.”alan.cowell@gmail.comWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.