By NIDA NAJARDEC. 10, 2015
Salman Khan was acquitted Thursday of a hit-and-run charge from 2002. The case, followed by many of the actor's fans throughout India, made its way to a Mumbai court, which overturned a trial court's earlier conviction.NEW DELHI — A court in Mumbai acquitted the Bollywood superstar Salman Khan in a hit-and-run case from 2002 that left one person dead and four injured.The court overturned an earlier conviction and five-year sentence for culpable homicide and other charges under the Motor Vehicles Act. Justice A.R. Joshi said the prosecution had failed to prove that Mr. Khan was guilty of any of the charges, citing its failure to record evidence from important witnesses and contradictions in the testimony of the injured witnesses, the Press Trust of India reported.“The appeal is allowed. The trial court’s verdict is quashed and set aside,” Justice Joshi said, according to the Press Trust of India. “Salman is acquitted of all charges.”The decision was the latest development in the lengthy case, which has shuffled from court to court while tarnishing one of the Indian film industry’s most beloved stars.AdvertisementThe prosecution argued that Mr. Khan had been driving while drunk on a September night in 2002 when he ran over five homeless men sleeping on a sidewalk in Mumbai, then fled the scene. Mr. Khan denied he had been driving the car, but a lower court convicted him in May and sentenced him to five years in prison, though he was granted bail and remained free.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While the conviction was met with an outpouring of anguish and support from Mr. Khan’s fans and friends in the industry, some celebrated it as a much-overdue rebuke to a perceived culture of impunity for the rich and powerful in India.The public expressions of grief over Mr. Khan’s conviction and the joy at his acquittal Thursday underscored the tremendous popularity the actor enjoys, despite a checkered legal history that includes a trial in another incident involving the hunting of antelopes, known as blackbucks, in 1998 in the state of Rajasthan. Mr. Khan has maintained he is innocent in the Rajasthan case as well.AdvertisementFans celebrated outside Mr. Khan’s home in Mumbai on Thursday, traveling from distant cities and holding up posters of the star.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; India: Court Acquits a Bollywood Star.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.