By MUJIB MASHAL and ROD NORDLANDDEC. 10, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan —  Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States have agreed, once again, to restart peace talks with the Taliban, but there is still one big piece of the effort missing: the Taliban themselves.The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, returned home from an ice-breaking visit to Pakistan to contend not only with fallout from a skeptical and largely anti-Pakistan public, but also with the resignation of his intelligence chief and a new body count from the latest Taliban rampage: the siege of residential buildings in Kandahar, near the largest United States military base in southern Afghanistan. The attack raised serious questions about whether the insurgents would be interested in talking peace.The two-day siege, as Mr. Ghani held meetings in the Pakistani capital in hopes of restarting peace talks, reinforced the theory that the insurgents time their attacks for maximum effect and message. Analysts and residents of Kandahar said the timing did not bode well for Taliban participation in a new round of talks.Naseem Jan, a shopkeeper in Kandahar, predicted more violence, “a blood bath before peace knocks on our doors.”AdvertisementA new political setback came on Thursday, when Mr. Ghani’s intelligence chief, Rahmatullah Nabil, a United States favorite who led Afghanistan’s National Directorate of Security for five years, resigned. He lashed out at his boss in a scathing Facebook message just as the plane carrying the Afghan delegation was landing in Kabul on Wednesday.Advertisement“When Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif once again stated that Afghanistan’s enemy is Pakistan’s enemy,” Mr. Nabil wrote, referring to the Pakistani leader, “our compatriots in the residential areas of Kandahar airport, Khanashin district of Helmand and Takhar and Badakhshan were being martyred and slaughtered, and at least 1,000 liters of blood of our innocent people was shed, in the same red color as the carpet that we catwalked on.“Thank God I am not part of it,” he added.Mr. Ghani’s trip to Pakistan was a bold move, and while he won some concessions and came back optimistic for a new round of peace talks this winter, Pakistani officials were less enthusiastic. One Pakistani foreign ministry official said talk of the efforts’ beginning next week was “premature” and “exaggerated.”Pakistan has always been seen as crucial to the peace process in Afghanistan, since Taliban leaders are based there — mostly in Quetta, in Baluchistan Province — and fighters depend on cross-border sanctuaries to escape Afghan security forces and their American combat allies.But the Taliban have also shown a determined independent streak recently, especially when it comes to peace talks. When Pakistan pressured the Taliban to sit down for talks with the Afghan government in July, the militants’ leader, Akhtar Muhammad Mansour, disappeared for days, with his phones turned off, Afghan security officials said at the time.Mr. Mansour is now officially at the helm of the movement, though his succession is contested by many Taliban leaders, and it is not clear yet where he stands on negotiations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The extent of the carnage from the siege near Kandahar Airfield, which lasted 26 hours and involved hostage taking, only came to the fore on Thursday as residents woke up to collect the bodies for burial. At least 50 people were killed, the Afghan Defense Ministry said in a statement on Thursday. Eyewitnesses spoke of indiscriminate shooting by the Taliban assailants, and of the government forces’ firing tear gas into residential buildings.Many of the bodies recovered had been burned in the fires set off by the fighting. About 100 shops were destroyed, said Nasrullah Khan, whose uncle was killed and brother wounded.“It was a massacre, a massacre of innocent and powerless people,” Mr. Khan said.Sharifullah — who, like many Afghans, uses only one name — said his brother had died of bullet wounds. “I was watching the shooters and how merciless they were, and thinking that these people might not have hearts in their chests,” he said.AdvertisementMr. Nabil, the spy chief who resigned, was a critic of Mr. Ghani’s overtures to Pakistan from the beginning, and it was only a matter of time before he left his job, officials said. His objections are shared by former President Hamid Karzai, Mr. Nabil’s close ally, who is seen as still wielding influence and as scuttling the new government’s efforts.When Mr. Ghani and his coalition partner, Abdullah Abdullah, took over from Mr. Karzai last year, Mr. Nabil remained as intelligence chief largely because Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah could not agree on a successor and because the Americans wanted continuity amid increasing Taliban attacks. But it was clear that Mr. Nabil did not get along with his new boss and disagreed with his policies.Officials said he had felt increasingly marginalized, even embarrassed, by Mr. Ghani, and that he had often been excluded from meetings with visiting Pakistani military officials, including his Pakistani counterpart.On Thursday, Mr. Ghani appointed Massoud Andarabi, a low-profile young officer who rose to become the intelligence agency’s operational deputy, as his acting spy chief.While many in Kandahar criticized Mr. Ghani for reaching out to Pakistan, others were sympathetic, saying he had no choice but to keep pushing for talks.“This is a scattered, spread war in Afghanistan which also involves several countries,” said Abdul Jabar Qahraman, a member of Parliament. “The Afghan government has no other way but to engage them. The Taliban are also a fractured movement. One of them launched an attack on Kandahar, but it is possible that another faction wants to talk.”Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Rod Nordland from Islamabad, Pakistan. Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Jawad Sukhanyar from Kabul.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Afghanistan and Pakistan Agree to Taliban Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.