By JODI RUDORENOCT. 6, 2015
JERUSALEM —  As the bodies have piled up over the past week — four Israelis killed in two Palestinian attacks, four Palestinians slain by Israeli troops — people here have been nervously debating whether they are witnessing the onset of a third intifada.But even as the violence continued on Tuesday, the very notion of a Palestinian uprising may be outdated, a futile look to history to define events unfolding in profoundly different circumstances.Most analysts say Palestinians today lack the strong leadership that in 1987 harnessed spontaneous stone-throwing to an organized movement leading to the Oslo Peace Accords, or that orchestrated the campaign of suicide bombings against Israeli buses and cafes starting in 2000. The deep trauma of the second intifada, which claimed the lives of about 3,000 Palestinians and 1,000 Israelis over five years, scarred both societies. Avoiding a repetition of those years has defined much of their politics since.“Things could happen out of the blue, but that would require a very fast-paced mobilization on the ground that is allowed to jell, and I see the Palestinian Authority and security forces more likely than not retaining the capacity to nip that in the bud,” said Mouin Rabbani of the Institute for Palestine Studies. “Those forces that are seeking to sustain and expand this Palestinian campaign are dealing not only with the forces that at the end of the day managed to successfully neutralize the first and second intifadas — the Israeli military — but perhaps a more effective opponent, their own leadership.”AdvertisementStill, the chasm between the diplomatic positions of the two players makes the chances of big-picture progress so remote that many have resigned themselves to a reality of relative calm occasionally punctured by deadly outbursts.Advertisement“Nobody asks themselves, ‘Will there be a next clash between Israelis and Palestinians?’ The only question is when it’s going to happen,” said Etgar Keret, an Israeli author.“Historically in the Middle East people always saw two different options,” he said. “Maybe in a good-case scenario there would be talks, there would be something that would defuse the situation; in the bad-case scenario somebody will get shot or stabbed and things will get worse.”He added, “Now there is no kind of good-case scenario option; it’s basically everybody waiting for something bad to happen.”The current escalation lacks coordination but has been lent coherence by a cause: the fate of the Old City holy site revered by Jews as the Temple Mount and Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary.Leaders including President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority have accused Israel of trying to divide the contested compound, home of Al Aqsa Mosque, or change the status quo prohibiting non-Muslim prayer.Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel has denied this at every opportunity in recent weeks, and did so again on Tuesday.The violence continued throughout the day, with clashes between Palestinian protesters and Israeli soldiers in the occupied West Bank after Israel demolished two East Jerusalem homes of Palestinians who carried out deadly attacks last year.AdvertisementPalestinians hurled rocks and firebombs at the soldiers, who retaliated with rubber bullets, live ammunition and tear-gas canisters.Witnesses say more than a dozen Palestinians were wounded near the Qalandia checkpoint into Ramallah, two of them critically: a man shot in the spinal cord and a woman in the neck.Fighting in Aida Refugee Camp near Bethlehem raged for hours after 2,000 mourners buried Abdulrahman Obeidallah, a 13-year-old killed by Israeli forces the day before; Israeli news media on Tuesday quoted military officials as saying he had been shot by mistake.Mr. Netanyahu visited the site where an Israeli couple were fatally shot last week in front of their four children, promising to deploy ground and aerial cameras on all West Bank roads and continue the military activity of the past days.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For his part, President Abbas accused Israel of “stepping up a severe attack on the Palestinian people everywhere,” but urged his side to dial it down.Mr. Abbas, his popularity plummeting, is under intense pressure to challenge Israel, yet is worried that a violent uprising could benefit the militant Hamas.“Our instructions to our security devices, organizations and youths and people are that we do not want any escalation, but we want to defend ourselves,” Mr. Abbas said in a statement on Wafa, the official Palestinian news agency, raising again the specter of Al Aqsa. “We want to reach a political solution by peaceful means and not any other way at all.”As politicians, commentators and activists dissected the appropriate terminology for the current wave of violence, Israelis and Palestinians alike reported subtle changes of behavior and feelings reminiscent of the previous intifadas.In Ramallah, some Palestinians bought extra canned and dry goods for fear of a repeat of Israel’s military siege on six West Bank cities in 2002. At Birzeit University, administrators canceled a graduation ceremony. Traffic crawled between tires and walls of rocks that had been placed on main arteries to slow the potential advance of Israeli troops.Advertisement“It feels like the early days of the second intifada, but in very slow motion,” said Diana Buttu, a lawyer who once worked for Mr. Abbas. “Everybody I talk to is saying, ‘What if the Army comes in tomorrow, what are we going to do, do we stock up or not stock up?’ There’s this feeling like anything can happen.”Daniel Gordis, a rabbi and senior vice president of Shalem College in Jerusalem, noticed on Sunday that an Israeli news announcer signed off by wishing listeners “a happy and quiet holiday,” the “quiet” added for the first time in years.As he walked to synagogue on Tuesday, Israeli surveillance helicopters thrummed overhead and “I was very aware of who was around me,” he said. “For those of us who lived here between 2000 and 2004, it feels to a lot of people a bit like some of those other days.”Many of the young Palestinians who have taken to the streets have declared the third intifada already underway, with “Defend Al Aqsa” as its defining chant. Several Palestinian Authority officials joined the throngs at Tuesday’s funeral in Bethlehem, but the crowd’s ire was also directed against its own leaders.“The Palestinians have waited very patiently with our government and have realized that the concept of popular peaceful resistance, as our leadership wants, will get us absolutely nowhere,” said Mohammad Mansour, 25.Assad Abu Jamalla, 40, said he was angry, though he did not join the funeral march or confront any Israelis. He was searching for his son, Ayman, 11, who failed to return home after the burial.“I am here to find him, kick his butt and take him home where he will be safe,” Mr. Jamalla said. “I don’t want to be the father of a martyr, and I don’t think that all this will liberate Palestine. What is happening in the street is only going to aggravate the occupation and bring about negative consequences.”Reporting was contributed by Rami Nazzal from Aida Refugee Camp in the West Bank; Diaa Hadid from Ramallah, West Bank; and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on October 7, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: New Violence Reminds Many of an Intifada.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.