AdvertisementSupported byBy Anne Barnard and Hwaida SaadBEIRUT, Lebanon — A Syrian pastry chef turned antigovernment activist, Bebars al-Talawy, has spent nearly three years in besieged rebel enclaves, growing ever more gaunt, exasperated and sick of the one red jacket he has worn month after month.Yet when rebels and security forces struck a truce recently that could end the blockade trapping him in the last rebel-held district in the city of Homs, he did not feel safer or freer. Instead, he was sure it meant choosing surrender or death, calling it the start of “the final countdown to the end of my life.”His predicament, and his disillusionment with all parties to the conflict, demonstrated the challenges of selling any peace deal in Syria, even as international officials praised the Homs truce as a step toward a nationwide agreement. Russia, the United States and Middle Eastern powers are pushing with new urgency for a political solution to the nearly five-year civil war as the Islamic State, incubated in the chaos of the multisided Syrian war, expands its reach, and hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees overwhelm Europe.But as Mr. Talawy, 25, has said in online interviews over several years, there are deep divisions in Syria over how and whether to stop the fighting — even among the tired and hungry, even within the more moderate factions that struck the deal in the Waer district of Homs, led by local men, not foreign extremists.Mr. Talawy, who gained a measure of social-media fame with his YouTube videos documenting the sieges of Waer and the old city of Homs, is not sure whether to take his first chance to leave the enclave blockaded on all sides by security forces.If he stays, he fears arrest, by the government or by rebel leaders who have made deals with it. If he goes, that means accepting safe passage to insurgent-held areas still pounded by Syrian, Russian and American airstrikes.Yacoub El Hillo, the senior United Nations official who helped facilitate the Waer talks, acknowledged that fears of arrest were “a legitimate concern.”Last year, a similar deal ended a more destructive and more strategically important standoff over the insurgent-held old city of Homs, where Mr. Talawy survived an even harsher, two-year siege, before taking refuge in Waer.Many activists and fighters left the old city through a process called regularization, supposedly ending their troubles with the security services. But some were later rearrested, or they disappeared.Mr. El Hillo said the government had made more concessions this time, promising a measure of neighborhood autonomy for opposition groups, agreeing they could keep their weapons until government detainees were released, and trying to persuade them that “they are not going to be hunting people after the deal is done.”But that is exactly what Mr. Talawy expects them to do. Though security forces will not be inside the district, he said, “they have power over the rebels inside,” enough to make them round up the wanted and the draft dodgers.“They will get rid of all rebels who joined the revolution,” he said. “We will be liquidated one by one.”As if to reinforce the wide gaps in Syrian society, President Bashar al-Assad on Friday reiterated his longstanding position that he would not negotiate with “terrorists,” which he defines as any armed opposition.For Mr. Talawy, an end to the Waer blockade, if it happens in the next few months as the truce envisions, would be bittersweet. It would puncture a kind of enchanted zone where the police cannot enter, where time feels as if it has stopped, where he does not have to think about what to do next.At night, he said, he walks in the outskirts of Waer. Sometimes he goes to a park, sometimes to a destroyed gas station where he once hid from security forces.“I like sitting there, digging up memories,” he said. “Sometimes I listen to the Quran, sometimes to revolutionary songs, to help me be more patient.”Besides, he said, the Internet connection is excellent.On Wednesday, government buses evacuated a few hundred fighters. Mr. Talawy posted videos of himself narrating the news.“Everybody is happy,” he said later over Skype. “I don’t know why — all they know is they want food.”“Waer,” he added, “is no longer safe.”Then he began a series of conversations looking back on the upheaval that had transformed him from a round-cheeked, idealistic, adolescent loner to a skeptic and social-media celebrity 20 pounds thinner.“This is all because of the Dara’a children,” he said, sarcastically blaming the boys in that southern city, whose arrests in 2011, for scrawling antigovernment slogans on walls, set off early protests. “They should ban selling spray paint to children,” he joked.Mr. Talawy grew up in Bab Sibaa, a neighborhood on the edge of the old city. He was shy and quiet, he said, not like Baybars, the 13th-century warrior and sultan he was named for. (Since his face is known on video, Mr. Talawy is one of the few activists who does not bother to conceal his identity for safety.)He remembers a recurrent childhood dream of “buildings knocked down, smoke around me, and I’m running.”“This dream came true,” he said.When protests spread to Homs, Mr. Talawy, then a baker in a French pastry shop, joined in. “I got super excited, thinking Assad will leave after a few days,” he said.But soon he was wanted. He hid in his own neighborhood, sneaking from place to place. He now thinks of that period as the first of his three sieges, “a psychological one.”Next came a physical siege; he was stranded in the old city when it was surrounded and sealed. Early on, he was wounded in the leg by a sniper’s bullet. Gradually, food became so scarce that some people stewed weeds and the pits of yellow loquat fruits.Some food was smuggled in, but it went to a select few: women and children, but also commanders and fighters. Single men like Mr. Talawy, who carried a gun for emergencies but did not fight with a faction, went hungry.Through it all, he wore his red jacket.Eventually, the rebels, heavily bombarded and out of food, agreed to a deal and were bused out to the north. Mr. Talawy went with them, reluctantly. At the time, he declared that he was now dispossessed, like Palestinians, but at the hands of “the son of my own country.”One of his friends joined the Islamic State. But Mr. Talawy returned to Homs, to Waer. It was the only place he felt safe. He found a room in a damaged house, without windows or rugs, but free.If the truce holds, there will be another round of evacuations, and if Mr. Talawy leaves Waer, he said, things will be harder, more expensive.He looks forward to yogurt and meat, he said. And getting a new jacket.Advertisement