AdvertisementSupported byBy Hwaida Saad and Rick GladstoneBEIRUT, Lebanon — The youngest son of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader deposed and killed four years ago, was abducted in Lebanon and then handed over to security forces by militants seeking to avenge a prominent Lebanese Shiite cleric who disappeared in Libya in the 1970s, the state-run National News Agency said on Friday.The agency said the son, Hannibal Qaddafi, 40, who is married to a Lebanese model, had been seized in the eastern Bekaa Valley region on Thursday by kidnappers who wanted information about the missing cleric, Moussa al-Sadr. The agency later said that he had been transferred on Friday to the custody of the intelligence branch of Lebanon’s Internal Security Forces, in the Bekaa Valley city of Baalbek. It was not immediately clear whether the security forces would hold or release him.Television stations in Lebanon earlier broadcast a video of Mr. Qaddafi, who appeared to have been beaten, conveying the request of his abductors.Their identity was unclear. But Mr. Qaddafi said in the video that they were followers of Moussa al-Sadr, an important Shiite cleric. He vanished in 1978 during a visit to Libya at the invitation of Mr. Qaddafi’s father.“I am speaking comfortably, I am sitting with the group who has a cause and loyal to their cause and we should respect them for their loyalty,” Mr. Qaddafi said.There was no immediate explanation for why Mr. Qaddafi was in Lebanon nor why the abductors had chosen this moment to take action on a grievance they have harbored for so long.Jamal Zubia, a spokesman for the Libyan government in Tripoli, would not say whether the authorities there wanted Mr. Qaddafi extradited.Mr. Qaddafi is one of at least eight children of Colonel Qaddafi, the mercurial autocrat ousted in the 2011 Arab Spring uprising that convulsed Libya and has since ushered in more volatility and violence.Three of Colonel Qaddafi’s sons are believed to have been killed in 2011, while another, Seif al-Islam Qaddafi, has been held in the custody of Libyan militants. He was sentenced by a Libyan court in July, but the verdict is subject to appeal.Hannibal Qaddafi was among the Qaddafi family members who escaped to Algeria in the waning months of Colonel Qaddafi’s rule.All were known for luxurious lives of privilege, but Hannibal was considered especially flamboyant. He was once detained on suspicion of drunken driving on the Champs-Élysées in Paris, but was released because he had diplomatic immunity.He also was known for leaving unpaid bills in some of Europe’s best hotels. In 2008, he and his wife, the model Aline Skaf, were arrested in Switzerland over accusations that they assaulted two hotel staff members. His father retaliated by imprisoning two Swiss businessmen, causing a diplomatic uproar.Mr. Sadr helped craft the modern Lebanese Shiite identity, founding the Movement of the Deprived, a group that represented poor Shiites. He also started a military wing, Amal, Arabic for “hope,” which evolved into today’s powerful Amal party. Libya has long said that Mr. Sadr boarded a plane to Rome, and suggested he was killed in an internal Shiite squabble. Many of Mr. Sadr’s followers suspect he was murdered in Libya.Hwaida Saad reported from Beirut, and Rick Gladstone from New York. Anne Barnard contributed reporting from Beirut, and Carlotta Gall from Algiers.Advertisement