By AMINA ISMAIL and DECLAN WALSHDEC. 11, 2015
CAIRO —  The Egyptian government has intensified its crackdown against members of the news media in recent weeks, arresting one prominent journalist and preparing to bring another to trial, as the number of reporters detained in Egypt has hit its highest level in decades, according to human rights campaigners and press freedom groups.Although three Al Jazeera journalists — whose imprisonment and trial had attracted international opprobrium — were released earlier this year, the number of journalists in detention had doubled since 2015, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.“It’s the largest number of detentions since we started documenting arrests in Egypt in 1991,” said Sherif Mansour, the committee’s coordinator for the Middle East and North Africa. “The situation had been going from bad to worse.”The Al Jazeera journalists were eventually freed this year, leading to hopes that the government might relax its prosecution of journalists. In September, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi said Egypt enjoyed “unprecedented” freedom of expression, but the situation does not appear to have changed.AdvertisementIn the latest prominent case, Ismail Iskandarani, a researcher and journalist, was detained at the Hurghada airport, on the Red Sea coast, on Nov. 29 after he returned from Germany. Mr. Iskandarani, a former fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, is being held on accusations of spreading false news and belonging to the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood.AdvertisementMr. Iskandarani denies the accusations. His supporters point to articles he wrote about the military’s faltering campaign against Islamist militants in Sinai as the probable reason for the investigation. His lawyer said on Thursday that his detention had been extended until the end of December.Separately, Mahmoud Abou Zeid, 28, a photojournalist also known as Shawkan, is scheduled to make his first court appearance on Saturday in Cairo. He was detained more than two years ago while photographing the violent dispersal of Islamist protesters staging a sit-in in Cairo, several hundred of whom were shot dead by the Egyptian security forces.Advocates say that Mr. Zeid was working as a photojournalist when he was arrested, and that he has no affiliation with the Muslim Brotherhood or any other political group. “He belongs only to the camera that he carries,” said Khaled El-Balshy, of the Egyptian Press Syndicate, which represents journalists.Mr. Zeid’s lawyer says that his client’s time in jail exceeds the two-year limit for pretrial detention in Egypt. Mr. Zeid has hepatitis C, and has been denied access to medical treatment, according to his family.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Yehia El-Sherbini, a childhood friend of Mr. Zeid who visited him one month ago, said he was concerned for his well-being. “He looked very tired, he had lost a lot of weight,” he said.Mr. Sherbini was speaking at a small street demonstration outside the journalists’ syndicate in Cairo on Wednesday that, at a time of rare public protest in Egypt, was notable for the fact that it took place at all.There are an estimated tens of thousands of people who have been imprisoned in Egypt since July 2013, when the elected president, Mohamed Morsi, was toppled, paving the way for Mr. Sisi to take power. Many of those detained are members of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, including Mr. Morsi.Still, it is the detention of prominent reporters that has generated some of the sharpest international opprobrium against Mr. Sisi.AdvertisementThe detention last month of Hossam Bahgat, a prominent investigative journalist and human rights advocate, led to an outcry that included a statement by the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, who described it as the latest in a series of “profoundly worrying” detentions in Egypt. Mr. Bahgat was released after two days of questioning.In an interview with CNN in September, after he had pardoned two of the three Al Jazeera journalists, Mr. Sisi said, “No one in the press or working in the press are held back from holding their own views freely.”Yet on Dec. 1, a military appeals court upheld a three-year sentence against a lawyer, Ahmed Nohan, who circulated on the Internet a digitally manipulated photograph that depicted Mr. Sisi with cartoon ears.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Egypt Is Intensifying Its Crackdown on Journalists, Rights Group Warns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.