By IVAN NECHEPURENKODEC. 11, 2015
MOSCOW — Russian investigators filed new criminal charges on Friday against Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the onetime oil oligarch, critic of President Vladimir V. Putin and former prisoner who lives in exile.The Investigative Committee of Russia, a prosecutorial agency that handles especially important cases, accused Mr. Khodorkovsky of ordering two contract murders 15 years ago.Mr. Khodorkovsky, 52, was pardoned by Mr. Putin in 2013 after serving a decade in penal colonies on other charges. Now living in London, Mr. Khodorkovsky dismissed the new accusations as politically motivated.Mr. Putin had hinted before at the prospect of murder charges related to organized crime conflict in the 1990s. He suggested in 2010 that Mr. Khodorkovsky had “blood on his hands.” The political confrontation between the two, Russia’s leader and its formerly richest man, is a central drama of the political history of Mr. Putin’s presidency.AdvertisementThe accusations came two days after Mr. Khodorkovsky told journalists that only a revolution could bring positive change in Russia. “Revolution is a good word; it can and will be peaceful,” he said during a news conference in London. Prosecutors in Moscow had asked investigators to clarify if this statement constituted a criminal offense.AdvertisementIn his comments in London, Mr. Khodorkovsky said that he had promised Mr. Putin that he would stay away from politics and take care of his sick mother after his release. But since his mother died in August 2014, Mr. Khodorkovsky said, he regarded the agreement as lapsed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the new accusations, investigators said Mr. Khodorkovsky in 1998 ordered the contract murder of Vladimir A. Petukhov, the mayor of the Siberian oil town of Nefteyugansk, where much of Mr. Khodorkovsky’s petroleum pumping assets were located. Mr. Petukhov died in a shooting.The investigators also asserted that in 1999, Mr. Khodorkovsky ordered the killing of Yevgeny L. Rybin, the head of a rival oil company. Mr. Rybin survived an attack, but his bodyguard was killed.Mr. Khodorkovsky has denied culpability in any killings.In 2008, Mr. Khodorkovsky’s business partner, Leonid B. Nevzlin, who now lives in Israel, was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment by a Russian court for ordering these and other killings. Israel’s Supreme Court has rejected a Russian extradition request.Reached by telephone, Mr. Khodorkovsky’s spokeswoman, Kulle Pispanen, declined to comment on the charges, which she described as “nonsense.”After his pardon — which was granted two months before the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, and was seen as a gesture of good will before the Games — Mr. Khodorkovsky went into a self-imposed exile in Western Europe. He has since helped finance online news media sharply critical of Mr. Putin’s government.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; Russia: New Charges for Ex-Oligarch.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.