By RAPHAEL MINDERDEC. 11, 2015
MADRID — Spain on Friday announced the arrest of a suspect wanted by the United States in connection with terrorism activities, including a failed attempt to kill a Swedish cartoonist who had depicted the Prophet Muhammad with a dog’s body.Spanish officials said the suspect, Ali Charaf Damache, was arrested in Barcelona, where he had been moving between hostels. The United States has been seeking the extradition of Mr. Damache, who is also accused of planning to set up terrorist training camps and kill several other Westerners.Mr. Damache is a dual Algerian and Irish citizen who was arrested in Ireland in 2010, where he faced American extradition proceedings. But he was released this year after an Irish judge rejected the extradition request.Jordi Jané, an official from the Catalan regional government in Barcelona, said during a news conference on Friday that Mr. Damache was the subject of an international arrest warrant, and that he had been detained on Thursday in Barcelona and then transferred overnight to Madrid. On Friday, Mr. Damache appeared before a judge in Spain’s national court, who ordered his provisional arrest. The American authorities now have 40 days to present Spain with another extradition request.AdvertisementMr. Jané said the American authorities had established their case against Mr. Damache in part with emails sent in the United States in 2009 and 2010 that discussed recruiting efforts for the formation of terrorist cells.Mr. Damache was born in Algeria, but he moved to Ireland in 2000 and married an Irish woman in 2002. The relationship ended in 2008, and he then married an American citizen, Jamie Paulin Ramirez. Ms. Ramirez has pleaded guilty in the United States to charges of conspiring with Colleen R. LaRose, also known as Jihad Jane, to support and train terrorists. Ms. LaRose is currently serving a prison sentence for planning, allegedly with Mr. Damache, to kill Lars Vilks, the Swedish artist who angered Muslims with his depiction of the Prophet Muhammad with a dog’s body.AdvertisementJorge Fernández Díaz, Spain’s interior minister, said Friday that the arrest of Mr. Damache in Barcelona confirmed that the Catalan region was a hot spot of Islamic fundamentalism, noting that Catalonia accounted for 45 percent of Spanish police arrests in connection with Islamist terrorism investigations. “Catalonia is a particularly sensitive area, Spain’s most sensitive by some margin,” he told Spanish journalists.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Europe; Spain: Man Wanted by U.S. Is Held.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.