AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa HadidRAMALLAH, West Bank — Kaiya, the family dog of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, has been photographed with visiting leaders and petted by top foreign guests, including Secretary of State John Kerry. But it became painfully clear this week that Kaiya does not accept affection from just anyone.Mr. Netanyahu announced Friday on Facebook that under Israeli law he had to quarantine Kaiya, a 10-year-old mix with black eyes and fluffy fur, after she bit two guests, including a member of Parliament from his own Likud Party, attending a Hanukkah candle-lighting party at his Jerusalem residence on Wednesday.And as it turns out, this was not the first time Kaiya, a rescue dog, had sunk her teeth into humans. Kaiya bit the prime minister five months ago, the newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth reported, and he had to get a rabies shot.For Mr. Netanyahu, the respite of the Hanukkah party was not the most opportune moment for Kaiya to misbehave.Sharren Haskel, Likud loyalist who happens to be a veterinary nurse, was bitten as she tried to pat Kaiya. “As a snake-catcher, a little nip from a dog won’t deter me!” she said on Twitter,Later in the evening, local media reported, Kaiya bit Or Alon, the husband of the deputy foreign minister, Tzipi Hotovely, just as the prime minister called out: “Get away from her! She bites!”Mr. Netanyahu’s son Avner adopted Kaiya in the summer. In August, the prime minister posted a photo of himself happily petting Kaiya. “How much light Kaiya brought into our home!” he wrote. “If you want a canine, find an adult dog to rescue. You won’t regret it!”Mr. Netanyahu placed Kaiya in quarantine for 10 days while her behavior is assessed. He said in a Facebook post Friday that the law should be changed. It has “flaws incompatible with logic and compassion,” he wrote.He followed by posting up a photo to Twitter, featuring his wife, Sara, his two sons, and Kaiya. “Happy Chanukah and Shabbat Shalom to everyone, whether you walk on two legs or four.”Advertisement