AdvertisementSupported byBy Omar Al-Jawoshy, Falih Hassan and Tim ArangoBAGHDAD — More than six months after falling to the Islamic State, the city center of Ramadi is under siege by Iraqi security forces and tribal fighters backed by American air power. Commanders say that as few as 300 militants remain holed up inside, behind a defense of elaborate tunnels, booby-trapped buildings and roads laced with hidden bombs.As Iraqi soldiers and tribal fighters have advanced on the city, clearing the outlying neighborhoods in preparation for what is expected to be a grueling and bloody fight for the center, they have discovered the things left behind by the Islamic State: lists of former government workers who repented to save their lives, and lists of others believed to have been executed; marriage certificates stamped by an Islamic State court; the bodies of militants.Civilians, raising white flags to approaching soldiers, have raced to safety under a hail of gunfire by Islamic State fighters who sought to use them as human shields. Others have had to pay hefty bribes to fighters to be allowed to leave.“The condition of families under the control of ISIS is tragic,” Abu Hussein, who escaped recently, said, using an acronym for the Islamic State. “They do not let people out, and food and medication is running low because of the siege on all exits of the city.”After months of false starts and unfulfilled promises of quick gains by Iraqi and American leaders, the campaign for Ramadi — the capital of Anbar, a vast Sunni-dominated region in western Iraq — has finally yielded some success. Iraqi security forces and Sunni tribal fighters trained and equipped by the United States have in recent days taken Ramadi’s largest neighborhood and captured the building that was the headquarters of the Anbar Operations Command, and they are bearing down on the city’s center.Efforts to stem the rise of the Islamic State.“A number of areas have been liberated, and we are seeing great victories on the ground, and the security forces have fully surrounded the city,” said Sheikh Sufyan al-Ethawi, a tribal leader in Anbar.What remains is a tough, urban battle for Ramadi, which fell to the Islamic State in May, and some officials say it could be weeks before the city is finally liberated from the Islamic State, also known as ISIL.A victory there, by no means assured, would be the most significant gain yet by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State, given that Anbar is seen as an area where the group is deeply entrenched and has enjoyed a measure of local support. Other victories have come in Sinjar, in the north, where Kurdish fighters backed by American airstrikes recently pushed out the Islamic State, and in Tikrit earlier this year.Yet even if Ramadi is liberated, the Islamic State would still control a vast territory that straddles the border between Iraq and Syria, including the group’s de facto capital — Raqqa, Syria — and Mosul, Iraq’s second largest city.Col. Steven H. Warren, an American military spokesman in Baghdad, told reporters on Thursday of the Ramadi battle: “It’s a slow process; it’s a deliberate process. And urban fighting is tough. It’s hot, it’s scary and it can be deadly.”Colonel Warren said that American officials, before the offensive, estimated that there were 600 to 1,000 Islamic State fighters in Ramadi, and that American airstrikes over the last week had killed 350 of them. It was unclear whether the heavy barrages around populated areas had also caused civilian casualties.As the fight unfolds for Anbar, an expansive desert region where close to 1,300 American soldiers and Marines died in the years after the American invasion, the United States is weighing a greater role. That reflects not only the strategic importance of Ramadi as a capital of Sunni Iraq, but also a political imperative, as Iran’s and Russia’s influence in Iraq has grown in recent months.Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter said recently that the United States was willing to deploy attack helicopters and advisers to help Iraqi forces “finish the job” of retaking Ramadi, provided the Iraqi government requested them.That request has not yet been made, but one senior Iraqi official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the continuing deliberations, said the government was likely to ask.Yet a greater, more overt American role in the fight could come with negative political consequences for the American-backed prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, a Shiite, who is locked in a power struggle with rivals from his own party and Shiite militia leaders backed by Iran.Those rivals have denounced a greater military role for the United States, and in some cases have vowed to fight the Americans. This raises the possibility that United States forces, if their numbers grow substantially in Iraq, could find themselves fighting Iran’s proxies, as they did during the long American occupation after the invasion of 2003.Mr. Abadi — in a delicate position as he tries to balance his relations with the United States and Iran, which controls militias whose leaders are popular among the Shiite public — has issued statements recently promoting Iraqi sovereignty and saying that foreign military forces are not needed in Iraq.The Shiite militias, which have had success against the Islamic State in other areas of the country and have been considered essential in protecting Baghdad, have been largely absent from the fight in Anbar. Back in May, after Ramadi fell, the militias rushed to Anbar, even though American officials warned that their presence could exacerbate sectarian tensions. In the months since, though, they have shied away from a fight there, as militia leaders questioned the value of shedding Shiite blood to secure a Sunni region.For the Americans, who have been training Sunni tribal fighters in Anbar, that is just as well. For the first time, it appears, units of Sunni tribal fighters are having success on the battlefield.“This is the first time that I see our forces with such high morale,” said Gen. Ahmed Abdullah, who leads a brigade of tribal fighters in Anbar, some of whom were trained this year by the United States. “Fighters used to be worried whenever an operation would be launched in the past. They considered ISIS as an enemy that couldn’t be defeated.”Now, “it is much different,” he said. “The international air support has been tremendous.”For the United States, the campaign in Anbar is resonant, given how many Americans died there in the last decade.“We’ve been here in Iraq for a long time,” said Colonel Warren, who noted in his briefing on Thursday that the recent gains in Ramadi came almost nine years to the day after the death, from a roadside bomb, of an American army captain named Travis L. Patriquin. Captain Patriquin had been closely associated with establishing the Anbar Awakening, the American-led effort to pay Sunni tribal leaders to switch sides and fight Al Qaeda in Iraq, the predecessor to the Islamic State.Local leaders had named the operations center headquarters, captured this week, in honor of Captain Patriquin, whose picture hung on a wall in the building.“Don’t know if it’s still there,” Colonel Warren said. “Hopefully we’ll find that soon.”Omar al-Jawoshy and Falih Hassan reported from Baghdad, and Tim Arango from Istanbul. An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Anbar Province, Iraq.videoAdvertisement