AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BilefskyLONDON — British prosecutors said on Friday that they would take no further action in their phone-hacking investigation, ending a four-year inquiry that shook the country and shed light on the freewheeling tabloid news media, its sometimes unsavory methods and its proximity to the highest echelons of power.The Crown Prosecution Service said that there was insufficient evidence to bring corporate charges against News UK, Rupert Murdoch’s newspaper holding company in Britain, and that 10 people under investigation at the rival Mirror Group Newspapers would not be charged.The prosecution service said it had brought 12 prosecutions and secured nine convictions for serious offenses during the investigation in the past three years, actions that had addressed considerable public concern about phone hacking and the invasion of privacy.“After a thorough analysis, we have decided there is insufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of a conviction and therefore no further action will be taken in any of these cases,” Alison Saunders, director of public prosecutions, said in a statement. “These decisions bring the C.P.S.’s involvement in current investigations into phone hacking to a close.”The investigation convulsed the news establishment and the political elite, and prompted a reckoning within the close-knit world of the British news media: Journalists were found to have illegally listened to voice mail messages and bribed police officers, and were said to have hired private investigators for illegal surveillance and information gathering.Piers Morgan, the former editor of The Daily Mirror, wrote on Twitter that he had been informed by prosecutors that no further action would be taken against him as part of the phone-hacking investigation.“As I’ve said since the investigation began four years ago, I’ve never hacked a phone and nor have I ever told anybody to hack a phone,” Mr. Morgan, who hosted a talk show on CNN for four years, wrote on Twitter. “Thanks to all my family and friends, and kind people on here, for all their support. It was greatly appreciated.”In July 2011, Mr. Murdoch’s newspaper holding company in Britain, then called News International, closed the tabloid News of the World after it emerged that a private investigator employed by the Sunday newspaper had intercepted voice mail messages left on the cellphone of a kidnapped teenager in 2002. The teenager, Milly Dowler, was later found dead.News UK said in a statement that it welcomed the Crown Prosecution Service’s decision, while acknowledging that transgressions had taken place.“Long ago, we apologized for the conduct that occurred, immediately took steps to pay compensation to those affected, and updated and instituted substantial reforms in our business to ensure our governance is second to none,” the company said. “Following a thorough and exhaustive investigation, and after many long trials, enquiries and proceedings, this matter has been concluded and the right decision has been taken.”The investigation featured a varied cast of tabloid characters, including Rebekah Brooks, who rose from being a secretary in Mr. Murdoch’s British newspaper empire to become the person running it.Ms. Brooks, a former editor of both The News of the World and The Sun, was accused of encouraging — or at least tolerating — phone hacking and other crimes, alongside her husband, Charlie Brooks, and her former deputy, Andy Coulson — who, it later emerged, was also her lover.In June 2014, she was acquitted of all the charges against her, and she has now returned as chief executive of News UK. Mr. Brooks was acquitted of a charge of perverting the course of justice.Mr. Coulson, who succeeded her as editor at the The News of the World and later became a spokesman for Prime Minister David Cameron, was found guilty of a conspiracy to intercept voice mail messages. He was jailed for 18 months in July 2014 for his role in the hacking.Mr. Morgan, for his part, made it clear he was elated that the investigation was over.“I’m now going to get spectacularly drunk,” he wrote on Twitter. “Happy Christmas.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement