
Sinosphere By                     
 EDWARD WONG and
 

OWEN GUO

DEC. 11, 2015
BEIJING —  Pop groups do not usually entertain audiences with songs like “Our Dear Leader!” and “Do Prosper, Era of the Workers’ Party.”Yet those may be among the ditties that North Korea’s Moranbong Band — two dozen or so slender young women in form-fitting outfits and high heels — perform in Beijing on Saturday night, in their first overseas appearance.Moranbong Band is the latest (and maybe the only) soft-power export from North Korea. It is the favorite group of Kim Jong-un, the nation’s young authoritarian leader, and some reports say he handpicked each member. Mr. Kim’s wife, Ri Sol-ju, who once sang in a band herself, is believed to be a patron.Moranbong has been dispatched to Beijing at a time when China and North Korea are trying to improve relations amid differences about the North’s nuclear ambitions and other economic and political matters.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, the women boarded a train in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital. They arrived the next day in Beijing, just at the end of the capital’s red alert over soaring air pollution.Ahead of its big performance, Moranbong, the band created by North Korea's ruler, Kim Jong-un, rehearsed in Beijing.Paparazzi photographs posted online showed band members being whisked through the streets on a bus, dressed in old-school socialist fashion: furry hats with a red star and long olive military-style winter coats.AdvertisementBut the women are expected to don much sexier outfits — out of the ordinary for North Korean women, who tend to dress modestly — when they appear over three nights at the National Center for the Performing Arts, the egg-shaped concert hall west of Tiananmen Square. A North Korean state choral group is also on the program.All three concerts are invitation-only events. Party officials are expected to attend, and some state work groups and ministry employees have been offered free tickets.“The visit by the band shows there is good will on the part of North Korea,” said Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University who studies North Korea. “However, we must not overly interpret the political significance of the performance.”The band is named after a hill in Pyongyang steeped in revolutionary history. In the 1940s, Kim Il-sung, the grandfather of the current leader, is said to have given a speech there after returning from exile in the Soviet Union.The women have performed at military barracks and for officials of the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea in concert halls in Pyongyang. In addition to pop versions of patriotic songs, the band has also mastered instrumental covers of Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” and the theme from “Rocky.”The group made its debut in 2012 and was seen as the North Korean answer to the famous K-pop girl bands of South Korea. The state-run Korean Central News Agency gave an appraisal of the homegrown sensation: “Just 10-odd musicians presented such sublime, rich and thrilling melodies as those of a grand orchestra with refined rendition while young singers sang songs in an emotional and cheerful manner.”AdvertisementIn Moranbong’s official debut concert, held that July and attended by Mr. Kim and his wife, people dressed as Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse and Winnie the Pooh appeared onstage as the musicians played instrumental covers of Disney songs. (Disney was not amused.)North Korea watchers quickly seized on the evening as a sign that Mr. Kim, then newly in power, might open up to Western culture and pursue economic, if not political, change. That has not turned out to be the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2013, rumors circulated in South Korea that one band member, Hyon Song-wol, had been executed, along with about a dozen other North Korean performers. But she resurfaced in a television broadcast in 2014 in which she saluted Mr. Kim for his “heavenly trust and warm care in promoting the arts.”Asked this week at a regularly scheduled news conference in Beijing about the band, Hua Chunying, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, said, “The good-will visit and performance of Democratic People’s Republic of Korea art groups in China are not within the remit of the Foreign Ministry.”But she added, “We always believe that state-to-state exchanges and cooperation in various forms will help increase mutual understanding and friendship between the peoples.”Choe Sang-Hun contributed reporting from Seoul, South Korea, and Patrick Boehler from Hong Kong.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 12, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: North Korea Sends Its Leader’s Chosen Pop Band to China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »