AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod Nordland and Najim RahimKABUL, Afghanistan — A day after Afghan security officials described making major progress in retaking the northern city of Kunduz from Taliban forces, the insurgents on Tuesday once again seem to have seized the upper hand. The Taliban’s white flag was once again hanging on the flagpole over Chowk Square, and half of the city was reported to be under Taliban control. The insurgents continued to fight pitched street battles against Afghan forces, according to residents and some security officials, and the Taliban were pressing into service armored Humvees and pickup trucks they had seized from the troops.The reports from Kunduz contradicted testimony by the American military commander, Gen. John F. Campbell, before the Senate Armed Services Committee in Washington on Tuesday. He told the panel that most of the city had been retaken from the Taliban, and that the continued fighting had been relegated to isolated pockets in the city as the insurgents “for the most part melted away, left the city.”Public assessments issued by Afghan leaders on Tuesday mostly lined up with General Campbell’s portrayal. “The enemy was pushed out of the city yesterday, the Afghan security forces, especially the Afghan National Army, recaptured the city yesterday,” said Lt. Gen. Afzal Aman, director of operations for the Afghan Ministry of Defense.But the accounts of many Kunduz residents on Tuesday greatly differed, as did details from senior Afghan military officers who spoke off the record because they did not want to publicly contradict government spokesmen who were also claiming improvement in the city.A New York Times reporter returning to Kunduz on Tuesday morning saw a steady stream of Kunduz residents taking advantage of a relative lull in the fighting to flee along the highway to the south, many with their whole families and with cars, trucks and even motorized rickshaws stuffed with their furniture and belongings.Traffic on the highway going the other way, back into Kunduz, was scant, despite government claims that life in Kunduz was returning to normal.“Residents of Kunduz yesterday managed to come out of their homes in a secure environment to buy necessary household items and take a peaceful breath,” said Sediq Sediqqi, the spokesman for the Ministry of Interior, at a news conference in Kabul.However, a military officer stationed in the center of Kunduz said that claim was inaccurate. “None of the streets in the south or north of the city are secure enough for our security forces to walk on,” he said. “As soon as they go out on the street, they get attacked.” Residents, as a result, were staying indoors in most of the city, he said.There was a lull in the morning on Tuesday, but later in the day the Taliban pressed a counterattack, winning back territory they had conceded the day before, in a seesaw that has characterized the past eight days since the Taliban overran all of Kunduz except the airport area in the south on Sept. 28.“We are not even able to sneak out,” said one head of a family living in the central Bandar Khan Abad area. “As soon as we looked out of the gate, we drew fire from Taliban and Afghan forces as well.”The colors on the flagpole over Chowk Square, the city’s central square, have changed four times since the fall of the city, according to local officials, as the front line moved back and forth, ending up with the Taliban’s white flag Tuesday, according to residents in the area reached by telephone.Cinema Square, a short distance away, which formerly had marked the front line, now is firmly under Taliban control, residents said.Sayed Sarwar Hussaini, the police spokesman in Kunduz, claimed that an Afghan flag was now hoisted over the square. “There are no serious threats so far,” he said on Tuesday. “The security clearance operation is still underway and hopefully the enemies will be kicked out soon.”Residents in the center of the city, as well as security officials stationed near Chowk Square, disputed that, saying the insurgents had not only put their own flag back up, but had regained control of the northern part of the city. They said the Taliban were carrying out attacks even in the southern part, and fighting there was reported near the Afghan Police Headquarters and the airport.A senior Afghan military officer blamed a lack of American airstrikes over the past two days for the Taliban advance on Tuesday, in the wake of the American airstrike that destroyed the Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz on Saturday and killed 22 people, mostly hospital staff and patients.“The U.S. airstrikes are halted since yesterday evening,” said the officer, who confirmed that the city remains divided between the insurgents and government forces, with some fighting on Tuesday even in the Sare Dawra neighborhood, close to the airport, where the Afghan Army and American Special Operations troops have headquarters. “Until the airstrikes resume, it will be hard to have any progress in the fighting against the Taliban,” he said.The senior officer also blamed a lack of coordination among Afghan units. “There are 10 generals from different organs, and they aren’t under the command of one person who should lead the fighting,” the officer said. “This way, it is unlikely for the Afghan security forces to achieve anything so quickly. The fighting might last for months and Kunduz city may not be retaken.”Rod Nordland reported from Kabul, and Najim Rahim from Kunduz. Ahmad Shakib and Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting from Kabul.Advertisement