
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
OCT. 6, 2015
A French public television channel abruptly halted an advertising campaign intended to celebrate the prominence of its female hosts after viewers complained that the commercial was itself sexist.The 38-second clip, released by France 3 on its official Twitter account on Friday, was supposed to run for three weeks, according to the French news site Pure Médias, but was withdrawn after prompting a backlash on social networks.
            La majorité de nos présentateurs sont des présentatrices !
https://t.co/iXTEwFNWlh In the ad, which has the air of a horror film, a camera tracks through an empty household in disarray. First we see an abandoned dish burning in an oven, then a messy child’s bedroom, an iron left unattended setting fire to a white shirt, a bathroom with empty toilet paper rolls strewn on the floor, a lonely dog whining for a walk. Finally, as the camera reveals a closet packed with high-heeled shoes, a question is asked in the form of a 1970s French disco hit on the soundtrack, “Où Sont Les Femmes?” or, “Where Are the Women?”“They are on France 3,” comes the answer in the closing titles. “Most of our hosts are hostesses.”AdvertisementFrench feminists, who read the ad as a statement that working women had transformed French households into nightmarish hellscapes of undone chores, were vocal in their dissent. One blogger called the ad, “Nothing more than a pile of sexist clichés!”
@France3tv C'est affligeant! Rien de plus qu'un ramassis de clichés sexistes! C'était pourtant une bonne chose à mettre en avant... Dommage!        
            Campagne @France3tv : qd les présentatrices bossent, rien ne va plus à la maison... #FAIL
http://t.co/EINmqUNfIE pic.twitter.com/ILGo4qBzay Pascale Boistard, France’s secretary of state for women’s rights, mentioned the broadcaster’s new president, Delphine Ernotte, in a comment on Twitter suggesting that the ad did not seem like a good way to promote equality.
            La campagne «femmes» de @france3tv ne me paraît pas être 1 bonne manière de valoriser l’#égapro chez les anim. TV, chère @DelphineErnotte When Ms. Ernotte was appointed to the post in April, Le Monde reported that in her previous role, as the head of the male-dominated telephone company Orange, she had tackled a macho culture by instituting 10-euro fines for sexist remarks in executive committee meetings.Five hours after she posted her comment, Ms. Boistard celebrated reports that the ad had been pulled and thanked Ms. Ernotte for her speedy response.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »