By JOSH KRONDEC. 12, 2015
KAMPALA, Uganda —  Dozens of bodies, some with their hands tied behind their backs, were strewn across the streets of Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, on Saturday, a day after coordinated strikes by unidentified gunmen on military camps shook the country.On Saturday, Burundi’s military said that 87 people had been killed in Friday’s attacks, which brought the capital to a standstill.As day broke, residents of the city cautiously ventured outside, and said that they saw bodies lying in their residential neighborhoods. All of the dead were men. Many were in civilian clothes, and some had been shot in the head.In one photograph shared on social media sites, a body is seen buried under a heap of damaged furniture.AdvertisementBurundian officials said that the security services had killed dozens of gunmen who took part in the attacks on Friday against at least three military bases in Bujumbura.Advertisement“They were shot down by security forces,” said Karerwa Ndenzako, a government spokesman. “The people found in the streets are attackers who have been killed by the security. Even now, security forces are collecting the bodies.”The bodies were left out in the streets overnight, Mr. Ndenzako said, because the authorities had been awaiting the “proper vehicles” needed to move them. It was not clear whether the bodies were taken to city morgues, or possibly collected elsewhere.Ever since April, when President Pierre Nkurunziza decided to run for a third term, which many people viewed as unconstitutional, the country has been racked by violence. The first wave seemed to be government-sponsored killings of opposition members and civilians who were protesting Mr. Nkurunziza’s attempts to retain power as violating a peace agreement that limited him to two terms. A coup attempt in May, government crackdowns and protests sent refugees fleeing to neighboring Rwanda. In recent weeks, opposition elements have stepped up armed attacks, possibly as a strategy to make Burundi appear ungovernable. Several analysts have said that the opposition is using the specter of chaos as leverage to force the government into a power-sharing arrangement. Western governments have urged Burundi’s government and the political opposition to stop fighting and negotiate.The strikes on military bases on Friday were the boldest attacks since the failed coup attempt, and some analysts in Burundi said that the bodies found on Saturday morning appeared to represent a retaliatory message.In Nyakabiga, a neighborhood in Bujumbura at the center of fierce antigovernment protests, at least 20 bodies were found on Saturday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Musaga, another Bujumbura neighborhood where residents said Saturday that they remained too afraid to go outside, more than a dozen people were reported to have been killed since Friday. Residents of Mukike, yet another neighborhood, reported several deaths and continuing violence.It was not clear how many of the dead in the streets were killed in clashes and how many were victims of extrajudicial killings.One victim, according to a witness, was a teenage boy who had been selling eggs.“Police killed people inside their houses or where they found them in the streets,” said Sarah Jackson, a regional director for the human rights group Amnesty International. “If these people were suspected of a crime they should have been arrested and investigated in line with international standards — not shot on sight.”AdvertisementThe violence in Bujumbura started Friday before dawn, when gunmen stormed three military installations around the capital, leading to the rolling thunder of gunfire that could be heard in the city throughout the day. By Friday evening, with civilians locking themselves indoors, only military vehicles were on the roads.Mr. Ndenzako, the president’s deputy spokesman, said that the attackers were sponsored by a coalition of “clever, malicious” opposition politicians, but he added that the government could not yet say who was directly responsible for the attacks against the military bases.He rejected any notions that Bujumbura was not secure, but he acknowledged that Burundi had problems.“For the time being, security situation is under control, but the political situation is not under control as long as people are attacking and dying day in and day out,” Mr. Ndenzako said.In many ways, however, the residents of Bujumbura were trying to behave as if their city were returning to normal on Saturday. Shops reopened, buses were running and traders were milling about, even as bodies were discovered in the streets.“Everyone here is so desensitized,” said one woman in Bujumbura, who asked that her name not be used because of the turmoil there.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Political Violence in Burundi Exacts Growing Toll.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.