AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — Odel Bennett recounted running down an alley in the Old City of Jerusalem with a knife stuck in the base of her neck, desperately seeking help. And most vividly, she described the cruel and mocking reactions she said she met from shopkeepers and passers-by.“I screamed, I begged for aid,” Mrs. Bennett, 22, an ultra-Orthodox Jewish mother of two, said in an interview on Tuesday from her hospital bed, where she was recovering from multiple stab wounds.“They stood chatting and laughing — they spat at me,” she said of the Palestinians in the alley. One man continued drinking cola out of a can, she said; others shook her off when she tried to hold onto them to lift herself off the ground. “I was looking for one glimmer of mercy in their eyes,” she said in a weak voice.Mrs. Bennett’s husband, Aharon, 21, an off-duty soldier, was killed in the knife attack, along with Rabbi Nehemia Lavi, 41, who heard the commotion in the alley below his apartment and went outside to try to help the Bennetts, according to the authorities and his relatives.The assailant has been identified as Muhanad Halabi, 19, a Palestinian law student. According to the police, after stabbing the Bennetts and Mr. Lavi, Mr. Halabi grabbed the rabbi’s gun and started shooting, wounding the Bennetts’ 2-year-old son, Natan, in the leg. Police officers arrived and fatally shot Mr. Halabi.Natan was lying opposite Mrs. Bennett on Tuesday in the surgery ward of Hadassah Medical Center in Ein Kerem, on the southwestern edge of Jerusalem. The couple’s infant daughter, Shulamit, escaped the attack unharmed.Mrs. Bennett’s account, reported in the local news media, has fed outrage in Israel, along with video footage of the episode that the police said a local Palestinian captured on his cellphone and posted on social networks. The attack came two days after Palestinian gunmen shot and killed an Israeli couple, Eitam and Naama Henkin, as they drove with their four young children in the West Bank.Intensifying violence has claimed lives on both sides in recent days. Israeli forces fatally shot two Palestinian teenagers during clashes in the West Bank on Monday. One of them — Abdulrahman Obeidallah, 13 — lived in the Aida refugee camp in Bethlehem, not far from the Beitar Illit settlement where the Bennett family lived. Witnesses said the boy was not involved in the rioting, and was shot while standing outside a community center where he frequently went after school. He was buried on Tuesday in a funeral attended by thousands.On Tuesday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel toured the area where the Henkins were killed. He went there “to see with my own eyes the site of the attack, the operational deployment and the actions of the forces on the ground, and to examine a host of ways and means that we can use to eradicate this wave of terrorism.”Overnight, Israeli security forces demolished the East Jerusalem homes of two Palestinians who carried out deadly attacks against Israelis last year.Based on Mrs. Bennett’s account, Micky Rosenfeld, a police spokesman, said that the police were broadening their investigation of the attack in the alley. Mr. Netanyahu said on Tuesday that he had asked for an investigation of the shopkeepers and others who stood idly by, saying that they should be prosecuted and that the authorities would seek to close their stores.Mrs. Bennett said that she, her husband and two children prayed at the Western Wall and were walking back through the Muslim Quarter of the Old City on Saturday night when she realized there were no other Jews around them. “I told my husband I was scared,” she said. They began to hurry toward an area where there would be a police presence.But “the vile murderer came out of a doorway and stabbed me in the back,” she said. Her husband struggled with the attacker while she shouted for help, but she was stabbed again and again, she said.Once she saw Mr. Lavi appear, Mrs. Bennett said she ran off to search for security forces, and when she found them, she collapsed. The knife fell out of her neck and onto the ground, and she struggled to stay conscious until ambulances arrived.The day after the attack, a young Palestinian man, Mahdi Abu Sbeih, 24, was scrubbing the floor of an Old City store where the blood of one of the victims had splashed between rolls of leopard-print fabric. Mr. Abu Sbeih said he had caught glimpses of the attack: a man lunging at another near his shop, and later a man lunging at a woman.Dr. Daniel Weiss of the surgery unit at the hospital said Mrs. Bennett had 11 stab wounds to her upper limbs, her chest, her abdomen, her back and neck, and was in severe hemorrhagic shock when she reached the hospital. “She could easily have bled to death,” he said.Though still frail on Tuesday, Mrs. Bennett said she wanted to speak out about what happened, adding quietly, “It cannot go on like this.”Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Bethlehem, West Bank, and Diaa Hadid from JerusalemAdvertisement