By DAN BILEFSKYDEC. 12, 2015
LONDON —  On Friday nights for three years, they met over pints at the Castle, a pub in Islington, in North London. The four men were getting on in years, but they were not there just to talk about retirement plans or the aches and pains of aging.Experienced thieves with long criminal records, they had something far more pressing in mind: an audacious, career-topping heist they boasted the world would never forget.The operation, meticulously plotted — with the help, the police would later find out, of the book “Forensics for Dummies” — was finally set in motion the Thursday before Easter this year, as Brian Reader, the ruddy-faced ringleader whom the others called “the Master,” boarded the No. 96 bus near his home in Dartford, Kent.Mr. Reader, 76, swiped his free travel pass for seniors and began the 80-minute journey to Hatton Garden, for centuries the center of London’s jewelry trade. By early evening, Mr. Reader reached an inconspicuous, seven-floor building on the handsome, manicured street. A large plaque outside read: Hatton Garden Safe Deposit Ltd.AdvertisementThe rest of his crew was there, dressed as building workers: John Collins, also known as Kenny, 75; Daniel Jones, 60; and Terrence Perkins, 67. Mr. Reader wore a yellow hard hat and a fluorescent jacket with the word “Gas” on the back. His distinctive striped socks were later captured by surveillance cameras.AdvertisementIn a case that prosecutors have called the largest burglary ever in England, the four men have pleaded guilty to conspiring to steal as much as $30 million in gold, jewelry and gems. Prosecutors say they used high-powered, diamond-tipped drills over the long Easter weekend to bore an 18-inch hole through a concrete wall in a basement vault at the safe deposit company and then made off with the loot.Those four are now in prison awaiting sentencing, and may face 10 years behind bars. Four other men are standing trial on suspicion of involvement, and have denied the charges.As details of the burglary have emerged, many have been left wondering how four aging and sometimes bungling robbers managed to break into a high-security vault in the center of London — protected by reinforced concrete, two iron gates and a motion-triggered alarm system — and get away with loot-filled wheeled plastic garbage bins. Had they not violated one of the first laws in the criminal handbook and boasted about the caper, they might never have been caught.“This offense was to be the largest burglary in English legal history,” the prosecutor Philip Evans told Woolwich Crown Court. “These four ringleaders and organizers of this conspiracy, although senior in years, brought with them a great deal of experience.”With his lined face, baggy eyes and cunning, Mr. Reader, the gang’s elder statesman, had a notable criminal record.In 1983, after six armed men in balaclavas stole gold, cash and jewelry from a warehouse at Heathrow Airport in another celebrated heist, prosecutors say Mr. Reader teamed up with a Kent crime boss to help launder around $40 million in gold. He was sentenced in 1986 to nine years in prison for handling stolen bullion. Until recently, he was living in a sprawling house in Dartford with an estimated value of $1.5 million.Mr. Perkins was sentenced to 22 years in jail for his involvement in another notorious 1983 robbery in which a hooded gang with sawed-off shotguns stole about $7.5 million in cash from the vaults at the London headquarters of Security Express, a security company.AdvertisementAt Hatton Garden, despite their expertise and the gang’s extensive planning, not everything went according to plan.On the evening of April 2, Mr. Reader and the rest of the gang were greeted at Hatton Garden Safe Deposit by a red-haired man known as “Basil” who, investigators say, apparently opened the fire escape door and let the others in. The man has never been identified and remains at large.Several men got out of a white van and unloaded bags, tools and two garbage bins, taking them in on the fire escape and down the stairs, Mr. Evans told the jury. The men communicated by walkie-talkie.Once inside the building, they disabled the elevator, leaving an “out of order” sign next to it, sent the elevator to the second floor, and shimmied down the elevator shaft to the basement, busting through a metal barrier. They cut a gray telephone cable jutting out of an alarm box, as well as the wires of an electrical box, disabling an iron gate protecting the vault, prosecutors say.Then they began the long and arduous task of drilling through the vault’s wall, reinforced with concrete — a skill they had perfected by watching clips on YouTube. Shortly after 12:21 a.m. on April 3, Alok Bavishi, whose family owns the safety deposit company, received a call that the intruder alarm had been triggered. He testified that his concerns were initially tempered by the fact that a previous alarm had been triggered by an insect.Kelvin Stockwell, a longtime security guard at the building, arrived nearly an hour later. After examining the front door and peering through the letter box of the fire escape door, he told the jury he decided that the building was secure and left without going inside.The police were also notified of the alarm, but no response was deemed necessary. All the while, the thieves were in the basement, breaking into the vault. The police later apologized, saying the “call handling system and procedures for working with the alarm monitoring companies were not followed.”Even so, the gang’s luck proved short-lived. When they finally breached the wall against which the metal cabinet holding the safe deposit boxes was standing, they were stopped in their tracks because the cabinet was bolted to the ceiling and floor, and they were unable to dislodge it.AdvertisementThey eventually left around 8 a.m., empty-handed. But they were undeterred, returning two days later, on Mr. Perkins’s 67th birthday. The burglary may have gone unnoticed because the security deposit’s neighboring businesses were closed for the Easter weekend. But the ease with which the thieves left and then returned, undetected, has led some to speculate that the crime was an inside job.On their second attempt, after a trip to the hardware store, the men managed to dislodge the cabinet on the night of April 4, though Mr. Reader was not there to enjoy the moment, having apparently lost his nerve.The men ransacked 73 safe deposit boxes, quickly filling several bags and two large trash bins with jewels, gold, precious stones and cash. Prosecutors said the men struggled to carry all the loot up the stairs to a fire escape. Mr. Collins, the lookout, was waiting nearby in the van.At 6:40 a.m., exhausted and out of breath, they sped away. Mr. Jones was later overheard quipping that he would have had to been wheeled out in one of the bins had he not brought his insulin shots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another two days went by before the theft was finally discovered. Pictures of the gaping holes drilled through the wall were soon splashed in Britain’s papers. Angry safe deposit box owners, some of them uninsured, lashed out at the police and at the safety deposit company for their perceived incompetence.Mirza Baig, a jewelry dealer, said he had lost everything. “I don’t have a penny’s worth of stones left with me because they were all in the safe deposit — the safest place you can imagine,” he told ITV News.For several days, the men reveled in the heist, but the police were closing in. The men had been identified at and near the scene from hours of surveillance footage, and electronic bugs, which had been placed in two of their cars, picked up their boasts, in cockney rhyming slang.“The biggest cash robbery in history,” Mr. Jones can be heard crowing, lacing his words with expletives, in recordings played in court, “that’s what they are saying.” Mr. Perkins said he wished he had taken a selfie at the vault.The men continued to meet at the Castle, a traditional pub that serves heaping plates of bangers and mash. The police filmed them with hidden cameras and used lip readers to figure out what they were saying.AdvertisementAfter the robbery, they argued over how to split the proceeds and launder the jewels, prosecutors say. Mr. Perkins was overheard saying he planned to melt down some of his gold. “That could be my pension,” he said.The men stashed some of the gold and jewels in their homes, behind baseboards and kitchen cabinets. On May 19 — 45 days after the burglary — 200 police officers swept in as Mr. Jones and Mr. Collins were transferring some of the jewels to the home of Mr. Perkins’s daughter. The police raided 12 addresses in North London and arrested seven suspects.At Mr. Reader’s house, the police discovered a diamond tester and a book on the diamond underworld. At the home of Mr. Perkins’s daughter, they found vast quantities of sapphires and diamonds, and a brown leather bag stuffed with Rolex, Breitling and Omega watches. Heat-resistant porcelain pots and tongs used for smelting gold were discovered hidden in a washing machine.After his arrest, Mr. Jones agreed to show prosecutors where he had hidden one bag of loot, under the gravestone of a family relative.Mr. Jones wrote to a Sky News reporter from his jail cell, saying that he had notified the police of the stash to “make amends to my loved ones and show I’m trying to change. I no [sic] it seems a bit late in my life, but I’m trying.”The police subsequently discovered that he had failed to mention a much larger haul from the Hatton Garden burglary at the same cemetery, prosecutors said.Hatton Safe Deposit has been forced into liquidation, and the building’s new owner said recently he was considering turning the vault into a museum devoted to the heist.The police have struggled to identify thousands of identical-looking chains and gems that have been recovered. Many millions of pounds worth of the stolen loot still has not been found, prosecutors say, and at least some had probably been melted down, laundered or hidden before the arrests.Hatton Garden Safe Deposit’s website remains active. “We are currently one of London’s most successful and leading safe deposit company [sic],” it says, promising to “protect important and irreplaceable personal belongings.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 13, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Graying Thieves and a Record Heist Undone in London.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.