By MUJIB MASHAL and JAWAD SUKHANYARDEC. 12, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — The Taliban’s overnight siege of a guesthouse near the Spanish Embassy in the diplomatic quarter of Kabul ended on Saturday as the police killed the final attacker, officials said.Seven people were killed, in addition to the three attackers, and at least seven others were wounded, Afghan officials said. Among the dead were four Afghan police officers, two foreign citizens and an Afghan electrician who worked at the guesthouse, said Fraidoon Obaidy, head of criminal investigation for the Kabul police.The two foreigners killed were Spanish police officers, according to a statement from the Spanish Interior Ministry.The attack began when a huge blast from a car bomb, which was heard across the city, destroyed the gate of the guesthouse around 6 p.m. on Friday. Three insurgents then entered the building, according to Abdul Basir Mujahed, a spokesman for the Kabul police.AdvertisementNoori ul-Haq, 46, a watchman at the guesthouse, said he was in the bathroom when he heard the explosion. “Immediately, I rushed out from the building,” he said. “I ran away — if I had stayed here, obviously the Taliban would enter. I saw the debris and the hood of the car lying on the ground.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Crisis Response Unit, an elite police force, soon arrived to take charge of the operation, cutting off electricity in the area. Sporadic gunfire and occasional explosions were heard through the night.Mr. Mujahed said the operation had taken a long time because the police had been moving slowly to minimize civilian casualties. He said the police had rescued at least 40 people, including both Afghans and foreigners.AdvertisementThe Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack. Zabihullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the insurgents, said on his Twitter account, “A guesthouse of invaders was targeted.”Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.