AdvertisementSupported byLetter From EuropeBy Alison SmaleDORTMUND, Germany — It was 5 a.m., and one of many snatched conversations with refugees in recent weeks, as we chronicle the biggest migration Europe has seen since World War II.Sayeed Askari and his family — his wife and son, plus his brother-in-law and his wife and son, and three other young male relatives — had just enjoyed two hours’ hospitality at a volunteer-run center here and were being bused to another shelter, the latest in a four-month odyssey from Afghanistan.Germany was their goal, a “good country,” said Mr. Askari, apparently basing that assessment on the opinion of another relative who had recently arrived in southwest Germany, and the fact his clan was now here, at the end of a trek through Iran, Turkey, Greece, the Balkans, Hungary and Austria.Mr. Askari, 33 and a butcher by profession, hailed from Kunduz. Not a good place, he conveyed, more by facial expression than words.German and European Union leaders have called for European countries to share the burden of absorbing the hundreds of thousands of migrants who have poured into the continent this summer.Ten days later, his point was proved. The Taliban captured Kunduz, in northern Afghanistan. By taking in Mr. Askari, Germany had fulfilled its stated duty in these days of mass movement: offering shelter to those in need.But Germany has another reason to be particularly interested in news from Kunduz. It was in northern Afghanistan that German troops were deployed in their deadliest mission since World War II.Fifty-four German soldiers and three police officers have lost their lives in Afghanistan since Germany first joined the United States in 2001, in what was then the post-9/11 fight against Al Qaeda.These days, Germany has been occupied mostly with the refugee influx and the 25th anniversary of its reunification on Oct. 3, 1990. But Kunduz has nonetheless made the front page in places like Dortmund, where the Westdeutsche Allgemeine newspaper reported the Afghan government’s claims to have recaptured Kunduz, and the debate over whether Berlin would extend the deployment of up to 850 German soldiers.The situation in Kunduz “is a quite fatal signal” because it sends the message that the Taliban can take over a city of even 300,000 people with little resistance, said Gen. Harald Kujat, who commanded Germany’s armed forces from 2000 to 2002. Told of the Askari clan, he added: “People think ‘I will get myself to safety.’ ”Asked whether the Germans who died in Afghanistan had perished in vain, General Kujat was philosophical. On the one hand, he stressed, it was necessary for Germany to stand by the United States when it lost thousands of lives.The latest E.U. proposal addresses just a fraction of a human crisis numbering in the millions.But it was impossible to gloss over what he described as various Western mistakes in Afghanistan: the rush to install a supposedly democratic national government instead of adopting a solution that more closely resembled a response to the end of the Balkan wars of the 1990s, when the West named a high representative to rule Bosnia.Corruption plagued the Afghan government of Hamid Karzai from the start, General Kujat said. In addition, tricky terrain and ethnic loyalties make it hard for any Kabul government to extend its reach nationwide.Compounding all this, he recalled, the West only gradually extended its mission in Afghanistan, and the United States was distracted in Iraq for several years after 2002.Tasks were farmed out piecemeal. The Germans, for instance, oversaw police training. “So what did we do — very German — we built a police academy,” General Kujat recalled. “When what was needed was training for the village policeman, who was badly paid” and thus susceptible to bribes from the Taliban or others.“We did not enter with full force,” General Kujat said, while the Taliban were always able to regenerate and tend to their wounded across the border in Pakistan.As the West faces new challenges — in Syria, with the refugees — “we must at last learn lessons from what we do,” General Kujat said. “The Americans and Europeans must finally get really much closer, not pursue national interests as is the case now.”Advertisement