AdvertisementSupported byBy William NeumanBARINAS, Venezuela — As president, Hugo Chávez lavished millions from this country’s oil boom on his home state of Barinas. He built a soccer stadium, highways, apartment houses and a hospital. He sang Barinas’s songs, danced its folk dances on television and rode with its cowboys over its open plains.Barinas returned the affection. Mr. Chávez and his party won elections handily here, and his father and later his brother Adán were elected governor. After Mr. Chávez died in 2013, the people of Barinas gave their votes to his handpicked successor, Nicolás Maduro.But boom has turned to bust, the economy is in shambles and the love affair is over.Last week, in a gut blow for the movement known as Chavismo, Barinas joined the rest of the country in turning raw anger over economic hardship into a landslide victory for the political opposition in crucial legislative elections.In direct voting for candidates, every Chavista candidate here lost, including one with the golden Chávez name — another brother of the former president, Argenis. And in proportional voting for parties, the opposition coalition crushed the United Socialist Party that Mr. Chávez founded.“These guys ruined everything that Chávez left behind,” said Pablo Rodríguez, 37, who sells soccer jerseys across the street from the stadium that Mr. Chávez built, several blocks from a house where Mr. Chávez spent part of his childhood. Mr. Rodríguez said he was a loyal Chavista until Dec. 6, when for the first time he cast his ballot for another party. “It’s not that I voted for the opposition,” he said. “I voted against all of this that’s going on. It’s like the president said, it was a slap in the face. He understood that much.”A customer buying a baby-size soccer shirt and shorts said that he, too, had voted against the government for the first time. But the customer, Ronald Rivero, 26, said angry voters wanted to see results from the opposition-controlled National Assembly.“Now these guys have to go to work, and if they don’t deliver, we’ll vote them out, too,” Mr. Rivero said.Similar sentiments are being heard around the continent, where political dynasties are falling or under intense pressure and where protests and social unrest are on the rise.In Brazil, legislators have begun an impeachment proceeding against President Dilma Rousseff, as scores of other political leaders have become embroiled in a huge corruption scandal.In Ecuador, protesters angry at President Rafael Correa have taken to the streets to demonstrate against budget cutbacks necessitated by vanishing oil revenue.And in Argentina, President Mauricio Macri was inaugurated last week after surging to a surprising win against the candidate of the Peronist party of his predecessor, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. His victory ended 12 years during which Mrs. Kirchner or her late husband, Nestor Kirchner, occupied the presidential palace.“We said, ‘Enough,’ ” said Mariela Baiguera, 42, a store clerk in Buenos Aires who said she had broken with her usual Peronist affiliation to vote for Mr. Macri because she was tired of Mrs. Kirchner’s combative style. But she was also wary of Mr. Macri. “He has no room to abandon his promises,” she said, vowing to vote against him in the next election if he did so.The strains are being felt most keenly by leftist governments, but analysts say that something other than ideology is at work here. South America saw robust growth in the century’s first decade, thanks to a historic boom in the value of raw materials and other commodities that are sold to the rest of the world.High prices for oil, natural gas, coal, copper, gold, silver, bauxite, soy beans and other products led to steady growth, a sharp drop in poverty and an expansion of the middle class throughout the region. That growth, in turn, brought political stability, with leaders and parties being repeatedly re-elected. Many of those were on the left, having come to office on a wave of public discontent following a lengthy period of economic stagnation.Venezuela has had 17 years of Chavismo. The Workers’ Party in Brazil has held the presidency for four straight terms. In Ecuador, Mr. Correa has been president since 2007. In Bolivia, President Evo Morales has been in office since 2006.But change is rolling across the region. The price of oil — vital to the economies of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador — has plunged to less than $40 a barrel from more than $100. The prices of copper (a key product in Peru and Chile) and soybeans (staples of Brazil and Argentina) have dropped to less than half of their recent peaks.“There’s been a pretty striking continuity in many countries, in large part thanks to the commodities boom that leaders and parties have been riding,” said Michael Shifter, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a policy analysis group in Washington. “When that’s over, voters look elsewhere and for new leaders, but governing is extremely difficult because they no longer have the resources to meet the high expectations that have been generated during the commodities boom.”From 2005 to 2012, poverty decreased throughout Latin America to 28 percent of the population from 39 percent, according to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. A World Bank study published in 2013 found that the size of the middle class in the region grew by 50 percent from 2003 to 2009, to 152 million from 103 million. Many countries helped spread the wealth through innovative social programs, and for the first time, the middle class and the poor accounted for roughly the same share of the population.Brian Winter, vice president of policy at the Americas Society and Council of the Americas, an educational and business group, said that even many conservative politicians who hope to replace the long-running leftist governments in the region acknowledged the need to continue such policies because of lasting concerns over inequality.“Predictions of the left’s demise in Latin America are exaggerated,” Mr. Winter said.Yet few countries saved much from the boom. And now governments are grappling with a regionwide economic slowdown. The International Monetary Fund has estimated that growth in the region this year will be minus-0.3 percent and that next year it will be less than 1 percent.In Venezuela, the monetary fund estimates that inflation this year will be 159 percent and that the economy will contract by 10 percent, both figures the worst among the countries the organization measures worldwide. Many economists point to disastrous economic policies of Mr. Maduro’s government, including strict controls on prices and foreign exchange. But the government is hamstrung by the sudden drop in the price of oil, which accounts for nearly all of the country’s export income.Many of the policies that Mr. Maduro has stuck with were inherited from Mr. Chávez, who had benefited from the bonanza of oil money.Here in Barinas, the state capital, Mr. Chávez had, by many accounts, more misses than hits. The soccer stadium, though in use, remains incomplete — some parts of the roof were never finished. A cancer hospital sits unfinished, the work suspended for more than a year. A costly new sugar mill failed.And yet the steady flow of oil money helped obscure many errors and excesses. That is less of an option for Mr. Maduro, who has presided over a depletion of reserves that has the country’s bondholders worrying about a possible default.“Chávez covered up problems with money,” said Miguel Aguín, a Barinas policeman who became disillusioned with Chavismo years ago. “He didn’t think about the future. He just gave out handouts to get through today.”His adherents often shrugged off Mr. Chávez’s failings during the boom years, but the elections last week showed that in lean times they are less forgiving.While the election result was a direct response to the economic crisis, the future of politics here and elsewhere in the region may have taken on a different tone as new members of the middle class seek to hold onto their gains and make new demands of their leaders.And as some families fall back into poverty, protests and unrest will grow.“Expectations have increased not only in the middle class but in all levels of society in Venezuela and across the region,” said Luis Vicente León, a pollster in Caracas. “It’s a generational change. Millennials are a digital generation, better informed and better connected, even in the lower classes. They are more demanding.”In Barinas, Freddy Garcés, 50, a farmhand who takes care of a herd of skinny cattle in a formerly rock-solid Chavista hamlet called El Corozo, said he hoped the victorious opposition lawmakers could quickly produce economic improvements.“If they don’t deliver,” he said, “then the people are going to pay them with the same coin they paid these guys.”Reporting was contributed by Simon Romero from Rio de Janeiro; Patricia Torres from Barinas; María Eugenia Díaz from Caracas, Venezuela; and Jonathan Gilbert from Buenos Aires.Advertisement