By GAIA PIANIGIANIDEC. 13, 2015
ROME —  Diplomats from 17 nations on Sunday urged leaders of some of Libya’s rival political factions to form a unity government that could reverse the nation’s descent into anarchy and prevent the Islamic State and other extremist groups from seizing more territory.“We refuse to stand by and watch a vacuum filled by terrorists,” Secretary of State John Kerry said at a news conference after the meeting in Rome. “The leaders who are here, we are convinced, speak for most Libyans. Those leaders have endorsed what is the only legitimate basis for moving ahead.”The 15 Libyan leaders who attended the conference here had already agreed to meet in Morocco on Wednesday to discuss the formation of a government. Other Libyan tribal and regional cohorts have refused to take part.The diplomats also pledged to provide Libyans with much-needed humanitarian assistance.“We call on all parties to accept an immediate, comprehensive cease-fire in all parts of Libya,” read a statement from the diplomats, who met under the auspices of the United Nations, the European Union, the African Union and the Arab League.AdvertisementSince 2011, when Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s dictatorship was overthrown and he was killed, the country has plunged into chaos. Eventually, a faction of Islamists and militias seized the capital, Tripoli, and established their own government.The internationally recognized government sided with a general, Khalifa Hifter, and relocated to eastern Libyan towns under his control. As the already weak central authority collapsed, the Libyan affiliate of the Islamic State took over of the coastal city of Surt. Other extremist groups, like Al Qaeda, have also flourished.Advertisement“The message of today’s meeting is clear,” Foreign Minister Paolo Gentiloni of Italy said. “What matters is the stabilization of Libya because this, too, can contribute to the fight against terrorism.”A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Libya Rivals Are Urged to Govern Together.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.