AdvertisementSupported byBy Floyd WhaleyMANILA — The Philippines conducted one of the largest mass evacuations in its recent history in preparation for Typhoon Melor, which roared through the storm-scarred central islands of the country on Tuesday, leaving floods, debris and widespread blackouts in its wake. A spokesman for President Benigno S. Aquino III said Tuesday that more than 724,839 people had been evacuated. The typhoon entered the eastern edge of the island nation on Monday, bringing winds up to 115 miles per hour. The storm passed along the northern edge of the central Philippine island of Samar, which was one of the areas devastated by Typhoon Haiyan in 2013, when storm surges leveled communities and killed more than 7,000 people. On Tuesday morning, the government said that no deaths or injuries had been reported, but that communications to some areas had been cut off and casualties might be discovered later. Unconfirmed news media reports and accounts from relief organizations said that a few people had died in the storm. Still, the country seemed better prepared for a disaster than before.After Haiyan, the national government began working with local governments to enforce mandatory evacuations in coastal areas before large storms hit the country. Mr. Aquino initiated a “zero casualties” policy for storm preparation and has held local government officials accountable when evacuations were not undertaken. Richard Gordon, the chairman of the Philippine Red Cross, said in a telephone interview that the small town of Catarman, in northern Samar, appeared to have been the hardest hit by Melor. He added that Red Cross teams in the area had seen houses destroyed, roofs blown off and trees fallen. The area was without power, water and cellphone communications. Most of the evacuations were in Albay Province, about 300 miles south of Manila, where about 590,000 people were moved over fears of landslides along the slopes of nearby Mayon Volcano, according to Sonny Coloma, a spokesman for Mr. Aquino. Jim Edds, a Florida-based storm chaser who has been observing typhoons in the Philippines since 2009, questioned the figure of more than 700,000 evacuated. “My experience in a number of typhoons in the Philippines is that a few evacuate, but the vast majority stay put and ride it out,” he said, adding that many people simply flee the immediate area but are still in the danger zone. He said it would probably take at least three days to get an estimate of casualties. The Philippines is struck by about 20 typhoons a year, generally between June and August. But in the past few years, severe storms have occurred in November and December, which are traditionally the cool, dry season. Some government officials cite the effects of climate change on the relatively new, unpredictable timing of strong storms to hit the country. Advertisement