By REUTERSDEC. 14, 2015
MADRID —  A debate before Spain’s general election next weekend exploded Monday into an angry row on national television when the opposition leader accused Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of not being a “decent” man and said he should have quit over a corruption scandal in his party.The humdrum election campaign burst into drama when the Socialist leader, Pedro Sánchez, attacked Mr. Rajoy over allegations of high-level corruption and accused him of lying over his government’s economic record. Mr. Rajoy angrily rejected his charges.In the televised debate watched by millions, Mr. Sánchez told Mr. Rajoy that if he continued to be prime minister the cost to Spain’s democracy would be “enormous because the prime minister, Mr. Rajoy, has to be a decent person, and you are not.”Mr. Rajoy jabbed back, telling his rival: “You are young. You are going to lose these elections.” Then Mr. Rajoy, 60, told Mr. Sánchez, 43, “You can recover from an election loss, but you can’t recover from the contemptible, mean and despicable statement you have made here today.”AdvertisementMr. Rajoy defended himself as “an honorable politician, at least as honorable as you.”The debate was a late chance for the men to bolster their support before elections on Sunday. New parties represent an unprecedented challenge to Mr. Rajoy’s center-right People’s Party and Mr. Sánchez’s Socialists, which have together dominated Spanish politics since the end of the Franco dictatorship in the 1970s.AdvertisementSpain’s economy is picking up after a severe economic and banking crisis, but unemployment remains over 20 percent and Spaniards are angry about high-profile cases of corruption, some linked to the People’s Party.Polls show the party ahead but short of a parliamentary majority, while new parties — the anti-austerity Podemos or centrist Ciudadanos — challenge the Socialists for second place.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many voters remain undecided, but the most likely outcome appears to be a coalition or a minority government.The debate Monday turned acrimonious when Mr. Sánchez touched on a corruption case that erupted in 2013 when a former treasurer of Mr. Rajoy’s People’s Party told a judge that he had collected millions in cash donations from construction magnates and distributed them to senior party figures, including Mr. Rajoy. Mr. Rajoy has denied that he or his party accepted illegal payments.Mr. Sánchez told Mr. Rajoy he should have resigned, to which the prime minister responded: “Nobody has ever accused me of appropriating anything. I don’t devote myself to politics for money.”Mr. Rajoy turned down invitations to take part in debates with the up-and-coming parties, agreeing to debate only Mr. Sánchez. The Spanish news media said it might be the last time that only the two parties take part in an election debate, given Spain’s transformed political landscape.Pablo Iglesias, leader of anti-austerity Podemos, said the debate was an anachronism. “The two-party system no longer exists,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.