By JAMES KANTERDEC. 14, 2015
BRUSSELS —  The European Union delayed a decision on whether to renew sanctions against Russia on Monday, after Italy insisted that more discussion was needed.The failure to continue the sanctions for another six months indicates cracks in the bloc’s stance against Russian aggression in Ukraine. It could also push the issue to the agenda of a summit meeting of Europe’s leaders later this week.The current sanctions do not expire until the end of January, and a decision to renew them is still expected, possibly in the next few days. Even so, the delay on Monday drew criticism from ministers favoring a tough and united line against Moscow, even at a time when the West is seeking Russian support in fighting Islamic State forces in Syria.“I see no reason to delay,” said Linas Linkevicius, the foreign minister of Lithuania. He noted that a cease-fire, known as the Minsk agreement, between the Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatist rebels had not yet been fully carried out.Advertisement“If we don’t see real progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreement, then we need to go further,” said Didier Reynders, the Belgian foreign minister. “Without that, we need to prolong the sanctions.”AdvertisementFederica Mogherini, the high representative of the European Union for foreign affairs and security policy, told reporters at a news conference on Monday that the union could reach a political decision as soon as Thursday at the summit meeting here. “The general assessment today was clearly going in the direction of the rollover of sanctions,” she said.Italy made a procedural move last week that had the effect of preventing the union’s foreign ministers from endorsing the decision on Monday. Unanimity is required; any one of the union’s 28 members can block renewal by signaling its opposition.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Italian foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, said his country’s position was “not a matter of principle,” and that Italy wanted the union’s national leaders to assess the state of the Minsk agreement before action was taken. “I am sure that we will have a common decision,” he said.Russia is a significant economic partner for Italy. The Italian energy industry has close ties to Gazprom, the Russian state-run natural gas exporter, and important Italian industries like farming and fashion have lost business because of retaliatory measures imposed by Moscow.But geopolitical considerations are important, too. Italy, France and other European powers want Russia’s help in stopping the festering civil war in Syria, which has fueled terrorism and sent huge numbers of refugees fleeing to Europe.President François Hollande of France has said that Europe needed to ease its sanctions on Russia. After the terrorist attacks in Paris last month, he flew to Moscow to talk with President Vladimir V. Putin about fighting the Islamic State.“There are signs in Europe of a wider change of thinking on Russia, given the situation in Syria, and Italy is sending particularly strong signals,” said Rosa Balfour, a senior fellow at the German Marshall Fund of the United States, a research organization. “But it’s probably too early to justify a change of policy because there has been no tangible progress by Russia in Ukraine, and weakening sanctions now would leave Eastern European countries too concerned about their own security.”Europe first imposed economic sanctions on Russia in July 2014, after Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula, and then strengthened them in September 2014. They were renewed most recently in June.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: E.U. Delays Renewal of Russia Sanctions .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.