By LAURA HEATONDEC. 14, 2015
ARUSHA, Tanzania —  This town, near the edge of the Great Rift Valley, has long been a jumping off point for safaris. But intermingled with the zoom-lens-wielding tourists and camouflage-green safari trucks has been another common sight: buttoned-up legal staff members drawn from all over the world.They have long converged here in a conference-center-turned-fortress in the center of town, guarded by United Nations police officers.But now, after 21 years, 93 cases and $2 billion, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda is closing down.The last defendants to appear before the tribunal sat beside their robed lawyers in a cramped courtroom on Monday, waiting nervously for a decision in their appeals.AdvertisementThis special court, set up by the United Nations in 1994 in response to a genocide of nearly one million people in Rwanda that year, was intended to bring to justice the orchestrators of the mass killings. All of those on the tribunal’s suspect list had fled Rwanda, and most were hunted down and arrested elsewhere. The tribunal’s prosecutor deployed a team to Rwanda in the 1990s to speak to victims and witnesses.AdvertisementThe tribunal’s early years were tainted by missteps. Critics said it was too slow, too expensive and too biased, failing to try any crimes committed by the side that ended the genocide and won the war — the side that now governs Rwanda.In the past few months, as the last cases have wrapped up, courtrooms and floors of office space have gradually been rented back to the conference center’s landlord.“A liquidation team is in place to sell all that is remaining behind, be it furniture, vehicles and computers,” said Danford Mpumilwa, a tribunal spokesman. “Naturally some of the items have been donated to schools and other local institutions, which desperately need them.”The United Nations is building a much smaller facility that will house the tribunal’s archive — a point of contention with the Rwandan government, which is demanding that the archive be brought to Rwanda.For one last session Monday, the court convened in the Kilimanjaro Wing of the tribunal.Seats set aside for family were the first to fill up. Wives, nephews and grandchildren of the accused flashed thumbs-up and jumped up from their chairs to wave through the finger-smudged glass separating the public gallery from the courtroom.Many of the spectators were carefully watching Pauline Nyiramasuhuko, a prominent suspect, who served as the Rwandan government’s minister for family and women’s development during the 1994 genocide, when soldiers, militia and everyday farmers — whipped into a frenzy by their leaders — killed their neighbors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Nyiramasuhuko’s role drew particular interest because she is the only woman the tribunal has tried. In 2011, she was found guilty on seven counts, including genocide and incitement to rape. Ms. Nyiramasuhuko was tried with her son Arsène Shalom Ntahobali and four other members of the local administration in the town of Butare in southern Rwanda, who were all convicted on multiple counts. The “Butare Six,” as they became known, all appealed their convictions.Judges on Monday upheld the six verdicts. But family members watching from the courtroom gallery were jubilant as Judge Fausto Pocar, from Italy, announced reduced sentences for the defendants.AdvertisementFor Ms. Nyiramasuhuko, though, it apparently will not make much difference. Her sentence was changed to 47 years from life; she is 69.Monday was the end of an era. The court officially closes its doors at the end of the year, and this was the last case to be heard in its current incarnation. After that, any unfinished business, such as supporting prosecutions in other countries or trying any of the remaining suspects at large, will fall to a slimmed-down institution known as the Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, headquartered in The Hague.The Mechanism, as United Nations officials call it, will continue to run an office in Arusha, but it will be about a tenth of the size of the tribunal at its height. The Mechanism has been preparing for this transition for several years. It will also track residual issues from the United Nations court for the former Yugoslavia when it closes, most likely in late 2017.Eight Rwandan fugitives are still at large, with $5 million bounties being offered for their capture by the United States through the State Department’s Rewards for Justice program. One high-profile suspect was captured last week in the Democratic Republic of Congo.Beyond the eight most-wanted fugitives, the Rwandan government has issued indictments for more than 400 people accused of involvement in the genocide.“Let us remember that these are full-size human beings, not pins or grains of salt, which disappear or melt,” said Johnston Busingye, Rwanda’s justice minister, at an emotional ceremony this month. “Some are hidden in plain sight, preaching the word of God to the faithful, treating patients in hospitals or engaged in other activities in various countries.”He called the failure of countries to apprehend suspects — despite being members of the United Nations, which backed the tribunal — “another U.N. paradox.”Jeffrey Gettleman contributed reporting from Nairobi, Kenya.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Special U.N. Court on Rwandan Genocide Closes Its Doors After 21 Years .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.