AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick Lyman and Joanna BerendtWARSAW — In the few weeks since Poland’s new right-wing government took over, its leaders have alarmed the domestic opposition and moderate parties throughout Europe by taking a series of unilateral actions that one critic labeled “Putinist.”Under their undisputed leader, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, they pardoned the notorious head of the security services, who was appealing a three-year sentence for abuse of his office from their previous years in power; tried to halt the production of a play they deemed “pornographic”; threatened to impose controls on the news media; and declared, repeatedly and emphatically, that they would overrule the previous government’s promise to accept refugees pouring into Europe.But the largest flash point, so far, has been a series of questionable parliamentary maneuvers by the government and the opposition that has allowed a dispute over who should sit on the country’s powerful Constitutional Tribunal to metastasize into a full-blown constitutional crisis — with thousands of protesters from all sides taking to the streets.Countries across Europe have seen nationalist movements rise in popularity, particularly in the wake of the refugee crisis and the terrorist attacks in Paris. But Poland’s rightward lurch under the newly empowered Law and Justice Party is unsettling what had been the region’s strongest economy and a model for the struggling post-Soviet states of Eastern Europe.“I am very agitated and depressed,” Andrzej Zoll, a former president of the Polish Constitutional Tribunal, said in an interview with Gazeta Wyborcza, one of the country’s leading newspapers. “Twenty-five years of democratic Poland is coming to an end.”On Saturday, antigovernment protesters marched peacefully through central Warsaw chanting for “democracy.” On Sunday, a pro-government “March of Freedom and Solidarity” drew a somewhat smaller crowd of peaceful participants and featured chants of “God, Honor, Fatherland” and the singing of patriotic anthems like “Let Poland Be Poland.”At Saturday’s protest, Ryszard Petru, leader of a new opposition party called Modern, bemoaned the moves of the new government and its leader. “Kaczynski has managed to divide Poles yet again,” Mr. Petru said. “And he has done it in just one month.”Top leaders of the Law and Justice Party — who did not respond to repeated requests for comment — describe such sentiments as overblown and insist they are only fulfilling the legitimate desires of the constituents who put them in office.Nor, they insist, will there be significant changes in relations between Poland, the European Union, NATO and the United States, despite whatever changes the new conservative government unleashes domestically.“Law and Justice supported Poland’s accession to the European Union,” said Konrad Szymanski, the new government minister for European affairs. “We support integration as a framework for European cooperation but, as almost every member state, we have our opinions about the future of the union.”Yet the leadership has often seemed to confirm its critics’ worst fears. After some opposition members called for a European Union investigation of the new government’s actions, Mr. Kaczynski described them as traitors. “In Poland, there is a horrible tradition of national treason, a habit of informing on Poland to foreign bodies,” Mr. Kaczynski said. “And that’s what it is. As if it’s in their genes, in the genes of Poles of the worst sort.”The speed with which Law and Justice moved to capitalize on its definitive victory in October’s parliamentary elections has deeply unsettled Polish politics — as has the re-emergence of older faces from the party’s previous days in power, from 2005 to 2007.Rather than showcasing Mr. Kaczynski and other figures from the party’s last time in government, Law and Justice ran younger, more moderate candidates, first Andrzej Duda for president in the spring and then Beata Szydlo for prime minister in the fall. But in the closing days of the campaign, and certainly since the government took power, Mr. Kaczynski reasserted himself, and brought back many of his oldest allies.“Their attitude is that every four years there are elections, but afterwards the party that has won the election should have full power, practically unlimited,” said Aleksander Smolar, president of the Stefan Batory Foundation, which promotes civic issues. “They want very much to enlarge their power and weaken the institutions that control the political process.”Nationalist fervor is on the rise. At a rally of right-wing youth groups in Wroclaw last month, the figure of an Orthodox Jew was burned in effigy.For years, under the previous center-right governing party, Civic Platform, top officials spoke before a backdrop of Polish and European Union flags. Now, Ms. Szydlo has decreed that only Polish flags will be used.“I am happy that in these difficult times, Poland belongs to the E.U. and NATO,” Ms. Szydlo said. “But we decided that Polish government sittings and press conferences after these meetings will, from now on, take place against the background of, in my opinion, the most beautiful white-and-red flags.”While Law and Justice was in the opposition for eight years, it agitated repeatedly for fresh investigations into the 2010 crash of a plane in Smolensk, Russia, that killed Mr. Kaczynski’s twin brother, Lech Kaczynski, then the country’s president, as well as dozens of other top Polish officials.Some party officials, including a few with top positions in the new government, suggested that the crash might have been orchestrated and covered up by the Russians, perhaps with the connivance of Civic Platform and its then-leader, Donald Tusk, who is now president of the European Council in Brussels.These conspiracy theories were rarely raised during the recent election, but now that Law and Justice has assumed power they are back in the public discussion in a major way.The new foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, called on Russia to cooperate in a fuller investigation of the crash. “Either they solve this case amicably, or it will become necessary to hand it over to international tribunals,” he said. A top government spokeswoman, Elzbieta Witek, said in a television interview that a state tribunal should investigate Mr. Tusk, too. That was just her “personal opinion,” she said.In November, the new culture minister, Piotr Glinski, tried to halt performances of a play — “Death and the Maiden” by Nobel Prize-winning Austrian author Elfriede Jelinek — because he feared it would be pornographic.The performances went on, but not before drawing concern that the new government intended to control artistic productions it did not approve of. Those concerns were not lessened by a television interview with Mr. Glinski in which he derided the program he was on and hinted that the new government intended a firmer grip on the media.“This is a pornographic program, in fact, just as your station has been spreading propaganda and manipulation for a few years,” he told an interviewer on the public television channel. “And that is going to end as this is not how the public television should function.”But the most significant dust-up came over the composition of the country’s Constitutional Tribunal. In the run-up to the election, Civic Platform appointed five new judges to the 15-member panel, even though two of the vacancies would not occur until a new government took power.In response, Law and Justice refused to seat any of those five judges and, instead, appointed five judges of its own.The Constitutional Tribunal ruled this month that Civic Platform had the authority to appoint only three judges, and it declared unconstitutional large parts of new legislation covering the tribunal introduced by Law and Justice.But the new government continues to insist that its five judges — and none of Civic Platform’s — be admitted to the tribunal. Confusion about how this will play out, and who actually has ultimate authority over the Constitution, has unsettled Polish politics and raised passions on all sides.“You are developing Putinist standards,” said Robert Kropiwnicki, a Civic Platform member of Parliament. “The master himself would be proud.”For weeks, during a fall campaign that resulted in Law and Justice winning an outright majority in Poland’s Parliament, the question people kept asking was whether the party had changed since its earlier, contentious stint at the helm of the government.Both of Poland’s leading parties believe themselves inheritors of the Solidarity movement that propelled the country’s independence movement in the 1980s.But while Civic Platform has championed free market principles and enthusiastically embraced Poland’s rising role in European affairs, Law and Justice, with its deep ties to rural parts of the country and to the powerful Catholic Church, had pitched itself as the champion for those left behind by the country’s post-communist prosperity.Mr. Kaczynski made explicit the link his party sees between the government and the church in a speech celebrating the 24th anniversary of a religious radio station. “The church and its teachings are the foundations of Polishness,” he said. “And everyone, even if they are not believers, has to accept it. Any hand raised against the church is also a hand raised against Poland.”While Law and Justice champions socially conservative causes, including opposition to same-sex marriage, abortion and even in vitro fertilization, it also promised voters such traditionally left-wing policies as a rise in the minimum wage and a lowering of the retirement age.“The transition phase between communist and post-communist Poland was very painful for a large part of the population,” Mr. Smolar said. “For a lot of people, especially the older population, it was perceived as a catastrophe.”Now there are concerns that the party, simmering in opposition for so long, will seek to redress a litany of grievances, even if it means bending the Constitution.“This is not the problem in Poland only,” said Aleksander Kwasniewski, Poland’s left-wing president from 1995 to 2005. “This is happening in countries across Europe. This is the problem of democracy in general. Traditional democracy is in crisis.”Advertisement