
Sinosphere By                     
PATRICK BOEHLER

DEC. 14, 2015
The prominent Chinese civil rights lawyer Pu Zhiqiang, 50, went on trial in Beijing on Monday on charges of “inciting ethnic hatred” and “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” accusations that supporters say were intended to silence one of China’s best-known social activists.The prosecution built its case on seven social media posts that Mr. Pu wrote on Weibo between 2011 and 2014, according to a document carrying the letterhead of the Beijing Mo Shaoping Law Firm, which represents him. The document, first reported by Radio Free Asia, was widely circulated online over the weekend.The founder of the firm, Mo Shaoping, confirmed in a telephone interview on Monday that the prosecution had cited seven social media posts and that a list of those posts had been shared with Mr. Pu’s family. But Mr. Mo declined to comment on the individual posts and would not confirm if the document that circulated online was from his law firm.Mr. Pu is known for speaking his mind, often in creative language that mixes street slang with allusions to classical Chinese literature, and his writings on social media are infused with witticisms that can be difficult for outsiders to grasp. That much is evident in some of the excerpts, below, from the posts in the document:On China’s rubber-stamp lawmakersIf you want to live like a fish in water, either you play the fool or be a real fool. (Jan. 31, 2013)In this post, Mr. Pu questioned the competence of Shen Jilan, China’s longest-serving legislator, who has boasted of never having voted against anything in her six decades in the National People’s Congress. He also questioned the qualifications of Mao Xinyu, Mao Zedong’s grandson and a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the National People’s Congress.AdvertisementOn China without the Communist PartyWhy wouldn’t China work without the Communist Party? How would I know why it wouldn’t work? Other than fraud, evasion, axes and sickles, what’s this party’s secret for staying in power? (July 26, 2013)This is part of a comment on a pro-government political treatise titled “China’s Great Logic: Why China Wouldn’t Work Without the Communist Party,” published in 2012.AdvertisementOn a company spokeswoman’s evasions of responsibility after a fatal train crashIf she had been a mad dog, she would have asked: “Which organization do you work for? I know your boss well. How about lending me your recorders for me to play with?” (July 29, 2011)This was Mr. Pu’s description of Tian Zhenhui, a spokeswoman for a government-affiliated maker of railway signals, deflecting questions at a news conference on why one of its signals failed, leaving at least 40 people dead in 2011.On XinjiangIf Xinjiang belongs to China, then don’t treat it as a colony, don’t act like conquerors and plunderers. (May 1, 2014)In a post shortly before he was detained in May 2014, Mr. Pu criticized the Chinese government’s policies of ethnic assimilation in Xinjiang, a region in China’s remote west with a large ethnic minority population, primarily Uighurs, a mostly Muslim, Turkic-speaking group.On ethnic violenceDay in and day out, you have been saying that the party’s policies are good, that Uighurs support the party with all their hearts. Then how can such carnage occur? (March 2, 2014)In a post after a deadly attack by ethnic Uighurs on a railway station in Kunming, in southwestern China, Mr. Pu questioned the Communist Party’s narrative about ethnic harmony.On religionThe Chinese authorities require some buildings in Tibet, including temples, to display portraits of Chinese leaders, all members of the dominant Han ethnic group. Mr. Pu’s take on this was scathing:Have the Han Chinese gone crazy? Or have the leaders of the Han Chinese gone crazy? (Jan. 25, 2012)He also criticized the authorities in Yining, a town in Xinjiang with a large Muslim population, where officials were said to have banned women from wearing veils.Yining has forbidden Muslims from wearing veils, calling it a dilution of religious consciousness. All Han Chinese have gone crazy. (Jan. 25, 2012)The Chinese civil rights lawer Pu Zhiqiang stood trial in Beijing on Monday. Outside the courthouse, supporters and diplomats faced a heavy police presence.Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter @mrbaopanrui.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »