By NORIMITSU ONISHIDEC. 14, 2015
The new finance minister of South Africa, Pravin Gordhan, said that the government would move forward in a "fiscally responsible way" and earn the trust of the public.JOHANNESBURG —  Yielding to widening criticism of his leadership over South Africa’s ailing economy, President Jacob Zuma has removed a little-known lawmaker as finance minister just days after naming him to the post.In a written announcement Sunday night, Mr. Zuma, who hours earlier had defiantly dismissed his critics before crowds of supporters, also reappointed as finance minister Pravin Gordhan, whose tenure in that position from 2009 to 2014 has been widely praised.The abrupt announcement followed a weekend of intensifying calls, including from high-profile members of Mr. Zuma’s governing African National Congress and the party’s traditional allies, that Mr. Zuma reconsider his appointment of David van Rooyen as finance minister on Thursday.The selection of Mr. van Rooyen, an A.N.C. lawmaker who has no experience in finance and was an unknown political figure nationally, led to a sudden drop in the rand, South Africa’s currency, and added to doubts among investors and credit rating agencies about the soundness of South Africa’s financial management.AdvertisementThe decision to replace Nhlanhla Nene with Mr. van Rooyen set off an avalanche of criticism that appeared to take Mr. Zuma by surprise.AdvertisementOver the weekend, amid individual calls that Mr. Zuma resign, groups of leading academics, church leaders, politicians and labor leaders sent open letters to the president questioning his judgment and his stewardship over the economy.The appointment of Mr. van Rooyen was particularly reckless, they said, because South Africa was already reeling from the worldwide drop in the price of commodities and nearly slipped into a recession recently.The South African Council of Churches called last week’s appointment “bordering on financially irresponsible,” and it said the move would “undoubtedly affect all South Africans — but the poor are likely to be hit hardest.”On Sunday, speaking to crowds of A.N.C. supporters, Mr. Zuma dismissed the criticism as coming from “people who talk a lot on TV,” according to the local news media.But later that night, Mr. Zuma’s office released a statement announcing the removal of Mr. van Rooyen. “I have received many representations to reconsider my decision,” Mr. Zuma said. “As a democratic government, we emphasize the importance of listening to the people and to respond to their views.”The reappointment of Mr. Gordhan, who Mr. Zuma said would promote “fiscal discipline and prudence,” calmed investors on Monday morning and led to a partial recovery of the rand. But critics said the damage to South Africa’s reputation, and to Mr. Zuma, would be lasting.“President Zuma has been playing Russian roulette with our economy and future as a country over the past five days,” the Democratic Alliance, the country’s main opposition party, said in a statement.AdvertisementThe second-biggest opposition party, the Economic Freedom Fighters, said: “The country has had three finance ministers in one week. If anyone still does not think we are in a banana republic, they cannot be helped.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Zuma, who is serving his second and last term in office, has overseen a government that has grown increasingly corrupt.Accused by critics of cronyism, Mr. Zuma has appointed allies with little experience to important positions in government and at state enterprises.The recent reshuffling of finance ministers is believed to be related to a clash with the powerful chairwoman of South African Airways, the troubled national carrier. The airline’s chairwoman, Dudu Myeni, has been pushing for the purchase of 10 aircraft, a move that was opposed by Mr. Nene, who served as finance minister until last week.Critics accused Mr. Zuma of abruptly removing Mr. Nene, who earned high praise during his year and a half as finance minister, and trying to replace him with the unknown Mr. van Rooyen as a way to facilitate the purchase of the aircraft.At a news conference Monday afternoon, Mr. Gordhan hinted strongly that he would not budge from his predecessor’s opposition to the aircraft purchase.Without naming any individual, he said some officials treated state enterprises “as if it’s a personal toy from which you can extract money when you feel like it,” and he called for “a bit of national reflection” about the management of national resources.Ms. Myeni was appointed to the board of South Africa Airways in 2009, and she later became chairwoman, even though she had no experience in the airline industry. Ms. Myeni, who is also the chairwoman of the Jacob G. Zuma Foundation, is regarded as very close to Mr. Zuma.Over the weekend, as Mr. Zuma defended his initial appointment as finance minister and denied that it was linked to the airline’s management, he also directly addressed longstanding accusations that he had named Ms. Myeni to oversee the airline because they have been romantically involved.“Her relationship with the president is purely professional, and is based on the running of the foundation,” Mr. Zuma’s office said.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Yielding to Critics, South African President Appoints Third Finance Minister in Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.