By MICHAEL FORSYTHEDEC. 14, 2015
HONG KONG — A Beijing court is set to rule on a recommendation that the suspended death sentence given to the wife of one of China’s most prominent politicians for the murder of a British business associate be commuted to life in prison, the country’s state-run news media reported Monday.Gu Kailai, the wife of Bo Xilai, a former commerce minister, was convicted of murdering a family business associate, Neil Heywood, by poisoning him in a Chongqing hotel room in late 2011. Mr. Heywood’s death — and Mr. Bo’s efforts to suppress the news of it — led to Mr. Bo’s removal from the ruling Politburo in April 2012, throwing China’s once-in-a-decade leadership transition into turmoil. Mr. Bo was sentenced to life in prison in 2013 for taking bribes, embezzlement and abuse of power.At the time of Ms. Gu’s conviction in August 2012, her death sentence came with a two-year reprieve, meaning it would be lifted if she exhibited good behavior behind bars. In a notice dated Nov. 16 but released by the official Xinhua news agency on Monday, the Beijing High People’s Court said the prison where Ms. Gu is being held had recommended the commutation, citing her good behavior and her expressions of repentance. The prison’s original recommendation that her suspended death sentence be changed to a life term was made in September 2014.Ms. Gu, 57, the youngest of five daughters of a People’s Liberation Army general, was a lawyer who ran a prominent Beijing law firm. Prosecutors during her trial said she murdered Mr. Heywood because he had threatened her son, Bo Guagua, and demanded the return of $22 million he claimed he was owed. Bo Guagua is now a student at Columbia University’s law school.AdvertisementThe announcement on Monday came less than two weeks after another business associate of Bo Xilai and Gu Kailai, the billionaire Xu Ming, was found dead in his prison cell after having a heart attack, the Chinese news media reported. Mr. Xu was 44.Gu Kailai’s sentence is comparatively lenient in China, which leads the world in executions. Observers on social media noted that a former graduate student, Lin Senhao, was executed on Dec. 11 after being convicted of the fatal poisoning of his roommate at the prestigious Fudan University in Shanghai. One commentator wrote of the disparity in the sentences on Weibo, China’s Twitter-like microblogging site.Advertisement“This shows that the death sentence in China is only for poor people who don’t have power,” a lawyer named Li Jinxing wrote. “Who is convinced by this sort of justice?”An article on Tuesday about a court proceeding in Beijing in the case of Gu Kailai, convicted of murdering a British business associate, referred incorrectly to a recommendation to commute her sentence. It was made by the prison where she is being held, not by the Beijing High People’s Court. The error was repeated in the headline.Kiki Zhao contributed research from Beijing.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Beijing Court Urges Life Term for Wife of Fallen Official.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.