AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew E. KramerMOSCOW — Secretary of State John Kerry pressed ahead on Tuesday in the effort to organize a new round of talks aimed at ending the Syrian civil war that could also align the United States and Russia more closely in strategies for fighting the Islamic State.After an extended trip to Paris for climate talks, Mr. Kerry met for nearly four hours on Tuesday evening with President Vladimir V. Putin in the Kremlin, in talks intended to smooth differences over a planned round of Syria negotiations scheduled to take place in New York on Friday.The United States and Russia have long been at odds over Syria, with Russia standing firmly by President Bashar al-Assad and the United States backing the rebels seeking his ouster. A previous attempt to broker a solution to the conflict failed, and it remains unclear whether the two sides will reach a compromise this time.Among the issues to be decided in the run-up to the proposed talks is which of the dozens of militias fighting in Syria should speak for the Syrian opposition, and which should be designated as terrorist organizations.On Tuesday, the diplomats said they had narrowed a gap on defining which Syrian militias belonged on a terrorist list. A final list may be ready Friday, Mr. Kerry said.Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia said his country would accept a delegation of Syrian opposition groups at negotiations on Friday, if they arrived under the auspices of a United Nations moderator; Moscow had earlier objected that groups it considers terrorists might wind up in the delegation.“There’s no question that when the United States and Russia work together our two countries benefit, and I think everybody else does, too,” he said. “Despite our differences we demonstrated that when our countries pull together, progress can be made.”That progress included steps, however halting and preliminary, toward closer American and Russian military coordination in fighting the Islamic State, bringing the countries’ combined firepower to bear on the terrorist group.Mr. Putin, eager to break out of the isolation over the Ukraine crisis and the seizure of Crimea, has been pushing for Russia to join the broader alliance against the Islamic State.For now, the United States has said coordination – initially called only “deconflicting” — is confined to a purely technical level, and intended only to avoid altercations in the air over Syria.“We confirmed the agreements reached by the Russian and U.S. militaries, including the agreements that also apply to the U.S.-led coalition working against ISIS, and in practical terms agreed on some further steps,” Mr. Lavrov said of the military interaction. He called this coordination “our parallel work” in fighting terrorism.The United States, Russia, the European Union and Middle Eastern countries had agreed in Vienna last month on a timeline of two years to hold new elections in Syria but left the question of Mr. Assad’s fate unsettled.Last week, a wide range of Syrian opposition figures formed a new body to oversee peace negotiations and insisted that Mr. Assad step down.Mr. Kerry appeared, more carefully than on previous occasions, to couch America’s insistence that Mr. Assad leave office as a recondition of any settlement.The United States, he said, was not seeking Mr. Assad’s ouster per se, but rather considers it unlikely that he could preside over a successful settlement.“The United States and our partners are not seeking regime change in Syria,” Mr. Kerry said. Syrian opposition groups arriving for talks Friday in New York should not demand as a condition of sitting down that Mr. Assad depart immediately, Mr. Kerry said, a position Russia calls a nonstarter for negotiations.“We see Syria fundamentally very similarly,” Mr. Kerry said. “We want the same outcomes, we see the same dangers, we understand the same challenges.” He added that the countries are “honest with differences.”Mr. Kerry has made finding a political resolution to Syria’s fierce and festering civil war a priority for defeating the Islamic State terrorist group, which has found a haven in Sunni regions of eastern Syria and western Iraq.Russia began airstrikes in Syria in September after a covert military buildup over the summer, in an operation to prop up Mr. Assad and break Russia’s two-year-old diplomatic isolation over the Ukraine crisis.While the airstrikes in Syria have not, for now, done much to strengthen Mr. Assad’s sphere of control or leverage in any eventual talks, they have rendered Russia an indispensable player in the Syrian crisis. Mr. Putin and Mr. Obama have met face-to-face three times since September.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement