AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael R. GordonINCIRLIK AIR BASE, Turkey — Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter flew to this strategically positioned air base in southern Turkey on Tuesday carrying an appeal for allied nations to do more to combat the Islamic State.“We are really looking for the rest of the world to step up,” he told a group of American and allied troops in a cavernous airplane hangar.As President Obama did the day before at the Pentagon, Mr. Carter directed much of his message to Saudi Arabia and other Arab states in the Persian Gulf. But Mr. Carter was far more explicit about the assistance the United States would like them to provide as the White House seeks ways to accelerate its campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL.‘We would like the Gulf countries to do more,” Mr. Carter said on his flight here. “Some of the Gulf countries could make very important contributions to encouraging and assisting Sunni communities subjected to ISIL rule to resist ISIL rule.”Developing the idea further, Mr. Carter suggested later in the day that Gulf states could help mobilize Syrian Arab fighters to challenge the Islamic State in its Syrian sanctuary or support Sunni tribes in neighboring Iraq in their struggle against the jihadist militant group.“The forming of capable, motivated security forces in the territory of Syria and Iraq, which is one of the key ingredients of our overall strategy, can be enabled by them,” he said. “So that is what I would want to talk to my Saudi counterpart about.”Mr. Carter’s appeal to the Saudis came as Adel al-Jubeir, Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister, elaborated on the formation of a 34-nation Islamic coalition against terrorism that his country first announced on Monday. The new Islamic group’s members are Saudi Arabia’s allies in the Yemen conflict and a number of African nations including Nigeria, but it conspicuously excludes Iran, Saudi Arabia’s bitter rival in the Middle East.Speaking at a news conference in Paris, Mr. Jubeir said coalition members would share military and intelligence information and base their operations in Riyadh. Asked if they could provide ground forces to fight militants, he said, “Nothing is off the table.”In the year since the American air offensive against the Islamic State began, fighter pilots have assumed a huge bulk of the war effort. Here are some of the American pilots carrying out those operations.Nonetheless, Mr. Jubeir said there were no specific plans to create a contingent of soldiers that could be inserted into a conflict, and he said other operational details were still incomplete.Mr. Carter hinted that he had received no detailed advance notice of the Saudi initiative, although he expressed hope that it was in line with his appeal for greater Gulf-state involvement in the American-led fight against the Islamic State.“We look forward to learning more about what Saudi Arabia has in mind,” he told reporters here.Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who is chairman of the Armed Services Committee, applauded the Saudi move. But he complained in a statement that the surprise expressed by some senior American officials at the Saudi plans to form the alliance reflected the “diminishing influence” of the Obama administration in the region’s conflicts.Searching for new tactics to weaken the Islamic State, Mr. Carter also met here with a small group of commanders, including Maj. Gen. Darsie Rogers, who heads the Special Operations Command, and several senior Air Force officers.For all the talk about pursuing more allied support, the A-10 attack planes, F-15E fighters, KC-135 refueling tankers and Predator drones at the base here showcased the centrality of the American role in the air campaign against the Islamic State.Turkey agreed in July to let the United States use the Incirlik base, a 15-minute flight from the Syrian border, to carry out airstrikes against the Islamic State in northern Syria.Since early September, the number of piloted aircraft and drones that fly missions against ISIS from the base here has risen to 59 from 15. But while Germany, Qatar and Turkey have joined the air armada here, 45 of those aircraft are American. The number of American military personnel who have been sent here to support the air campaign has grown to about 1,100. A tented dining facility has been erected to accommodate the influx. Security is tight and military personnel are forbidden to leave the base. Before the Turks decided to let the United States use the base for missions against the Islamic State, “the northern front was a little bit vacant,” said Col. Sean McCarthy, who commands the 447th Air Expeditionary Group.Major Charlie, an A-10 pilot who military public affairs officers said could only be identified by his rank and first name for security reasons, said that he typically flies missions three times a week, some that have lasted as long as eight and a half hours, requiring several midair refuelings.To get the most out of his missions, the major said that after striking his targets he checks with the coalition’s command center to see if any new targets have come up.The presence of civilians has precluded him from attacking one particular Islamic State checkpoint, he said. But drawing an analogy to hunting for game, the major said that he is biding his time until a moment comes when no civilians are around and he has a clear shot. The checkpoint, he added, “has my name on it.”Advertisement