
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
DEC. 15, 2015
An ultranationalist Israeli group was accused of incitement on Tuesday for labeling the leaders of four of Israel’s most prominent human rights organizations “foreign agents” in a widely viewed video that equates their work on behalf of Palestinians with support for terrorism.The video, produced by Im Tirtzu, an ultra-Zionist organization, opens with the dramatization of a knife attack by a Palestinian man on an Israeli and goes on to argue that such violence is encouraged by the work of the Israeli rights activists, whose names and photographs are displayed as if they were suspected accomplices of the attacker.Within hours, the 68-second clip had been viewed more than 160,000 times on the Facebook page of Ronen Shoval, the group’s founder. Mr. Shoval, who failed in a bid to win election to Israel’s Parliament this year as a candidate for the Jewish Home party, urged viewers to support a draft law that would restrict the activities of nongovernmental organizations that accept donations from outside Israel.Michal Rozin, a legislator for the left-wing Meretz party, called on Israel’s attorney general to investigate the video’s producers for “blatant incitement” against the four activists named in the clip: Ishai Menuhin, the director of the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel; Avner Gvaryahu, outreach director for Breaking the Silence; Sigi Ben Ari of the Center for the Defense of the Individual; and Hagai El-Ad, executive director of B’Tselem.AdvertisementOne of the groups, Breaking the Silence, which collects testimonies from former Israeli soldiers with misgivings about their service in the occupied territories, was barred from working in Israel’s schools by the education minister, Naftali Bennett, on Tuesday.AdvertisementIsrael’s government has repeatedly blamed incitement through social media for the latest wave of deadly attacks on Israelis by Palestinians, and demanded that websites remove videos praising or encouraging such violence.“The central issue is not Im Tirtzu,” Mr. El-Ad wrote on Facebook. “The voice is indeed their voice, but the hands are those of the government — a government that has no ideas besides more and more occupation, which drags more and more Palestinians and Israelis into violence. With no idea what to do, they resort to incitement.”The activists named in the video received death threats on social networks after the clip was released.Supporters of the rights groups in Israel and abroad expressed dismay at the video on social networks.
            Saddened by incendiary video attacking work of @HagaiElAd, @menuchin, @avner87 and Sigi Ben Ari. You are heroes-keep defending human rights.        
            In response to Im Tirzu's despicable "foreign agent" video, @FMEP affirms support for Israeli human rights groups. https://t.co/1T5XtRzcs3 As the columnist Peter Beinart has written, foreigners who argue about the continuing Israeli occupation of the land it seized in 1967 often overlook the fact that there is “a struggle within Israel between radically different Zionist visions.”In a statement denouncing the video as “horrific,” J Street, a Jewish-American political advocacy group in Washington, said “the hateful way in which Im Tirtzu pursues its agenda should have no place and no support from the Jewish community here or in Israel.”J Street went on to note that Im Tirtzu itself solicits and accepts donations from outside Israel. “We call on all Jewish funders, individual and communal, to cease immediately their support for this organization which depends heavily on American funding to pursue its work undercutting Israeli democracy and undermining Jewish values,” its statement concluded.Until 2010, the largest donor to Im Tirtzu was a Christian Zionist group in the United States founded by the Rev. John C. Hagee, an evangelical pastor who once argued that biblical verses suggested that the Holocaust was part of God’s plan to force Jews to return to Palestine.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »