AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan GilbertBUENOS AIRES — A federal prosecutor is trying to revive a criminal complaint filed by Alberto Nisman, a prosecutor who died in mysterious circumstances earlier this year.Mr. Nisman had accused Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, then the president, of trying to shield former Iranian officials he suspected of planning a 1994 bombing of a Jewish center here in exchange for trade benefits.Mr. Nisman’s complaint, which Mrs. Kirchner believed was part of a plot to destabilize her administration, dissolved in Argentina’s courts when a three-judge panel ruled unanimously in May to accept another prosecutor’s decision to drop it. That prosecutor, Javier de Luca, concluded that there was no crime on which to base an investigation.But shortly after Argentina’s new government moved on Monday to abandon a public pact with Iran that Mr. Nisman had claimed was intended to serve as cover for the secret deal described in his complaint, the prosecutor, Raúl Pleé, sought to revive the case, according to Télam, the state news agency.Mr. Pleé, who could not be reached for comment on Tuesday, has asked that the court of Judge Daniel Rafecas, who originally dismissed Mr. Nisman’s complaint, consider whether new information justifies the reopening of the case against Mrs. Kirchner; her former foreign minister, Héctor Timerman; and some of her political supporters.The new information is related to negotiations between Argentina and Iran that led to the public pact, according to local news media reports of the document that Mr. Pleé filed.The pact, signed in 2013 by Mr. Timerman and his Iranian counterpart, proposed the creation of a joint commission to help solve the 1994 bombing, which killed 85 people in one of the worst anti-Semitic attacks since World War II.But last year, a court ruled that the pact, which was rejected by Jewish leaders, some victims’ relatives and the political opposition to Mrs. Kirchner, was an unconstitutional overreach by the executive branch, a decision that Mrs. Kirchner’s administration appealed to a higher court.The new president, Mauricio Macri, who took office last week and is seeking to reposition Argentina internationally, had promised to revoke the pact. On Monday, the Justice Ministry ceased the appeal.Pointing to the politicization of some legal cases in Argentina and the influence of the executive branch, Sergio Berensztein, a political analyst here, said the sequence of events that could lead to a revival of Mr. Nisman’s case would have been unlikely if Mrs. Kirchner’s party had beaten Mr. Macri in last month’s election.Mr. Pleé has been part of a group of prosecutors within Argentina’s politicized judicial system whom Mrs. Kirchner’s administration accused of maneuvering against her.Mr. Nisman had led the investigation into the 1994 bombing for a decade before he was found dead in January of a gunshot wound to the head at his apartment here. The investigation into his death, which thrust Argentina into a political crisis, has not established whether it was a suicide or murder.Advertisement