AdvertisementSupported byBy Alissa J. RubinPARIS — Three people are being questioned by French investigators in connection with terrorist attacks in the Paris area this year, including two suspected of supplying the guns used in the deadly siege of a kosher supermarket in January, the Paris prosecutor’s office said Tuesday.The three people were detained as part of investigations by the French police to retrace the links to the sets of attackers responsible for the rampages, which left 17 people dead in January and 130 people dead after an assault on Nov. 13. One of the suspects, Claude Hermant, 52, has a history with France’s far right. He was identified this year by the French news media as a possible source of the weapons used by Amédy Coulibaly in the siege at the kosher supermarket. That attack, which left four people dead, occurred two days after a shooting at the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, which was carried out by another group.The Paris prosecutor’s office also confirmed that a person was being questioned in connection with the shooting and bomb attacks last month at seven locations in and around Paris, including at the Bataclan concert hall, a stadium and several restaurants and cafes in the 10th and 11th Arrondissements. The name of that suspect and the reasons for the questioning were not made public.Mr. Hermant was already in detention for his role in an arms trafficking ring. He and a female companion, who has not been named, are being questioned on suspicions that they supplied the weapons to Mr. Coulibaly through a company managed by Mr. Hermant’s companion. According to French news reports, several of the weapons used by Mr. Coulibaly in the attacks were traced to the company.Mr. Hermant has been portrayed as a sometime adventurer and mercenary with ties to the French far right. He had been one of the leaders of the Maison du Peuple Flamand, a nationalist group in the Lille area, according to news reports. The organization closed in 2012, according to French news reports, but it was not clear why.As many as six of the assailants in the coordinated Islamic State terrorist assault in Paris were Europeans who had traveled to Syria.Before that he was part of a military wing of the far-right National Front party, which is now led by Marine Le Pen. An article in 2001 in the French newspaper Libération quoted court documents in which Mr. Hermant testified that he was a member of a paramilitary organization within the National Front that provided security for senior party members.He also described a subgroup he called “the Ghosts” — a secret paramilitary force of which he was a member. The group’s mission, he said, was to disrupt the National Front’s “enemies,” which included groups that worked against hate crimes. He said the “ghosts” also stirred up trouble in the suburbs.Mr. Hermant also said he had been a mercenary in the Republic of Congo, where he was imprisoned for seven months.The National Front denied the existence of the “ghosts.”Under French terrorism laws, Mr. Hermant and his companion can be held for up to six days, although Mr. Hermant is likely to remain in custody as part of the arms trafficking investigation.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement