By DAVID E. SANGERDEC. 15, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The nations controlling the world’s nuclear inspection agency voted on Tuesday to close its decade-long investigation into the work it suspected Iran of conducting to design a nuclear weapon, and instead to move ahead with fulfilling the deal signed in July to limit Iran’s production of atomic material for at least 15 years.The unanimous vote by the International Atomic Energy Agency’s board of governors ends the agency’s long-running, and largely unsuccessful, effort to get Iran to fully answer a series of questions about suspected activities.“This closes the board’s consideration of this item,” said the resolution, which was drafted by the United States and its five partners in the negotiations with Iran — Britain, China, France, Germany and Russia.In a report issued nearly two weeks ago, the agency concluded that until 2003 Iran had conducted what Yukiya Amano, the agency’s director general, called on Tuesday “a coordinated effort” on “a range of activities relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device.” Iran continued with some activities through 2009, Mr. Amano said, but after that there have been “no credible indications” of continued weapons development.AdvertisementIranian officials immediately hailed the vote and said it would allow implementation of the July accord, including the release, perhaps as early as January, of about $100 billion in frozen funds and an end to oil and financial sanctions that have crippled the Iranian economy.Advertisement“The fabricated issue of the so-called military dimension of Iran’s nuclear program is now history,” Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister and its chief negotiator on the nuclear deal, said on Tuesday, according to the Tasnim News Agency, a semiofficial government news outlet in Tehran.The report left almost no one satisfied. Senate Republicans who voted against the nuclear accord — and all of them did — along with some Democrats who voted for it said the Obama administration had erred when it decided to close the books on the past in the interest of focusing the atomic agency on inspections that will ensure the new agreement is fully carried out.The Obama administration has been relatively quiet about the resolution, but officials have said in background conversations that Secretary of State John Kerry did not want to give hard-liners in Iran an excuse to walk away from the nuclear deal.Mr. Kerry said in a statement that the resolution allows the atomic energy agency “to turn its focus now to the full implementation and verification” of the new deal, “which prohibits the resumption of such nuclear weapons-related activities and provides comprehensive tools for deterring and detecting any renewed nuclear weapons work.”He argued that the resolution would “in no way preclude the I.A.E.A. from investigation if there is a reason to believe Iran is pursuing any covert nuclear activities in the future, as it had in the past.”Behind the scenes, there was significant debate inside the administration over whether to try to force Iran to conduct a serious excavation of its past.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some officials feared that if Iran was given a pass, it would send a signal to other nations — including North Korea — that their obligations to respond to international investigators could be negotiated away in a political deal. President Obama eventually concluded that the larger goal of halting Iran’s ability to produce a nuclear weapon for the next decade-and-a-half was more valuable than setting a precedent about the integrity of inspections.Outside experts were also largely unsatisfied. David Albright, the nuclear expert who founded the Institute for Science and International Security, a Washington research group, concluded in a report last week that “Iran did not provide the I.A.E.A. with anywhere near a full declaration about its past nuclear weapons-related activities, and it did not provide the kind of transparency and cooperation required for the I.A.E.A. to conclude its investigation.”AdvertisementMichael Singh, a critic of the nuclear deal who served on the National Security Council under President George W. Bush and is now at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, argued that allowing Iran to leave doubts about the history of its nuclear effort was a fundamental mistake.“By protecting its nuclear secrets, accepting only temporary constraints” on its production of nuclear material and “advancing its missile program, Iran is keeping its nuclear options open for the future,” Mr. Singh said in an op-ed article Monday in The Wall Street Journal, written with Simond de Galbert, a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.The decision not to pursue more details on Iran’s alleged bomb-design work came as another United Nations group reported that Iran’s launching of a ballistic missile in October was a clear violation of United Nations sanctions. Iran apparently conducted a similar test in November, though the United States has declined to discuss its evidence in detail, perhaps to protect the sources of its intelligence.The United States ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, has accused Iran of violating the weapons and travel bans “with impunity” and has said the United States would press the Security Council to take action.The report by a group of experts who monitor violations of the United Nations sanctions was vague about the nature of some of the violations. The Spanish ambassador, Román Oyarzun Marchesi, who is chairman of the Iran sanctions committee, told the Council on Tuesday afternoon that in addition to the missile launch, there was an attempt by Iran to procure bars of plutonium this year. But the report was inconclusive, he said, on the question of whether the attempt was a “willful violation.”The council took no action on Tuesday. But Ms. Power’s comments seemed to suggest that the Obama administration’s strategy was to focus on current and future violations. Some members of Congress say that effort was not public enough. Senator Chris Coons, a Delaware Democrat who voted for the Iran agreement, told the Senate that the atomic agency’s report this month “details just how determined Iran has been to develop a nuclear weapons capability.”“I fear the Iranians are taking action after action in this area and others to demonstrate that they are willing to flout international rules, regulations and restrictions,” said Mr. Coons, who is on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. “In the absence of our decisive action, these misdeeds by the Iranians will simply continue and escalate.”Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from the United Nations.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Vote Ends Long Inquiry Into Iran’s Nuclear Past.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.