By JOANNA BERENDTDEC. 15, 2015
WALBRZYCH, Poland —  Experts from the Krakow University of Science and Technology said on Tuesday that, contrary to 70 years of local folklore, there is no trace of any armored Nazi train filled with looted treasure buried near Walbrzych in southwestern Poland.“There may be a tunnel,” said Janusz Madej, the head of the scientific team, “but there is no train.”The findings did not persuade the two amateur explorers who have been claiming since August to have located the fabled train. They declared on Tuesday that it was still there and that they would keep pressing to dig it out.The Krakow University team of geologists and engineers surveyed the site in November using magnetic and gravitation methods, Mr. Madej said at a news conference. The examination revealed some anomalies in the ground, he said, but they are no more than about eight feet below the surface, while the train was supposed to be 30 feet underground.Advertisement“The anomalies could be remnants of a collapsed tunnel,” he said.The two amateur explorers — Piotr Koper, a Polish construction company owner, and Andreas Richter, a German geologist — said in August that they had “irrefutable proof” of the existence and location of the train, which was thought to be filled with gold, gems and weapons and sealed in a tunnel in the closing days of World War II. Their announcement put the 120,000 inhabitants of the usually quiet city of Walbrzych at the center of a global frenzy.AdvertisementOn Tuesday, the explorers seemed less confident, though still adamant that the train must be there. Speaking at the same news conference, the explorers said their own experts had recently checked the site with ground-penetrating, thermal and magnetic sensors. Based on that data, the two men said there were clear signs of a railway tunnel, with tracks and sleepers.Mr. Koper presented images of round, oval and rectangular shapes in the ground that he said must be the armored train. “We carried out similar examinations in many other locations, but we have never encountered anything like this,” he said. “There is no way these shapes are of natural origin.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He showed images of very similar shapes during an interview in September, saying they were probably military equipment on the train, including small armored vehicles with short gun barrels.Mr. Koper said on Tuesday that he and Mr. Richter, though just “hobbyist treasure hunters,” stood by everything they said and added, “There can’t be a mistake.”Mr. Madej responded, “It’s human to make a mistake, but it’s foolish to stand by it.”Historians believe that Lower Silesia, which was part of Germany before 1945, may still hide many secrets from the war period. Many artworks and other valuables plundered from Eastern Europe were stashed in Silesian castles and mansions during the conflict and were not recovered or accounted for afterward.Though the Polish authorities and amateur explorers alike had for decades searched for the legendary Nazi gold train in vain, hopes of finding it were reignited by the announcement in August. Poland’s deputy culture minister, Piotr Zuchowski, said then that he was “99 percent convinced” that the train had finally been found. Those hopes may have been dashed again by the Krakow scientists’ report.The local authorities in Walbrzych now have to decide whether to go ahead with the planned next step in the hunt — an expensive and complicated operation of digging and drilling to introduce cameras into the ground and see what is there.“We need to think about we should do now,” said Arkadiusz Grudzien, a spokesman for the city president.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hopes Dashed in Hunt for Fabled Nazi Gold Train .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.