By SOMINI SENGUPTADEC. 15, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  For decades, the secretary general of the United Nations has been chosen by the world’s five most powerful countries — and always behind closed doors. The only clear qualification for the job was that the permanent members of the Security Council agreed on him — and, yes, it has always been a him.But now, for the first time in the organization’s 70-year history, the almighty P-5, as the Council’s permanent members are known, have been persuaded to pry open their doors, ever so slightly.After months of bargaining, the Council has agreed to let all those who aspire to the post of secretary general hold “informal dialogues or meetings” with the 193 nations that make up the General Assembly, allowing candidates to reveal something about who they are and why they want the job.Those meet-and-greets will be strictly voluntary. And in the end, the permanent Security Council members — Russia, the United States, China, France and Britain — hold on to the most important perk: They submit one name for the job to be rubber-stamped by the General Assembly.AdvertisementModest as these changes appear, they are being hailed as a victory in diplomatic circles for what Natalie Samarasinghe, executive director of the United Nations Association for the United Kingdom, called “transparency and inclusivity.” Never before has the Council had to even specify how and when it picks the next secretary general, or what is expected of him or her.AdvertisementThe new procedures are part of a long-awaited letter, signed Tuesday afternoon by the heads of the Security Council and General Assembly.It does not go as far as what some civil society groups are agitating for: a single term for the secretary general, possibly for seven years, so that whoever is selected does not have to curry political favor with powerful countries to be re-elected. Currently, the secretary general is, by custom, allowed to serve for up to two five-year terms.Establishing only one term, Ms. Samarasinghe argued, would offer the secretary general “the political space needed to develop and implement a more independent, long-term and visionary agenda.”“I feel that this reform is the one that will probably have the most impact, and the conversation on this issue is by no means over,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The changes come at a time of mounting frustration with the way the Security Council conducts business and its inability to carry out its principal mandate: to safeguard world peace. The frustration is aimed mainly at its five permanent members, all victors of World War II.But the attention to the selection of the secretary general is also a measure of concern about the credibility of the United Nations as a whole and the worry that its top jobs are controlled by the most powerful countries.The letter remains vague on two divisive elements. First, on the question of whether a woman should lead the organization for the first time in 70 years, it encourages countries to nominate “women, as well as men.” Russia had vigorously objected to the notion of gender preference.Second, Russia had insisted on maintaining a tradition whereby each region gets a shot at the top job. It so happens that it is Eastern Europe’s turn next. The final language gave a nod to the Russian concern: “We note the regional diversity in the selection of previous secretaries general,” it says.AdvertisementThe qualifications are explained ever so obliquely: The next secretary general, who is to take office in January 2017, is to have “extensive experience in international relations and strong diplomatic, communication and multilingual skills.” The Security Council says it will begin its discussions on candidates in July. Critics had called for a more specific timeline to avoid last-minute horse trading.The joint letter follows a resolution adopted by the General Assembly in September calling for greater transparency in the selection process. That resolution, diplomats said, reflected the dissatisfaction of many countries with the opaque nature of the process. It called for a letter to be released jointly by the presidents of the General Assembly and the Security Council to lay out the process and allow candidates to present themselves in “a timely manner.”“The letter will kick-start the recruitment process for one of the most important jobs in the world,” Matthew Rycroft, the British ambassador, said in a statement. “Crucially, the letter calls for greater equality, transparency and predictability in the process; a process that has been opaque for too long.”A version of this article appears in print on December 16, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: World Powers Relax the Process for Picking a U.N. Leader, Slightly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.