By KATRIN BENNHOLDDEC. 15, 2015
LONDON — When it comes to terrorist plots, Britain has been lucky more than once.In 2007, two car bombs planted in the West End of London failed to go off. Two militants linked to those bombs then drove an explosive-laden Jeep into Glasgow Airport the very next day, but again failed to kill anyone. A year later, a Muslim convert targeting a restaurant in Exeter prematurely detonated a suicide vest in the bathroom.Such amateurism has not been confined to these isles. In 2009, a militant set his pants on fire while trying to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner with explosives concealed in his underwear, earning him the nickname the “underwear bomber,” and in April a gunman who targeted a French church instead shot himself in the leg.But last month’s synchronized attacks in Paris suggest that the days of jihadist ineptitude may be numbered.Several of the Paris attackers, who had been to Syria and appeared to be well-trained, were among the approximately 30,000 foreign fighters from 100 countries who have joined the Islamic State over less than three years. More than 5,000 of them are believed to be Westerners, many of whom could eventually return home.Advertisement“Europe is far more vulnerable today than it was just a few years ago,” said Jytte Klausen, a professor at Brandeis University.AdvertisementHer research shows that even before the rise of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, about one in every 12 returning foreign fighters had plotted attacks at home.More significant, amid fears that Islamists are coming back to Europe, she found that plots were twice as likely to succeed when the perpetrators had spent time on jihadist battlefields.Jihad is a source of networks, training and brutalization, said Peter Neumann, the director of the International Center for the Study of Radicalization at King’s College London.The last conflict to mobilize foreign fighters on a similar scale was in Afghanistan against the Soviets in the 1980s. Some 20,000 went. But that covered a whole decade, and the share of Westerners was much smaller.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, the Afghan jihad represented a chilling precursor: Veterans from that conflict have popped up on battlefields from Bosnia to Algeria to Iraq. They have been involved in establishing jihadist movements like Al Qaeda and plotted against the West for the past two decades.“It is no coincidence that Osama bin Laden began his terrorist career as a foreign fighter,” said Mr. Neumann, whose center has a database of about 700 Western jihadists in Syria. “All the big plots in Europe have involved people who have trained abroad. That’s why it’s so important to avoid the safe havens for training, because training makes them ‘better terrorists.’’’A broad coalition of nations, including Britain, is now bombing Islamic State targets in Syria. But part of the damage back home is already done, Mr. Neumann said.“Even if the Syrian conflict ends tomorrow, which we know it won’t,” he said, “the consequences will be with us for a generation.”AdvertisementBefore the Islamic State came onto the scene, three out of every four major terrorist plots were averted, Ms. Klausen’s research suggests. The ability of the authorities to maintain even that level will diminish unless Western societies clamp down on local terrorist cells, she said.That will require European countries to beef up their intelligence and policing capability to keep up with the rising number of returning jihadists, as well as improve intelligence sharing on a largely borderless continent that still treats national security as, well, a national issue.But they also need to invest in ambitious prevention plans that rely on more than just men or women in uniform, experts say. Mistrust of the security services runs high in the Muslim communities where the Islamic State recruits. With parents and social workers best placed to detect early signs of radicalization, counterterrorism officials need to better leverage their influence, Mr. Neumann said.Just as jihadists have learned from past mistakes, he said, Western governments need to learn from theirs: “We need to become smarter about prevention.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.