AdvertisementSupported byBy Christopher Drew and Nicholas KulishThe findings of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service inquiry into the detainee-abuse case are included in a report, which was redacted by the United States Navy. In nearly all cases, the redactions are of the names of American service members. Links to excerpts from the report appear below.The first sworn statement to the Navy is from Staff Sgt. David Roschak, the ranking soldier at the outpost. The fourth and final statement is from Specialist David Walker, an Army medic. The two other soldiers asked not to be named in connection with a military investigation.The soldiers were stationed at a small outpost in Kalach, Afghanistan, when Navy SEALs arrived to train the local police force. In their statements, the soldiers described discipline problems involving several of the SEALs that led to a series of incidents — rifles fired without warning for target practice, grenades tossed for sport, a civilian punched in the face — and then escalated into hours of detainee abuse after a bomb exploded at a checkpoint.The Afghan Local Police beat the suspects, and the soldiers said that enlisted SEAL team members had later fired handguns next to the detainees’ heads, stood on their abdomens and dropped rocks on them. Two soldiers said that they had seen SEALs dump water on the faces of detainees lying on their backs, and that the detainees had appeared to be choking.The soldiers said the SEALs had urged them to keep quiet about the episode.Four soldiers stationed at an isolated outpost told investigators that they had witnessed members of a Navy SEAL team mistreating Afghan detainees.The four accused SEALs sought legal counsel and elected not to speak to investigators. Six other Navy service members provided sworn statements. The first four are support personnel, and the last two are SEALs who were not implicated.Like the soldiers who made the abuse allegations, the Navy personnel described how the checkpoint bombing led the Afghan Local Police to round up suspects. They also reported seeing the police mistreating the suspects. For the most part, they said they had not witnessed abuse by the Navy SEALs and offered benign explanations for what had happened. One of the Navy servicemen described nudging a detainee with his foot, while another said he had poured water for a thirsty detainee.Yet one of the sailors described, in the first statement below, seeing one of the SEALs fire a pistol next to a detainee’s head. Another said, in the third statement below, that he had seen a member drag a detainee by a scarf wrapped around his neck. Both of those actions were among the abuses reported by the soldiers.Six Navy service members gave their version of the events that led to the criminal inquiry.This man worked as a Pashto interpreter for a contractor called Mission Essential Personnel and was stationed at the outpost with the American service members.In his first interview, he described a brief series of interrogations and no detainee abuse by the Americans. He later provided a sworn statement that described a more tumultuous scene: one lasting hours and involving substantial abuse of detainees by the Afghan Local Police.Then he described seeing a member of the Navy SEAL unit stepping on a detainee’s abdomen. The interpreter said he had initially given a different version of events because he had been “afraid of getting hurt from the guys on the SEAL team.”An interpreter for the SEAL unit expanded on his initial account, as evidenced by an interview and written statement in the Naval Criminal Investigative Service report.Unlike the other sworn statements, the Afghans’ testimony is summarized by the naval investigators. They only interviewed Afghan witnesses brought to them by the same local police unit implicated in the beatings.The first Afghan witness said that after the bombing, he had been beaten by the Afghan Local Police but not by the Americans. The second witness, himself a member of the local police, said that in the few minutes of the encounter he observed, he had seen American service members join the Afghans in beating the detainees.The third witness is a mechanic for the local police who did not see the episode. The fourth and final witness is a landowner who was not even in the province at the time of the bombing or its aftermath.The Afghan Local Police brought four locals to give sworn statements to investigators.Capt. Robert E. Smith sent a letter to the Naval Criminal Investigative Service explaining that he had handled the case with an informal, nonjudicial procedure known as a captain’s mast. He dismissed the charges against all four of the accused SEALs: three enlisted men and their lieutenant.A letter from the East Coast SEAL command informed investigators that the charges had been dismissed.Advertisement