
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
DEC. 16, 2015
While the spotlight of international attention remains firmly fixed on the brutalities of Islamic State militants in Syria, the families of thousands of Syrians who vanished into government detention facilities after protesters first took to the streets in 2011 have been confronted with graphic evidence of what President Bashar al-Assad’s security forces are capable of.Since March, when Syrian opposition activists posted a trove of images online, families of the missing have been looking for traces of their loved ones by sifting through thousands of post-mortem photographs smuggled out of the country by a police photographer who defected in 2013.In new research released on Wednesday, Human Rights Watch reports that the images provided to the opposition by a military police photographer who was given the code name Caesar “show at least 6,786 detainees who died in detention or after being transferred from detention to a military hospital.”Close analysis of the images, and interviews with released prisoners and former employees of the detention facilities, suggest that most of the victims shown in the photographs were detained by one of five intelligence agency branches in Damascus, the capital. After their bodies were sent to military hospitals, they were photographed and the photographs were carefully archived, with unique serial numbers, by the government. The reason for the Assad government’s detailed documentation remains unclear.
            Rehab’s family paid +$100K to free her from detention. Her body appeared among #CaesarPhotos https://t.co/gYvnUw5Blx pic.twitter.com/2X3u7perV3 The rights group, which worked with forensic pathologists from Physicians for Human Rights to analyze the photographs and interviewed relatives of the missing, was able to verify the identities of 27 of the victims.AdvertisementEight of those 27 families agreed to have the details of their relatives’ stories published by Human Rights Watch. Those stories are included in “If the Dead Could Speak,” an 85-page report and a video report that accompanies it.The video includes an interview with Dahi al-Musalmani, a former judge who fled Syria in 2013, who described finding a photograph of his 14-year-old nephew among the images of the dead. The boy, Ahmad al-Musalmani, had been arrested in 2012 when an anti-Assad song was discovered in a search of his phone at a government checkpoint.
            If you're at all interested in what's going on in #Syria, watch this video. https://t.co/oitgnjP7GY pic.twitter.com/p13UTpEb1V His uncle searched for Ahmad for 950 days, eventually learning that he was being held by Air Force Intelligence. After paying more than $14,000 in bribes in an unsuccessful attempt to win Ahmad’s release, the report says, he finally found photographs of the boy’s body in the online archive.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »