By JONATHAN GILBERTDEC. 16, 2015
The country’s treasury and finance minister announced the change at a news conference Wednesday.BUENOS AIRES —  Argentines were bracing themselves for a substantial devaluation of their currency, the peso, as the new president, Mauricio Macri, rushed to execute sweeping market-oriented changes intended to revive an ailing economy.Alfonso Prat-Gay, the finance minister in Mr. Macri’s center-right government, announced the immediate scrapping of currency controls on Wednesday night, the precursor to a probable plunge of the peso Thursday morning.“Lifting these barriers that have halted the economy for many years will kick it along the path to growth,” Mr. Prat-Gay told reporters. The moves are aimed at bolstering an economy predicted to grow by 0.4 percent this year, according to the International Monetary Fund.Yet the devaluation is likely to mean hardship in the short term for many Argentines as prices shoot up. It subsequently risks stirring social unrest in a nation where large street protests are commonplace and trade union leaders are influential.Advertisement“This is going to affect me because my salary is not going to keep up,” said Leonardo Rodríguez, 24, who earns about $715 a month for delivering cosmetics to stores here.Advertisement“Macri doesn’t care about the middle class; he only aspires to favor the rich,” he added, doubting whether the actions of the new president, who is from a wealthy family, would ever benefit him.Mr. Prat-Gay said that the policies were geared toward ending poverty, one of Mr. Macri’s campaign promises.Economists have long warned that the peso, whose value was tightly administered by the Central Bank under Mr. Macri’s predecessor, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, was overvalued. This makes the nation’s manufacturers uncompetitive and thwarts foreign investmentPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The devaluation was inevitable,” said Gastón Rossi, a former deputy economy minister and director of LCG, a consultancy in Buenos Aires. “The economy wasn’t sustainable.”Mrs. Kirchner, who saw the gains of a devaluation nearly two years ago vitiated by inflation, left another devaluation to her successor because the political cost was too high, Mr. Rossi added.Some economists expect Mr. Macri’s changes to result in a recession or anemic growth next year, followed by a rebound in 2017 of about 3 percent.Pointing to tensions between supporters of Mr. Macri and supporters of Mrs. Kirchner’s party, which proposed more gradual economic changes, Axel Kicillof, a lawmaker and Mrs. Kirchner’s former economy minister, warned this week, “Brusque devaluations bring great disarray.”The exchange rate is officially 9.8 pesos per dollar, but because of the unpopular controls that limit access to dollars, they sell in a black market for about 14.5 pesos.The devaluation will especially benefit Argentina’s influential farmers, who have been hoarding stocks of grain harvests for export, like soy, as they speculated about the move. Mr. Prat-Gay said the government had agreed to a deal with them to liquidate billions of dollars in stocks over the next three weeks.An article on Thursday about a move by Argentina’s new president, Mauricio Macri, to devalue the nation’s currency misstated, in some editions, the International Monetary Fund’s forecast for Argentina’s economy and the name of the Buenos Aires consultancy where Gastón Rossi, a former deputy economy minister who said the devaluation was inevitable, is a director. The economy is predicted to grow — not shrink — by 0.4 percent this year, and Mr. Rossi works at LCG, not LSG.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Argentina Set to Devalue Its Currency.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.