AdvertisementSupported byLetter From IndiaBy Manu JosephNEW DELHI — Prime Minister Narendra Modi choked, his voice trembled and his speech acquired the tone of a self-made man looking back at his difficult childhood. He was at Facebook’s headquarters this week in Menlo Park, Calif., recounting how his mother had worked as a domestic helper to raise him.His political foes in India later claimed that he was exaggerating, that he had never been as poor as he suggested. An examination of what is known about Mr. Modi’s family, his childhood home and the state of the nation when he was a boy would indeed indicate that he was a bit more fortunate than most Indians of the time. Even so, the indisputable fact is that he had to struggle, like millions of children then.At his Facebook appearance, Mr. Modi said something about his fabled rise that might not seem odd at first glance: “I would like to thank the country.” But he was being too generous to the nation. If he had wished to be accurate, he would have been more specific: He would have thanked Indian politics. That is the only system in India that offers a smart, impoverished young man or woman a shot at success, prestige and great wealth, however illegitimate. There is nothing else.All other spheres of Indian life are rigged against the most talented of the poor. The most respectable and lucrative jobs require parentage, schooling, contacts and mastery of English that are beyond their fortunes. The huge income disparity that nations like the United States are now experiencing because of a transformed job market that disproportionately rewards elite education and social class was always the central quality of Indian society.No doubt there have been genius Indian athletes and artists, accidental actors and shrewd entrepreneurs who have risen from poverty to great acclaim and wealth. They are very few, however, and they are the beneficiaries of pure chance, not of a system. But Indian politics, which can accommodate tens of thousands in its various rungs, is a field that rewards the clever, gifted and ambitious poor.It is not that politics is fair. Rich politicians do better than poorer ones, and politicians certainly promote their own genetic material. But if all Indian politicians are taken into account — including those in municipal corporations and village councils, failed candidates, disciples, sidekicks, assistants and managers, among whom are fixers and businessmen serving as fronts for dirty money — what becomes apparent is that the most intelligent of the poor have a shot at success in this system as in no other walk of Indian life. Many enter politics to abolish their own poverty, not that of others.There is a view, as expressed by the sociologist Ashis Nandy, that in an unequal society like India, corruption is a compensating force that allows the street-smart poor to thrive. “As long as this is the case,” Mr. Nandy said, “the Indian republic will survive.”But in a functional electoral democracy, in which the average voter claims to be disgusted by corruption, how has the corrupt politician survived, and why do the upright often fare very poorly? Among the few hypotheses that try to explain this paradox — while carefully dismissing the notion that the average Indian voter, too, is a crook — is one offered by Raghuram G. Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India.In a speech last year, Mr. Rajan said that India’s system of political corruption begins with the fact that the poor are entitled to many services and benefits that don’t reach them because the distribution of welfare is inefficient. This gap, he said, is often bridged by a “crooked but savvy politician” who knows how to work the system in ways that a less corrupt one would not. Hence the poor, through their votes, reward the crooked politician, who does many other crooked things that keep his voters poor.In an ideal society, of course, the weak would not need criminals to survive, and fewer of the talented would have to become criminals to thrive.Follow Manu Joseph, author of the novel “The Illicit Happiness of Other People,” on Twitter at @manujosephsan. Advertisement