By DIAA HADID and RAMI NAZZALDEC. 16, 2015
JERUSALEM — When the latest Palestinian uprising erupted in early October, set off by increasing fears that Israel was seeking to take over Al Aqsa Mosque compound, its locus was Jerusalem. The city was also home to the young men and women who carried out the attacks, stabbing, shooting and trying to hit Israelis with their cars.Now, however, the violence has mostly faded from Jerusalem, and when attacks occur, the perpetrators are usually from the West Bank.The change seems to be a result of actions taken by Israeli officials, who have focused on reducing tensions surrounding the compound, the holiest site in Judaism and one of the holiest sites for Muslims, while instituting a series of security measures that Palestinians have denounced as collective punishment.“The message is that nothing and nobody is immune,” said Rafik Husseini, director of the Maqassed Hospital, one of the last Palestinian institutions remaining in East Jerusalem.AdvertisementIn recent weeks, the authorities have allowed most Palestinian residents of Jerusalem access to the mosque compound while removing a particular source of unrest by banning visits by incendiary politicians.AdvertisementThey have also begun a series of security measures, restricting free movement in and out of Palestinian areas, conducting sweeping arrests and placing some suspects in administrative detention, rights groups say, under which they can be held without charge for renewable six-month periods. The authorities are closely monitoring social media, seizing anyone they see as inciting violence, as well as youths who express intentions of martyrdom. They have also revived the practice of destroying the homes of the attackers and have refused to return the bodies of most of the suspects, arguing that mass funerals for slain Palestinians lead to more violence.The authorities have instituted similar measures in hot spots across the West Bank, but they appear to have had more impact in East Jerusalem, where Palestinians are directly governed by Israel. The idea, analysts say, was to make it clear to the Palestinians not to take for granted the relative freedoms they have in East Jerusalem.“The price was made clear for them,” said Eitan Dangot, a former military coordinator for Palestinian civilian affairs in the Gaza Strip and West Bank. “The neighborhoods of East Jerusalem went back 20 years. They had no freedom, no work.”Palestinians say the Israelis are going too far, taking vindictive steps meant to remind them who is in charge. Residents of one East Jerusalem neighborhood awoke one day to find vehicles blanketed with parking tickets, in an area usually ignored by the police. And Israeli forces have repeatedly raided Palestinian-run hospitals in East Jerusalem, searching for suspects.Even a cigarette is now a problem, said traders in the alleyways of the Old City, who were fined by newly zealous inspectors enforcing a ban on indoor smoking.“It’s the pinnacle of frustration,” Amjad Ghrouf, a 42-year-old Palestinian trader, said with a sigh as he secretly puffed on a cigarette inside a sweet shop. “It’s just to screw with us,” muttered his friend, who kept watch by the doorway.Since the uprising began in October, Palestinians have killed 18 Israelis and an American citizen. More than 115 Palestinians have been killed in the same period.AdvertisementAccording to estimates from Israeli officials and the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, 60 Palestinians have been shot dead while attacking Israelis, or being suspected of doing so, from Oct. 1 through early December, with 12 of the attackers thought to have come from East Jerusalem. All but two of those attacks were in the first three weeks of October. And while attacks were quite common in Jerusalem that month, they now account for less than a fifth of the estimated 135 attacks of this uprising.That is not to say attacks have ceased in Jerusalem. On Monday, a Palestinian man rammed his car into a crowd of Israelis at a bus stop, injuring a dozen people, including an 18-month-old baby. On Wednesday, two men tried to plow their vehicle into Israeli security forces conducting a raid in the Kalandia refugee camp.Quelling the uprising in East Jerusalem was particularly important for Israeli officials, who claim the city as their eternal, undivided capital, and who have sought to project an image of business as usual in the city.For Israel, violence by Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem is particularly troubling, because they may freely move about the West Bank and in Israel, in contrast to Palestinians in the West Bank, who need permits to enter Israeli-controlled areas.Yet, in throwing up new obstacles and checkpoints around East Jerusalem — 38 during the peak of the uprising, the United Nations counted — Israel’s security measures tended to underscore the divisions in Jerusalem.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Palestinians say the new measures are only increasing the anger and alienation of East Jerusalem’s Arabs, which could fuel further attacks.“I would not be surprised if more violence happens,” said Yusef Mukhaimar, a leader of the Shuafat refugee camp, “because nobody is dealing with the underlying causes.”He gestured to alleyways with piles of rotting garbage and narrow, potholed roads rendered persistently gloomy by illegally built multistory structures in the camp that block the light.“The people think: We have no relation to you,” he said, referring to Israeli Jews. “They see this as a terrible occupation.”AdvertisementIsrael captured the area from Jordan in the 1967 war, and expanded Jerusalem’s boundaries to 27 square miles from 2.3 miles. The annexation was rejected by the United Nations, and most of the world considers the territory occupied. Some 200,000 Jews live in annexed areas in communities that are widely considered illegal settlements, including Pisgat Zeev that can be seen from Mr. Mukhaimar’s office.Across the city, in the outlying East Jerusalem community of Jabal Mukaber, cars wove through the new concrete cubes at one entrance as riot police officers briefly blocked another entrance because youths were flinging rocks and demanding that the return of the body of an attacker.Drivers sped in the opposite direction as tear gas thudded near homes. “Go back!” one man yelled at other drivers. A 58-year-old cleaner shrugged. “Every day they put on a dance,” he said of the clashes.The restrictions appeared to have some effect.One activist from the Shuafat camp and another from Issawiya, a crammed Palestinian neighborhood on a sloping hill near the prestigious Hebrew University, said leaders from their areas had met with municipal authorities — they did not specify whom — and agreed to banish youths identified as inciting violence in return for the police agreeing to ease searches of women. The police could not confirm those claims.“We can lose the whole world, but our honor is not to be touched,” said Amir Dibs, a 22-year-old youth counselor in the Shuafat camp.The delays for thousands of Palestinian men working across Jerusalem also appeared to be a deterrent. Elias, 22, a mechanic, said he took part in violent protests for the first few weeks of the uprising. But after rising an hour earlier to get through the new checkpoint, he shied away.“We are tied to them,” he said, referring to the Israelis. If Palestinians rose up, “we would be killed, or we would die of hunger.”Israeli measures have upended life in East Jerusalem in other ways. In Silwan, a neighborhood near the old city, a 66-year-old Palestinian grandmother said she did not allow her grandchildren to visit her unsupervised anymore. She feared that the police would harass them — but also that the grandchildren might try to attack them.AdvertisementOne of her sons was fired from his job at a Jewish-owned supermarket, and another married off his daughter at 17 just to keep her out of the protests.On a more positive note, residents said that being under fire created a sense of community long missing from Palestinian neighborhoods.One recent day in the Shuafat camp, young men hauled away rubble from the ruins of the home of Ibrahim Akkari. Israeli forces destroyed the house after Mr. Akkari ran over a man in November last year, killing him.“We were so sad when they did this, but now we have joy,” a 19-year-old volunteer said, gesturing toward the pile of rubble. “This gave us solidarity.”An article on Thursday about Israel’s adoption of stricter security measures, which Palestinians denounce as collective punishment, referred imprecisely to access to the Aqsa Mosque compound in Jerusalem, the site of many clashes between the Israeli police and Palestinians in recent months. The Israeli authorities have recently allowed nearly all Palestinian residents of Jerusalem to visit, not most Palestinians in general. (Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip generally cannot visit the compound without a permit to enter Jerusalem.) The article also omitted attribution for a statistic about the 115 Palestinians killed since the uprising began. According to estimates from the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, from Oct. 1 through early December, 60 Palestinians have been shot dead while attacking Israelis or being suspected of doing so.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Attacks, but Not Palestinian Anger, Subside as Israel Clamps Down .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.