AdvertisementSupported byBy Saeed Al-Batati and Kareem FahimAL MUKALLA, Yemen — Warring parties in Yemen agreed on Wednesday to release hundreds of prisoners as the Yemeni government and Houthi rebels sat down for peace talks in Switzerland aimed at ending the country’s nine-month conflict.The prisoner swap had been discussed for months, and was not part of the negotiations in Switzerland between the Houthi rebels and the government of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, according to Nasser Houthar, a southern Yemeni official allied with Mr. Hadi. Even so, it was a rare gesture of good will by the sides, whose fighting has engulfed much of Yemen and left about 6,000 people dead since the conflict started in March. A Saudi-led military coalition, which supports Mr. Hadi, and the Houthis agreed to a cease-fire that began on Tuesday and was intended to facilitate the peace talks mediated by a United Nations special envoy. The truce was broadly holding on Wednesday, though there were multiple reports of violations, including fighting in the southern city of Taiz and airstrikes in Marib Province, east of the capital, Sana, according to residents.Past cease-fires have faltered, but there is mounting pressure on the combatants to reach an agreement now because of the increasingly dire humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Human rights groups have also stepped up their condemnations of the Houthis and the Saudi coalition, accusing them of carrying out indiscriminate attacks and other violations that may amount to war crimes.Mr. Houthar, reached by telephone on Wednesday afternoon, said that 340 Houthi prisoners were being transported to the southern Lahj Province, where they were expected to be exchanged for 270 fighters allied with Mr. Hadi and held by the Houthis.Also on Wednesday, an American prisoner held in Sana who had been facing the death penalty was convicted on murder charges and sentenced to 10 years in prison, according to his lawyers. Sharif Mobley, from New Jersey, was detained in 2010 in a sweep by the Yemeni authorities of militants suspected of ties to Al Qaeda. He was later accused of killing a security guard at a hospital from which Mr. Mobley attempted to escape.His lawyers at Reprieve, an international human rights group, said that Mr. Mobley had been held incommunicado for long periods and abused in custody, and that they had been unable to mount an effective defense.Mr. Mobley’s local lawyer, Saleh el-Moraisi, said that Mr. Mobley had also been ordered to pay compensation of about $23,000 to the family of Abdul Malik al-Bouhim, the security guard. Mr. Mobley’s lawyer said they were exploring a possible appeal.Saeed Al-Batati reported from Al Mukalla, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo. Shuaib Almosawa contributed from Sana, Yemen.Advertisement