By SEWELL CHANDEC. 16, 2015
LONDON —  Britain’s highest court unanimously rejected on Wednesday an attempt by Donald J. Trump, the real estate developer and Republican presidential candidate, to block the construction of a wind farm near his luxury golf resort in northeast Scotland.The ruling is the latest impediment for the resort, known as Trump International Golf Links, which opened in 2012 near Balmedie, a few miles north of Aberdeen.Mr. Trump has vowed to stop further development on the project if the offshore wind farm — 11 turbines, which would be visible from the golf resort 2.2 miles away — goes forward.In a 27-page ruling, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom rejected an argument by Mr. Trump’s lawyers that the wind farm had been improperly approved by Scottish officials in March 2013 because it did not comply with a 1989 law and because there was a problem with the planning application.AdvertisementFergus Ewing, the Scottish energy minister, wrote on Twitter that the government was “pleased that the Supreme Court has unanimously found in our favor.”AdvertisementIn a statement, George A. Sorial, the executive vice president and counsel for The Trump Organization, Mr. Trump’s development company in New York, denounced the ruling as “extremely unfortunate for the residents of Aberdeen and anyone who cares about Scotland’s economic future.”Mr. Sorial said the wind farm, known as the European Offshore Wind Deployment Center, would “completely destroy the bucolic Aberdeen Bay and cast a terrible shadow upon the future of tourism for the area.”He added, “History will judge those involved unfavorably, and the outcome demonstrates the foolish, small-minded and parochial mentality which dominates the current Scottish government’s dangerous experiment with wind energy.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Sorial warned that the wind farm might never be built because of insufficient financing for renewable-energy projects, in large part because of plunging oil prices.“We will evaluate the court’s decision and continue to fight this proposal on every possible front,” he said.Local opposition to the resort inspired a 2011 documentary film, “You’ve Been Trumped,” which Mr. Trump’s lawyers tried unsuccessfully to stop the BBC from broadcasting in 2012.Scottish officials approved the resort in 2008 after determining that the economic benefits outweighed environmental concerns. But the subsequent approval of the wind farm drew outrage from Mr. Trump, who clashed on the subject with Alex Salmond, who was Scotland’s first minister until last year.Mr. Trump told a parliamentary committee that the wind turbines were “one of the most serious problems Scotland will have or has had.”Last year, Mr. Trump bought Turnberry, a prestigious golf course in southwest Scotland, an action that suggested that he might not invest much more money into the resort near Aberdeen.AdvertisementMr. Trump’s mother was born in Scotland and moved to the United States in the 1930s. She died in 2000.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Loses Bid to Block Wind Farm Near Scottish Resort.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.