By MICHAEL FORSYTHEDEC. 16, 2015
HONG KONG —  China’s state-run news media has identified several people who the police say carried out a deadly knife attack in September at a coal mine in the northwestern Xinjiang region, releasing a televised confession this week in which one of the suspects said he had been carrying out jihad.The attack, which took place on Sept. 18 and may have killed more than 50 people, was not reported by China’s official news outlets until mid-November. Then images of Chinese police officers roaming the rugged Tianshan mountains near the border with Kazakhstan in an extensive manhunt in October and November were shown in the state news media, which claimed that 28 people suspected of taking part in the attack had been killed.The Chinese government has called the attack at the Sogan coal mine, in remote Baicheng County, an act of terrorism. It has also sought to portray its continuing campaign to quell unrest among Xinjiang’s Uighur minority as part of a global effort to combat violent religious extremism.But the government has been selective in disclosing the extent of the violence in the region for fear, some analysts and officials say, of frightening the millions of ethnic Han Chinese who live in Xinjiang, after decades of government-supported migration. Uighurs, a mostly Muslim Turkic group, were once an overwhelming majority in the region, but they now make up about 40 percent of Xinjiang’s 22 million people.AdvertisementThough many of the suspects in the attack were said to have been killed, one man surrendered to the police after being urged to do so by his grandfather, a member of the Communist Party, according to a report on Sunday in Tianshan, a news website run by the local government. A local senior police official, Memet Tohtinyaz, was killed while pursuing the suspects, Tianshan reported.AdvertisementIn a video posted online on Tuesday by Xinjiang television, the man said to have surrendered, Turghun Emet, who appeared to be in his 20s, said he had been told “we will do jihad,” presumably by the attackers’ leaders. It was impossible to determine whether the man was speaking freely.“If we die when we do jihad, then we will go to heaven,” he said in Uighur in the video, to which Chinese subtitles had been added. “At that time, they gave me a knife. There was a knife in everyone’s hands — if you cut someone, kill someone, then you will be a martyr and go to heaven.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two other men, who were named the prime suspects in the attack, were also identified. Their black-and-white pictures were published on the Tianshan website, but the report did not say whether they were among the 28 suspects said to have been killed.State news media released detailed articles about the mine attack several days after a series of coordinated terrorist strikes in and around Paris in November that killed 130 people; China said that it, too, had been a victim of terrorism carried out by religious extremists. A report in Tianshan said that the mine attack had killed 16 people, but interviews with local residents and relatives conducted in October by Radio Free Asia, which is funded by the United States government, and by The New York Times suggested that the number of deaths may have exceeded 50.China has sought to portray extremists in Xinjiang as part of transnational terrorist organizations, with violent separatists among the Uighur population coordinating with jihadist groups abroad. While that claim is disputed, analysts say that some religious extremists in Xinjiang have drawn inspiration from the global jihadist movement, which they can learn about online.Nicholas Bequelin, Amnesty International’s regional director for East Asia, said the roots of violence in Xinjiang were both domestic and international. Decades of Han migration into Xinjiang, along with limited economic opportunities for Uighurs, has stoked resentment, as have harsh measures to suppress a separatist movement, including severe restrictions on freedom of movement, curbs on religious expression and mass incarcerations. A well-known Uighur scholar, Ilham Tohti, is serving a life sentence after being convicted of fomenting separatism.But in recent years, violence has also drawn inspiration from the “global cyberjihadism,” Mr. Bequelin said.“We are right to deconstruct what China is saying in its official communication about terrorism and about Xinjiang,” Mr. Bequelin said in an interview this week. “We should nonetheless not forget that there is an amount of violence there that seems to be inspired or is taking on a jihadi mantle.”Kiki Zhao contributed research.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Jihad Said to Be Motive in Chinese Mine Attack.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.