
Sinosphere By                     
 EDWARD WONG
 
DEC. 16, 2015
BEIJING — Many Chinese Internet users are watching with great concern the case of the civil rights lawyer Pu Zhiqiang, in which prosecutors brought charges against Mr. Pu based on seven short posts he wrote from 2011 to 2014 on Weibo, a Twitter-like platform.Foreign officials have broadly denounced the case as political persecution, but few have paid attention to the specific legal implications surrounding the question of free speech, the issue that is vexing many Chinese who are following Mr. Pu’s plight.Mr. Pu’s posts included criticism of China’s policies toward ethnic Uighurs in the western region of Xinjiang and mockery of the national legislature and a legislative advisory body. He also made some acid comments about Mao Zedong’s grandson, Mao Xinyu, a major general in the People’s Liberation Army.The case is the latest one that Chinese officials are using to set a benchmark for criminalizing online speech. Mr. Pu has been charged with “inciting ethnic hatred” and “picking quarrels and provoking trouble.” If found guilty, he could be sentenced to up to eight years in prison, his lawyers say.AdvertisementIn late 2013, legal officials expanded the charge of “picking quarrels” to cover online speech, and since then, police officials and prosecutors have used the accusation as a basis for detaining and imprisoning a wide range of people, including lawyers, writers and artists.AdvertisementMr. Pu’s trial lasted a little over three hours on Monday, and Mr. Pu and his supporters now await a verdict. In the courtroom, Mr. Pu said he was willing to apologize to anyone whose feelings might have been hurt by his posts, said Mo Shaoping, one of his lawyers. But the defense team also presented a case to the judges of why Mr. Pu’s posts did not constitute crimes.In an interview, Mr. Mo explained the importance of the case’s free speech aspects and the defense’s legal arguments:“The significance of the case is this: Where is the boundary between using harsh and rude words to criticize public figures and events, and freedom of speech? Our viewpoints are:“First, apart from speech that leads to immediate danger, speech should not be deemed a criminal act. For instance, if you spread the lie that a theater is on fire and that triggers a stampede where people are injured or die, this would be speech that causes an immediate danger. Anything else should just be tolerated as free speech.“Second, the public has the constitutional right to criticize public figures. It’s enshrined in the Chinese Constitution. Public figures should be more tolerant and should not charge someone just because his or her language is rude.“Third, Weibo is a special platform of expression, and it’s an instant channel where people comment on events and public figures. Therefore, control over Weibo should be more tolerant than control over conventional media. It’s different from conventional media because it involves the expression of emotions. There should be a greater degree of free speech there compared with conventional media.“So this case should not be taken on as a public criminal indictment. If anyone is hurt by Pu Zhiqiang’s Weibo posts, that person can file a civil suit against him in court. Think about Fang Zhouzi and Cui Yongyuan. Only when you have exhausted all the civil and administrative ways can you really resort to public criminal indictment.”Mr. Mo was referring to an anti-defamation lawsuit that Mr. Fang, a biochemist who has campaigned against academic fraud, filed against Mr. Cui, a former state television host, in January 2014. The two had engaged in a heated debate on Weibo over genetically modified food, as Mr. Cui questioned why Mr. Fang had become a big supporter of genetically modified corn. In their posts, they started hurling personal insults at each other.A Beijing court began hearing arguments in July 2014. This June, the court said both men were at fault and ordered each to pay the other 45,000 renminbi, or about $7,000, delete their Weibo posts and apologize publicly to each other. Both men appealed the decision, and a second trial is underway.Follow Edward Wong on Twitter @comradewong.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »