By MICHAEL R. GORDONDEC. 16, 2015
Ashton B. Carter, the secretary of defense, said at an American air force base in southern Turkey on Tuesday that "we really are looking for the rest of the world to step up" in fighting the Islamic State.BAGHDAD —  Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi of Iraq declined to take up the Pentagon on its recent offer to speed up the fight against Islamic State fighters in Ramadi with the help of American attack helicopters, officials said on Wednesday.“The prime minister did not make any specific requests in connection with helicopters,” Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter told reporters after he met with the Iraqi leader here.Mr. Carter made it clear that Mr. Abadi had not ruled out the use of the Apache helicopters in future operations, which are expected to be especially challenging as Iraqi forces look toward the battle for Mosul, Iraq’s second-largest city, which was captured in June 2014 by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Mr. Carter also insisted that neither Lt. Gen. Sean B. MacFarland, the American military commander who is leading the campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, nor the Iraqi prime minister believed that the Apaches were needed “right now” to win back Ramadi, the capital of Iraq’s Anbar Province, which is the site of protracted fighting between Islamic State militants and Iraqi ground troops.AdvertisementBut Mr. Carter told Congress just a week ago that the United States had offered to have American-piloted Apaches fight with Iraqi forces as the Iraqi Army sought to complete its capture of the city. The United States, he noted, has also offered to deploy American advisers with Iraqi brigades on the battlefield instead of restricting them to bases inside Iraq, another proposal the Iraqis have yet to accept.Advertisement“The United States is prepared to assist the Iraqi Army with additional unique capabilities to help them finish the job, including attack helicopters and accompanying advisers, if circumstances dictate and if requested by Prime Minister Abadi,” Mr. Carter told the Senate Armed Services Committee.The meeting between the American defense secretary and the Iraqi prime minister underscored two factors shaping the American-led campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq: the Obama administration’s reluctance to significantly expand the role of American troops in Iraq, and the reluctance of Iraq’s Shiite-dominated government to accept highly visible forms of American military support in the face of pressure from hard-line Shiite politicians and the Iranians.It also raised questions about the Obama administration’s plans to intensify its campaign against the Islamic State militants. In recent weeks, the Pentagon has spoken of the “accelerants” it is planning to introduce to hasten the demise of the Islamic State. The Iraqi government, however, has yet to embrace two of the important “accelerants” — the Apaches and the deployment of American advisers in the field.Mr. Carter disclosed the Apache offer to American lawmakers after it had been conveyed privately to Mr. Abadi. Iraqi officials said the public nature of Mr. Carter’s statements, which appear intended to reassure Congress that the Obama administration was stepping up its efforts against the Islamic State, put the prime minister, who has already been weakened by a series of bruising struggles with his political rivals, in a difficult spot.“This is a very complex environment,” General MacFarland said, somewhat philosophically. “It is kind of hard to inflict support on somebody.”According to United States officials, the Pentagon’s offer to support Iraqi forces with American Apaches was more qualified than it first appeared. Military commanders would have the authority to use the attack helicopters if Mr. Abadi agreed to their use and the risks of using them were judged to be acceptable.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The deployment of Apaches in riskier situations would require further White House review, even if Mr. Abadi approved, United States officials added.American officials also said it would take weeks to deploy the advisers who would accompany Iraqi brigades on the battlefield even if Mr. Abadi were to agree to their presence.AdvertisementOne important measure has been accepted in principle by Mr. Abadi: a new American special operations task force, which is to number fewer than 100. Seeking to reassure the prime minister, Mr. Carter said the task force’s operations would require the approval of the Iraqi authorities. He suggested that some of its missions would take place near the Iraqi border with Syria, where they would receive less attention than those carried out near the Iraqi capital.“Everything we do, of course, is subject to the approval of the sovereign Iraqi government,” Mr. Carter said at the start of his meeting with Mr. Abadi, which also included Khaled al-Obeidi, Iraq’s defense minister, and Lt. Gen. Taleb Shegati al-Kenani, who heads Iraq’s counterterrorism service.“Our progress in Ramadi is a huge progress and added to it the progress in Baiji,” Mr. Abadi said in English, referring to a town that is the site of a strategic oil refinery in northern Iraq.American military officials have painted a generally positive picture of the Iraqi military’s push to take Ramadi, but Iraqi troops were involved in pitched fighting on Tuesday as Islamic fighters counterattacked.The city, which is believed to be occupied by several hundred militants, has been surrounded by about 10,000 Iraqi troops. Tens of thousands of civilians are believed to be trapped in the town, and Islamic fighters have shot at some who have tried to flee, according to American officials.In their Tuesday counterattack, Islamic State militants took a bridge northwest of the city that spans the Euphrates, which the Iraqi Army had previously occupied. At the same time, militants sent several car bombs and a small group of fighters to attack the Anbar Operations Center, the Iraqi command that is overseeing the Ramadi campaign from north of the city.Both attacks were beaten back as American airstrikes enabled the Iraqi military to retake the bridge. Two Iraqi soldiers were killed as were several dozen Islamic State fighters, American officials said. By the end of Tuesday, both sides were back where they had started. It was unclear when Iraqi troops might break through the Islamic State’s belts of improvised explosive devices and other defenses and push into the heart of the city.A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Iraq Declines Offer of U.S. Helicopters, Pentagon Chief Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.