By ISABEL KERSHNER and TIM ARANGODEC. 17, 2015
JERUSALEM —  Israel and Turkey have reached a preliminary agreement to begin restoring full diplomatic relations after years of deep freeze, Israeli officials said on Thursday.The two countries, once close regional allies, fell out after a deadly confrontation in 2010 between Israeli commandos and Turkish activists on a passenger vessel seeking to breach Israel’s naval blockade of the Gaza Strip.The ship, the Mavi Marmara, was part of a flotilla carrying aid to Gaza when Israeli naval commandos rappelled onto the ship’s deck and killed nine activists after being met with violent resistance. A 10th activist died of his wounds much later.A senior Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because the reconciliation deal had not been finalized, said that Israel would create a compensation fund for the families of those killed on the Mavi Marmara. The Israeli news media reported that the compensation would be about $20 million, but Emmanuel Nahshon, a spokesman for the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said the amount had not been set.AdvertisementTurkey, in turn, would drop criminal charges it has filed against Israeli officers and agree to prevent a leader of Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls the Palestinian territory of Gaza, from entering Turkey. Israel has accused the Hamas leader, Saleh al-Arouri, of orchestrating attacks against Israelis in the West Bank from a base in Turkey.AdvertisementThe two countries would also return ambassadors to each other’s capitals and would discuss building a pipeline to bring natural gas from Israel to Turkey, the Israeli official said.The emerging deal was announced a few days after President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey told reporters that reconciliation “would be good for us, Israel, Palestine and the entire region.”Dore Gold, the director general of Israel’s foreign ministry, responded in a statement, “Israel has always aspired to stable relations with Turkey and is constantly examining the ways to achieve that goal.”The reconciliation agreement still requires final signatures, the senior Israeli official said.It has been more than two and a half years since President Obama pressed Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to call Mr. Erdogan, then the prime minister of Turkey, and apologize for the Marmara episode. That phone call, at the end of a 2013 visit by Mr. Obama to Israel, was supposed to pave the way for reconciliation. Instead, it was one of many false starts, as Israel and Turkey could not agree on terms.The senior Israeli official said the pending agreement grew out of a recent meeting in Switzerland attended by Mr. Netanyahu’s national security adviser, Yossi Cohen; a special Israeli envoy, Joseph Ciechanover; and Feridun Sinirlioglu, a senior Turkish diplomat.Turkish officials did not speak publicly about the deal on Thursday. But Daily Sabah, a pro-government newspaper, said, citing a senior Turkish official, that a “preliminary reconciliation deal” had been reached at a meeting in Zurich. The semiofficial Anadolu news agency reported that a deal was in the works but had not yet been completed.A deal with Israel could restore one of Turkey’s most important relationships, which the United States once relied on to help maintain regional security. Turkey used to be Israel’s most important friend in the Muslim world, and the two countries still share many strategic interests, including containing Iran.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters. The White House praised the agreement. “We would welcome this step in improving relations between two of our key allies in the region, particularly given our common interests and the challenges we face,” a senior Obama administration official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because she was not authorized to address the matter publicly.AdvertisementAlso on Thursday, Israel gave final government approval for a long-awaited deal that would allow an American-Israeli partnership to develop a large offshore natural gas field, allowing Israel to export gas to other countries in the region, including Turkey. Russia is a major supplier of natural gas to Turkey, and Mr. Erdogan’s government has been looking to reduce its dependence on Moscow, according to analysts.Those efforts have gained urgency in recent months, with Turkey and Russia colliding over their roles in the Syrian civil war. Turkey supports rebels trying to overthrow President Bashar al-Assad, whom Russia supports.Last month, Turkey shot down a Russian fighter jet on a bombing mission in Syria after, according to Turkish officials, it strayed into Turkish airspace, sharply increasing tensions. Russia responded with sanctions on Turkey.“There is a question of how and to where Israel will export its gas,” said Gallia Lindenstrauss, an Israeli expert on Turkish foreign policy at the Institute for National Security Studies at Tel Aviv University. The crisis between Turkey and Russia, she said, is part of “a constellation” of factors working in Israel’s favor.Israel’s energy minister, Yuval Steinitz, said that the progress on the deal to develop Israel’s gas reserves had contributed to the thaw between Israel and Turkey and that Israel had been looking into the possibility of exporting gas to Turkey for months, according to Israel Radio.Steven A. Cook, an expert on Turkey at the Council on Foreign Relations, said the deal with Israel, long a diplomatic priority of the United States, had most likely been pushed forward because Turkey realized that it needed its Western allies amid rising tensions with Russia and Iran, which also supports Mr. Assad.Mr. Cook said the reconciliation with Israel was “a big part of Turkey’s charm offensive.”Isabel Kershner reported from Jerusalem, and Tim Arango from Istanbul. Jodi Rudoren contributed reporting from Jerusalem, and Julie Hirschfeld Davis from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Israel and Turkey Near Deal to Restore Relations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.