By SOMINI SENGUPTA and RICK GLADSTONEDEC. 17, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  An independent panel has concluded in a scathing report issued Thursday that United Nations officials passed allegations of child sexual abuse by peacekeepers “from desk to desk, inbox to inbox” and failed to meet the organization’s core mission to protect the rights of the most vulnerable civilians.The report grew out of allegations that French soldiers deployed in the Central African Republic had offered food to children as young as 9 in exchange for sex. In one of the most damning indictments of the United Nations system, the report found that its officials had “turned a blind eye to the criminal actions of individual troops,” and failed to protect or aid the child victims.Instead, the 111-page report said, United Nations officials obscured the allegations and focused on questioning the conduct of one senior staff member who had leaked the information to the French authorities.“In the absence of concrete action to address wrongdoing by the very persons sent to protect vulnerable populations, the credibility of the U.N. and peacekeeping operations are in jeopardy,” the panel’s report said.AdvertisementThe report raises broader questions about the organization’s willingness and ability to hold accountable its own staff and troops deployed to protect the most desperate people in war zones around the world.AdvertisementSexual abuse allegations have dogged United Nations missions for years, and even after the allegations came to light in the Central African Republic, others surfaced against United Nations peacekeepers there. The allegations in the country implicate the very arm of the organization responsible for safeguarding civilians’ rights: the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.The report was issued amid at least two other serious scandals confronting the United Nations in the final year of the 10-year tenure of Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. In October, the Antiguan diplomat who headed the General Assembly in 2013 and 2014 was charged in a multimillion-dollar corruption scheme; he has pleaded not guilty. In November, Mr. Ban’s mediator for the long-running Libya conflict was implicated in an apparent conflict of interest, after he accepted a job funded by a country that had backed one Libyan faction.The United Nations’ handling of the child sexual abuse allegations, however, is by far the most damaging to its reputation.“The welfare of the victims and the accountability of the perpetrators appeared to be an afterthought, if considered at all,” said the report of the three-member independent panel led by a Canadian former judge, Marie Deschamps. “Overall the response of the U.N. was fragmented and bureaucratic, and failed to satisfy the U.N.’s core mandate to address human rights violations.”Mr. Ban, who appointed the panel, said in a written statement, “I express my profound regret that these children were betrayed by the very people sent to protect them.” He said he would “act quickly” to determine what to do about any United Nations officials found to have abused their authority.The abuse is alleged to have occurred from December 2013 to June 2014 near a camp for displaced people in the Central African Republic’s capital, Bangui. United Nations investigators uncovered evidence that six boys, ranging from 9 to 15 years old, had been sexually abused by French soldiers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The panel faulted the United Nations mission chief, Babacar Gaye, saying he had not taken the evidence seriously. “He turned a blind eye to every opportunity he had to intervene,” Ms. Deschamps said Thursday at a briefing with reporters.Mr. Gaye, a retired Senegalese general, was dismissed by the secretary general last August.The panel also faulted an aide to Mr. Gaye, who at the time was the top human rights officer in Bangui. The aide, Renner Onana, still works for the mission in the Central African Republic, though in another capacity. What disciplinary action will be taken against him, if any, is unclear.AdvertisementFrom the start, the scandal has revolved around a senior official in the United Nations human rights office in Geneva, Anders Kompass, who leaked the abuse allegations to French officials in July 2014. Many months later, he was suspended by his boss, the high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, who said he had violated protocols. The suspension was short-lived. He was restored to his post.The panel was critical of Mr. Hussein’s actions. It faulted him for what it called “a single-minded determination to pursue an investigation” of Mr. Kompass. But the panel said Mr. Hussein’s actions did not “rise to the level of an abuse of authority.”Mr. Hussein’s response to the panel, in an annex to the report, signaled a tense relationship with his subordinate. He said he was shocked that Mr. Kompass had divulged the identities of the children without their consent.On Thursday, in a written statement issued after the report’s release, Mr. Hussein said that “it’s extremely important” for the United Nations system broadly to “strengthen and accelerate its responses to all types of human rights violations.”Mr. Kompass was exonerated by the panel.It blamed a raft of other officials for having failed to take action, singling out Carman Lapointe, who was responsible until recently for internal oversight of the United Nations bureaucracy. It said she had not been impartial in her inquiries about Mr. Kompass’s actions.The panel was highly critical, too, of the special representative for children and armed conflict, Leila Zerrougui. She “took no steps to inform herself” about the welfare of the child victims until widespread media coverage began last spring, the panel said.Not least, the United Nations children’s agency, Unicef, did little more than refer the victims to a local group that met with them in 2014 for no more than a couple of hours. In a written statement, Unicef said it was reviewing the panel’s conclusions, adding that “we, of course, deeply regret those failures, including in not adequately following up on the children’s well-being.”As for the soldiers accused, France has said it is investigating. So far, no arrests have been made. Early this month, French officials said four peacekeepers were being questioned.A version of this article appears in print on December 18, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Scathing Report Assails U.N. Handling of Child Sexual Abuse Allegations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.