AdvertisementSupported byBy Sewell ChanLONDON — Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front party in France, deleted a tweet on Thursday that contained a photo of the decapitated body of James Foley, the American journalist who was killed by the Islamic State last year, after criticism from his family.Ms. Le Pen had posted the tweet in anger after a French journalist with a pugnacious reputation, Jean-Jacques Bourdin, likened the National Front to the Islamic State during an interview with a French scholar, comparing the way both groups encouraged xenophobic sentiments.“Daesh is THAT!” Ms. Le Pen wrote on Twitter, using an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL. She posted three photographs, including one of Mr. Foley’s body. (She has not removed the other two.)Mr. Foley, 40, was beheaded in September 2014 by a British fighter for the Islamic State, Mohammed Emwazi, commonly known as Jihadi John, who was reportedly killed last month in an American airstrike.“We are deeply disturbed by the unsolicited use of Jim for Le Pen’s political gain, and hope that the picture of our son, along with the two other graphic photographs, are taken down immediately,” Mr. Foley’s parents, John and Diane, said in a statement.On Thursday, Ms. Le Pen noted that the photographs were widely available online, and she said that she had posted them to make a political point.“I did not know it was a photo of James Foley, and when I learned that his parents demanded that I take down this photo, I did, obviously,” Ms. Le Pen said on Thursday. “The goal was to make certain journalists and politicians realize the excessiveness, outrageousness, of comparing the National Front and Daesh.”She added: “I do not regret the publication of these photos. I think it drew attention to the appalling outrage of comparing Daesh and the National Front.”The French authorities have opened an investigation into the tweets, for “propagation of violent images.”Ms. Le Pen’s party has been gaining in popularity in France. The National Front made a strong showing in the first round of regional elections, on Dec. 6, although it did not end up ahead in any races in the second round, on Sunday, because a large number of voters turned out to support candidates from the two mainstream parties, the center-right Republicans and the left-leaning Socialists.Ms. Le Pen has distanced herself from the racist and anti-Semitic views of her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, who founded the party, but she has nonetheless attracted controversy for her criticism of France’s Muslim population, the largest in Western Europe.On Tuesday, she was acquitted of charges of inciting hatred with remarks she made criticizing Muslim street prayers in 2010.Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting from Paris.Advertisement