
Sinosphere By                     
 JANE PERLEZ and
 

YUFAN HUANG

DEC. 17, 2015
BEIJING — Nineteen coal miners trapped for more than 24 hours after a gas explosion and raging fire in a mine in Hegang, in northeastern China, are presumed dead, the state-run broadcaster CCTV reported on Thursday.The explosion on Wednesday afternoon initially trapped 52 workers, but 33 were rescued, CCTV said.A spokesman for the rescue team, Zhang Qinxiang, told the broadcaster that the 19 still inside a tunnel could not possibly survive carbon monoxide levels that he said were so high that the men would die “after taking one breath.”The blast site remained on fire on Thursday and the temperature inside the mine “could have reached 1,000 degrees” Celsius (more than 1,600 Fahrenheit), he said.Several large coal mines run by the Longmay Group, a state-owned company that has threatened to lay off 100,000 workers, are scattered around the city of Hegang, which is in Heilongjiang Province.AdvertisementLast month, 22 workers died in a fire at a Longmay-owned coal mine in Jixi, about 150 miles south of Hegang. Longmay was severely criticized by work safety authorities for poor supervision, failing to repair conveyor belts in the mine and waiting nine hours before reporting the fire to the relevant authorities.Rescuers in the Chinese city of Hegang say the high concentration of carbon monoxide in a mine there leaves little chance of survival for 19 workers trapped inside, Chinese state news media reported.But the mine where Wednesday’s explosion occurred is a small, privately owned operation, according to a former Longmay mine worker who was reached by telephone. The worker gave only his surname, Ma, for fear of reprisals.AdvertisementSuch accidents are common in Hegang, especially in private mines where safety procedures are more lax than in larger, state-run mines, Mr. Ma said.“There are just too many accidents,” he said, “Every day the workers have to get in a car and are lowered hundreds of meters underground. Sometimes they lose control of the cars and the workers die.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Sometimes deaths go unreported, Mr. Ma said.“Deaths of three or five wouldn’t be considered an issue here,” he said. “No one would report them. The owner will give some money to the family and call it a day.”Morale among workers in Hegang has been shattered by the announcement in September that Longmay, which is owned by the Heilongjiang Province government, planned to lay off so many workers. Since then, some safety procedures have been curtailed, because safety inspectors were among those already laid off, mine workers said in recent interviews.In November 2009, 108 miners were killed in an explosion in a Longmay-owned mine in Hegang.Follow Jane Perlez on Twitter @JanePerlez. Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »