By ANDREW E. KRAMERDEC. 18, 2015
MOSCOW —  The Ukrainian government declared a moratorium Friday on repaying about $3.5 billion in debt to Russia, introducing new strains to an already poisonous relationship.Ukraine’s cabinet prohibited further payments to Russia unless Moscow agrees to join a restructuring program that has been accepted by commercial creditors — a step President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has rejected — or a court orders Ukraine to pay up.Ukrainian officials said that paying the Russians in full now, after commercial creditors agreed last summer to a 20 percent write-down and long delays in repayments, would be illegal and run counter to Ukraine’s $17.5 billion International Monetary Fund bailout.“If we were to repay this bond in full, it would mean we failed to meet the terms of the I.M.F. and the obligations we made under our restructuring,” Natalie A. Jaresko, Ukraine’s finance minister, said in a telephone interview on Friday.AdvertisementThe dispute centers on a contentious $3 billion loan that Russia granted to Ukraine in 2013 after the former Ukranian president, Viktor F. Yanukovych, rejected a trade deal with the European Union and agreed instead to join a Russian-led bloc, the Customs Union. That decision set off the street protests known as the Maidan movement that led to Mr. Yanukovych’s overthrow, and subsequently war with Russia.AdvertisementRussia’s Finance Ministry had, for unclear reasons, structured the $3 billion loan as a Eurobond, a financial instrument typically used in commercial transactions rather than bilateral loans.Ukraine has asserted that Russia should accept the same deal as the commercial creditors but Russia’s Finance Ministry refused, saying that the loan was bilateral and therefore had to be paid in full.Thrust into the uncomfortable role of arbiter, the International Monetary Fund initially backed the Russian position and held that the Eurobond was, in fact, a bilateral loan.But the fund, which has Ukraine’s ailing economy on life support, altered its lending rules to allow the bailout for Ukraine to go forward despite Ukraine’s likely default on the Russian bond. That provided Ukraine the backing it needed to declare the moratorium on Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is in fact a declaration of default by Ukraine,” said Konstantin Kosachev, a Russian senator.Russian officials have said they will sue Ukraine in a British court, as stipulated in the terms of their Eurobond issue.The moratorium on payments to Russia covers the $3 billion bond and two sovereign loan guarantees to Russian banks.Ukraine and Russia have in recent weeks escalated their trade war that has been simmering on the sidelines of the real war in eastern Ukraine after a series of energy and air travel disruptions earlier this fall.AdvertisementUkraine’s cabinet decided on Wednesday to halt most trade with Crimea, the peninsula Russia annexed in 2014, starting in mid-January, inevitably raising the cost for Russia. Mr. Putin then signed a decree excluding Ukraine from a free-trade bloc of former Soviet states starting Jan. 1. On that date, Ukraine is scheduled to join a trade alliance with the European Union.The International Monetary Fund, while eventually backing Ukraine on the debt dispute with Russia, has its own problems with Kiev.The fund cautioned Friday that support could be suspended if a draft budget under consideration in Parliament is passed with a deficit greater than 3.7 percent of gross domestic product, the maximum allowed under the bailout terms.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Ukraine Halts Repayments on Billions It Owes to Russia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.