AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael D. Shear and Gardiner HarrisWASHINGTON — At the end of a week in which he has sought to demonstrate his commitment to fighting terrorism at home and abroad, President Obama on Friday acknowledged that some terrorist plots — such as those by a husband and wife or lone wolf — are difficult to detect and prevent.“Here essentially you have ISIL trying to encourage or induce somebody who may be prey to this kind of propaganda,” Mr. Obama said of the kind of attackers who killed 14 people in San Bernardino, Calif. “And it becomes more difficult to see.”Speaking to reporters before leaving for a two-week vacation in Hawaii, Mr. Obama said that visitors and immigrants seeking visas already face scrutiny for any social media posts that are publicly available, such as those made on Facebook. But he said that detecting posts on applications that are not available to the public is difficult and may not be appropriate.“Keep in mind it was only a couple of years ago we were having a major debate about whether government was becoming too much like Big Brother,” Mr. Obama said.On his way to Hawaii Friday night, the president plans to stop in California to visit with families of those killed in the terror attacks in San Bernardino.Mr. Obama defended his administration’s policies in Egypt, Libya and Syria, although he acknowledged mistakes by the international coalition that fought the Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi “for not moving swiftly enough and underestimating the need to rebuild government there quickly.“As a consequence you now have a very bad situation,” he said.In Syria, Mr. Obama continued to call for the resignation of President Bashar al-Assad, but he suggested that a transition away from the Assad regime could be less than immediate.“Is there a way to construct a bridge” to a government without Assad, Mr. Obama asked, including one that would reassure the Russian government and Alawite minority. He suggested there might be.Mr. Obama opened the news conference asserting that “steady, persistent work over the years” by his administration had delivered economic and foreign policy successes, making the American people more secure at home and abroad. He cited economic improvement over the past year, legislative progress in Congress, and diplomatic deals on climate, Iran’s nuclear program, and Cuba.“I just want to point out I said at the beginning of this year that interesting stuff happens in the fourth quarter,” Mr. Obama said. “And we are only halfway through.”Mr. Obama promised that he will not act unilaterally to close the detention facility at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, before letting Congress decide whether to approve or reject a legislative plan to do so.Closing the prison for terrorists was a central promise of Mr. Obama’s 2008 campaign, and he moved to do it in the first days of his administration. But Congress has blocked those efforts.The White House has said Mr. Obama will present a new plan to lawmakers, but they have also hinted that Mr. Obama might act on his own to shutter the prison, which has become a symbol for recruitment by terror organizations.In his remarks to reporters, Mr. Obama pledged to let Congress act first.“We will wait until Congress has definitively said ‘No,’” Mr. Obama said, “before we say anything definitive about my executive authority here.”He added: “I’m not going to be forward leaning on what I can do without Congress before I’ve tested what I can do with Congress.”Mr. Obama said that the global climate deal that he helped to strike in Paris this month will survive intact no matter who follows him as president.“You now have a global marketplace for clean energy that is stable and accelerating, he said, adding: “That then creates a different dynamic that is independent of what Congress does.He said that the great environmental victories of the previous 50 years were all accompanied by warnings from business interests that the new rules would ruin the economy, including efforts to clean the air, water and eliminate acid rain.But in each case, the costs were lower and efforts easier than any of the critics predicted, he said.“And there’s no reason why the same won’t happen here,” he said.Beyond the climate deal, America’s global leadership is often best done not through the use of bombs but the kind of diplomacy that led to the Iran nuclear deal and the trans-Pacific trade agreement.“Sometimes the results don’t come overnight, they don’t come the following day, but they come,” he said of diplomatic efforts.Mr. Obama vowed to not become a lame-duck president during his last year in office, adding: “I plan on doing everything I can with every minute of every day I have left as president.”The president’s news conference also comes as Congress gave final approval Friday morning to a $1.15 trillion spending measure that both parties hailed as a return to the kind of budget compromises that have been missing in recent years.Mr. Obama has said he intends to sign the measure, which increases spending and makes permanent business tax breaks in exchange for tax credits championed by the president that are devised to help millions of people, including children, fight their way out of poverty.He said the budget allows the government to finance its military, invest in education and the environment, and early childhood education.“It was a good win,” he said. “There’s some things in there that I don’t like, but that’s the nature of legislation and compromise.”Mr. Obama said that the success with the budget gives him “some optimism” that he and the Republican Congress can make some progress in 2016 on what he called “a narrow set of issues.”Those include, he said, passage of the trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement and legislation to overhaul the country’s criminal justice system. He said the criminal justice negotiations have been sincere and serious.He praised both the previous house speaker, John A. Boehner, and the current one, Paul D. Ryan. He said Mr. Ryan had acted professionally, saying “he has reached out to tell me what he can do and what he cannot do. It’s a good working relationship.”At the White House, the president’s top advisers said the budget deal capped a productive year that defied predictions of Mr. Obama’s lame-duck status and the Democratic Party’s clobbering in midterm elections at the end of 2014.In 2015, Mr. Obama sealed a controversial deal with Iran to contain that country’s nuclear program, negotiated a free-trade agreement with a dozen Pacific Rim nations, and concluded a global climate change pact with most countries in the world.At home, he beat back legal challenges to the Affordable Care Act, reached agreement with Republicans on an overhaul of national education standards and helped resolve a long-simmering dispute over how to finance transportation construction.Those accomplishments have been overshadowed in recent weeks amid growing concern in the United States about the threat of terrorism. Mr. Obama’s approval ratings have slid recently as that issue has overtaken the economy as the central concern for most Americans.Mr. Obama delivered an address to the nation on terrorism from the Oval Office on Dec. 6. He spoke again at the Pentagon after chairing a meeting of his National Security Council to discuss the campaign against the Islamic State. And he delivered remarks on Thursday after receiving a threat briefing at the National Counterterrorism Center.Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.Advertisement