By JEFFREY GETTLEMANDEC. 18, 2015
NAIROBI, Kenya —  Millions of Rwandans filed obediently into the polls on Friday in a constitutional referendum that seeks to extend President Paul Kagame’s tenure for potentially 19 more years.People were lined up in the dark before dawn, residents said, and the vast majority were expected to cast their votes in favor of changing the Constitution to allow Mr. Kagame to govern until 2034. He has been president since 2000, and for several years before that he was essentially running the country. Under the current law, he would not have been able to remain president after his current term expires in 2017.Across Africa, term limits have become a testy subject. Burundi’s president, Pierre Nkurunziza, plunged his country into chaos this year after pushing for a third term, which many critics said was illegal. Hundreds have died in street battles since April.Late on Thursday, an African Union committee voted to send 5,000 peacekeepers to Burundi, though the plan still needs United Nations approval and agreement from donors to fund it. The United Nations’ top human rights body on Thursday also called for an international investigation of abuses committed in the country in the past few months.AdvertisementIn Burkina Faso, former President Blaise Compaoré’s attempts last year to change his term limits set off protests that drove Mr. Compaoré into exile.AdvertisementRwanda is a different story. It is one of the most tightly controlled nations in the world. Many people are afraid of criticizing Mr. Kagame. Several journalists and opposition figures have been jailed on charges that Western diplomats have called spurious.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That said, Mr. Kagame, a former rebel leader who helped end Rwanda’s genocide in 1994, has done a notable job in combating poverty and providing security. Rwanda is one of the safest, cleanest and least corrupt nations in Africa.The line on Mr. Kagame, as some Western analysts have put it, is that he is “impressive but repressive.”The final results of the referendum will be released in the coming days, but analysts say they are a foregone conclusion: Mr. Kagame, 58, will be given the green light to govern until he is an old man. And late Friday, the head of the electoral commission, Mbanda Kalisa, said partial results showed that a majority of voters in 21 of 30 districts had voted to lift term limits, according to The Associated Press.Mr. Kagame has not said definitively what he will do, aside from comments such as what he told reporters on Friday, “What is happening is the people’s choice.”A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Rwandan Vote Is Expected to Change Law and Extend President’s Term.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.