By RAPHAEL MINDERDEC. 18, 2015
MADRID —  In their first debate before Sunday’s national election, the leaders of Spain’s four main political parties each took their places on stage, with one exception.The incumbent, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, refused to participate in the forum that included the country’s two emerging parties — which polls indicate could gain almost 40 percent of the vote — dismissing them as irrelevant. In his place was an empty lectern.After four years in office, Mr. Rajoy — often criticized for being reserved to the point of aloofness — remains something of an enigma. He has also suddenly become a lightning rod of Spanish politics, the symbol of an old guard challenged by a younger generation of rivals who have singled him out as the obstacle to much needed change.The election on Sunday is expected to be a cliffhanger, and Mr. Rajoy is provoking unusually strong passion for a man long considered more of a political technician and party insider than a magnetic or particularly polarizing leader.AdvertisementWhen Mr. Rajoy finally did debate this week, he sat across from only his main Socialist opponent, Pedro Sánchez, who said the prime minister should have resigned because of a corruption scandal that has dogged his conservative Popular Party. “The prime minister must be a decent person,” Mr. Sánchez said to him, “and you aren’t.”AdvertisementAt a campaign stop on Wednesday, Mr. Rajoy was punched in the face by a 17-year-old, who was later reported to have said he was “very happy to have done it.”It is a surprising turn for a man of professorial countenance who, while also a southern European leader, is “the exact opposite of somebody like Berlusconi,” the brash former Italian prime minister, according to José Luis Álvarez, a Spanish professor of leadership at the Insead business school near Paris who also wrote a book about Spanish prime ministers.Spain’s election, Mr. Álvarez suggested, “has turned into a weird personal referendum about the leadership of somebody who doesn’t seek to present any kind of individual identity.”Instead, Mr. Rajoy has presented himself as the custodian of Spanish unity and continuity, in the face of challenges from secessionist politicians in Catalonia, as well as from two emerging parties — Citizens and Podemos — that have highlighted the fragmentation of Spain’s politics.Having steered Spain through a tumultuous debt crisis, Mr. Rajoy managed to arrest the country’s economic slide and recently fulfilled his pledge, however slightly, to lower Spain’s high unemployment compared with four years ago.Along the way, he and his Popular Party also clamped down on the kinds of large-scale protests set off by earlier budget cuts — through what has become known as a “gag law” that stiffly penalizes unauthorized demonstrations.In his appeal to voters, Mr. Rajoy has warned that changing tack now, after years of belt-tightening, would risk derailing an economy that required a banking bailout in 2012 but is set to grow 3 percent this year, outpacing those of Spain’s main European partners.AdvertisementThat progress, however, has come at the cost of a sharp erosion in support for Mr. Rajoy’s party, which took a beating in municipal elections in May and seems poised to lose what has been an ironclad majority in Parliament.Mr. Rajoy’s opponents accuse him of stifling dissent, and for ushering in lower salaries and wider income disparities while protecting Spanish institutions to the benefit of a narrow circle of business and political interests.He and his party have now become a dividing line in the debate over Spain’s future.Mr. Rajoy’s opponents, especially the new upstart parties, want more than a change of leadership. They want to move Mr. Rajoy out of the way so they can overhaul what they say are inefficient institutions — including the Senate, the upper chamber of Parliament — and to put an end to endemic corruption that has tainted Spain’s political establishment.The battle is as much generational as anything. Mr. Rajoy, 60, was already a government minister in the 1990s. He and his party lost two elections before winning on their third attempt, in 2011, when voters punished the Socialists for pushing Spain into economic crisis.Among his opponents, Mr. Sánchez, the Socialist leader, is 43; the Podemos leader, Pablo Iglesias, is 37; and Albert Rivera, who leads Citizens, is 36.In fact, Mr. Rajoy has contrasted his leadership experience and 30 years in politics with what he has called the “proliferation” of new parties.He has insisted these new parties are ephemeral, one-man organizations that are only “the product of a television show or a marketing campaign.” During a political meeting in Las Palmas last week, he told supporters that “every quarter of an hour appears a different one.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As for his refusal to debate against the leaders of the new parties in November, Mr. Rajoy argued that, as the head of government, he has a busier agenda than they do.His opponents and some political observers say he has been burying his head in the sand at a moment when the pressure for change has spread across the full spectrum of Spanish politics and society.AdvertisementMr. Rajoy’s refusal to debate against newcomers is “legitimate in terms of electoral strategy,” but it leaves Spain with “a democratic deficit,” said David Jímenez, editor in chief of El Mundo, a conservative newspaper.“If you present yourself to an election and consider yourself the best candidate, why not demonstrate it?” Mr. Jímenez asked.The answer was in part already provided in an autobiography, titled “In Confidence,” that Mr. Rajoy published in 2011, before winning his first general election.In it, Mr. Rajoy recalled a quiet upbringing, under a father who was climbing the ranks of the judiciary during the Franco dictatorship. “I believe that I’m a lot like my father,” Mr. Rajoy wrote. “He is a perfectionist, somewhat introverted and very cautious.”Mr. Rajoy qualified as a land registrar, like two of his three siblings, but then switched to politics when Spain transitioned to democracy.Having steadily worked his way up the Popular Party, whose leadership he took over in 2003, Mr. Rajoy has managed to remain “the quiet administrator.”Even as prime minister, he has appeared more willing to play commentator for soccer matches on radio than to take part in risky political debates on television.“I think that he is the politician who most understands a basic rule of politics, which is that it’s first and foremost about survival, rather than always trying to rise to the challenge and be seen doing things,” said Mr. Álvarez, the leadership professor and author.AdvertisementMr. Rajoy called Sunday’s election at the latest possible date to give himself time to present a 2016 budget containing tax cuts and erasing some of his earlier austerity policies.His personal approval ratings have fallen sharply in the meantime. The decline has been in no small part because of his failure to contain a series of corruption cases, including one centering on his party’s former treasurer, Luis Bárcenas, who awaits trial after admitting to paying kickbacks to party officials.This month, Mr. Rajoy sent his younger deputy prime minister, Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría, as his substitute to one of the televised debates. The move fueled speculation about whether Mr. Rajoy, for all his survival skills, could keep his party under tight control for much longer.If his party is forced into a coalition after Sunday’s vote, the price its partners may demand to support a minority conservative government could be Mr. Rajoy’s removal.Seeking to blunt the image of generational stonewalling, the Popular Party has used posters of Ms. Sáenz de Santamaría alongside those of Mr. Rajoy as part of its campaign advertising.However, the attempt has not convinced even all those in the party, like Cayetana Álvarez de Toledo, one of the few members not seeking re-election on Sunday because of differences with the party leadership over its strategy.“You cannot compete in terms of novelty and youth, or even on corruption issues, if your candidate is Rajoy,” she said. “That is why the Popular Party is trying to offer voters a choice between security and experience versus the risks of the unknown.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 19, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Generational Challenge Confronts Spain’s Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.