By RAPHAEL MINDERDEC. 19, 2015
SORT, Spain — Xavier Gabriel is not taking part in Tuesday’s El Gordo, or the Fat One, Spain’s immense Christmas lottery drawing. But that is because he feels he has already won it, as the owner of the most popular lottery office in the country of the biggest lottery players in the world.“I used to play the lottery when I didn’t have any money,” Mr. Gabriel said, “but now that I’ve got the money, I want to allow others to get rich instead.”His own fortunes picked up, he said, when his lottery business gained nationwide fame after he did an interview on Spanish radio and noted that the name of his village, Sort, meant “luck” in Catalan, the language spoken in this northeastern region of Spain.Then, in 1994, somebody for the first time actually won a lottery prize with a ticket issued in Sort. Mr. Gabriel, 58, used the occasion to rename his office La Bruixa d’Or, the Golden Witch, which has since become a national emblem of luck and a formidable merchandising brand that he uses to sell trinkets, children’s books and even a line of shoes.Advertisement“The best marketing is the most simple one, and that begins with just finding the right name for your business,” he said. “I made the witch famous across Spain overnight.”This year the Golden Witch office has sold about 50 million euros’ worth of tickets for two lottery draws — one on Tuesday and a smaller one on Jan. 6, the Feast of the Epiphany — that most Spaniards consider an integral part of their end-of-year festivities. Spain’s national lottery company said 3.2 billion euros worth of tickets had been sold for Tuesday’s draw, of which €2.2 billion will be paid in prize money. The top individual prize is expected to be around €4 million.AdvertisementWhile a full ticket costs 200 euros, it is subdivided so that people generally go for the more affordable option of buying a 10th of a ticket.Mr. Gabriel said 87 percent of his tickets were sold online, but about 300,000 people made the pilgrimage up the windy road to Sort to buy them in person, many coming in organized weekend bus trips. Since he started his business, Mr. Gabriel said, the Golden Witch has issued 36 winning tickets for the two holiday draws.“I come every year to buy this lottery for my family and closest friends,” said Arsemari Maguregui, a housewife who drove on Thursday over five hours with her husband from Abadiño, in the Basque Country, to spend 160 euros at the Golden Witch. “We’ve never won, but I keep hope that it will happen one day.”A serial entrepreneur who started work at 16 as a banking clerk, Mr. Gabriel eventually acquired the license to run an office of the state-owned lottery in his village in 1986.Spaniards are not particularly obsessed with gambling and casinos, but they are the heaviest lottery players in the world, spending the equivalent of 1.8 percent of the country’s gross domestic product of about €1.06 trillion, said Mauro Guillén, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton business school and the co-author of a study on lotteries. The lottery is “a cultural phenomenon” in Spain, where 34 percent of the population shares lottery tickets, compared with about 12 percent in the United States, he said.For El Gordo, the Christmas lottery, the proportion is more than 60 percent, as friends, families and co-workers buy tickets together. It is “a way to cement social relationships and to dream together about winning and becoming rich,” Dr. Guillén said.AdvertisementIn some companies, tickets are given by managers as a symbolic Christmas bonus; the Spanish stock exchange hands each of about 600 employees a portion, worth €20, of a ticket. “It’s not a lot of money, but it represents a lot of shared hope,” said Antonio Zoido, the chairman of the exchange.Like other owners of state lottery offices, Mr. Gabriel receives a commission of 4 percent on each ticket sold. The state uses the rest of the ticket revenues to pay the prize money and to fill its tax coffers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As an entrepreneur who also pioneered online lottery ticket sales, Mr. Gabriel has become a model for many. Ms. Maguregui, the Basque housewife, asked him to autograph one of his four entrepreneurship books, “Nothing Is Impossible.”But the presence of a somewhat eccentric tycoon in a mountain farming village has also irritated some people here. Mr. Gabriel said that several of his projects had been vetoed by the local authorities, including plans to build a castle and a project to start upriver rafting in an American-designed hovercraft.He also lobbied, unsuccessfully, to rename Sort’s main street “Fame Avenue,” which he claims would have helped persuade owners of Ferraris and other luxury cars to come and drive down the avenue as an act of homage to their good fortune.200 MilesFRANCEBay of BiscayANDORRAAbadiñoSortMadridPORTUGALSPAINMediterraneanSeaStrait ofGibraltarAtlanticOceanMOROCCOALGERIADEC. 19, 2015
“I’m happy to have doubled the earnings of every hotel and restaurant around here, even if some people then speak badly of me,” Mr. Gabriel said. “Success creates envy in a small village.”Indeed, Mr. Gabriel draws a lukewarm response among town hall officials. Raimon Monterde Alberich, the mayor, said Sort needed to spend more on sports facilities and other urban infrastructure. “What he could do is renovate our existing castle, which stands in ruins, rather than talk about building a new one,” he said.While acknowledging that Mr. Gabriel helped put Sort on the map, Baldo Farré, another town hall official, said no study had been done to measure his precise impact on the local economy. “There are many buses that come here, filled with people who just buy their tickets and then move on,” he said.Even the etymology of Sort is questioned. Mr. Gabriel suggested the Romans probably named the village after discovering gypsum here. But the town hall officials said the name probably came from an ancient Basque word for “bridge.”Rather than debating history, Mr. Gabriel is looking forward to fulfilling his dream of becoming Spain’s first space tourist. A decade ago, he paid $200,000 to book his seat on the Virgin Galactic, the space plane being developed by Richard Branson, the British entrepreneur. The project has, however, run into delays, and the space plane broke apart during a test flight last year.Advertisement“I asked the witch to help change my life and village — and she did,” Mr. Gabriel said. “I promised to go and visit her in space, and that’s what I will do, as soon as it is possible.”Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 20 about Xavier Gabriel, a Spaniard whose lottery business has become a national emblem of luck and a formidable merchandising brand, misstated, in some editions, the timing of the crash of the Virgin Galactic space plane, on which Mr. Gabriel has booked a $200,000 seat. The crash was last year, not in July.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 20, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Spaniard Selling Lottery Fortune.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.