

      By RUSSELL GOLDMAN

DEC. 21, 2015

A landslide on Sunday at an industrial site in Shenzhen, China, destroyed 33 buildings and buried dozens of people under excavated dirt and construction waste. It was the latest in a string of deadly disasters in China linked to human activity or error. In each case, the devastation had roots in China’s rapid industrialization, weak safety regulation and a political system rife with graft. 
Related Article
Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版 Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版 Just before midnight on New Year’s Eve, as hundreds of thousands of revelers jostled along the waterfront in Shanghai to watch a light show, a stampede erupted that ultimately killed 36 people and injured 49 others. An investigation later revealed that the police were not prepared to handle the crowd, estimated at 300,000 people. Several officials, including a district police chief and the local head of the Communist Party, were charged with corruption and dismissed.  The Oriental Star, a cruise ship whose passengers were mainly pensioners, capsized in the Yangtze River on June 1 in heavy rain and severe winds. More than 440 people on board were killed, and only 12 survived. One of those rescued was the captain, Zhang Shunwen; he was arrested and criticized for not anchoring the ship during the worst of the storm. A government investigation found that the ship, also known as the Eastern Star, had been cited for safety violations. A series of explosions at a chemical warehouse in Tianjin on Aug. 12 killed more than 150 people, injured more than 700 and flattened a large area of the city’s busy seaport. Many of the casualties were firefighters who were trying to contain a blaze at a site where large amounts of extremely volatile chemicals were stored with minimal precautions, close to housing. Several executives of the company that owned the warehouse were arrested, and China’s chief work safety regulator, Yang Dongliang, was placed under investigation by the country’s anti-corruption agency. Two deadly coal-mine explosions and fires a month apart were linked to poor safety practices, killing a total of 41 people. On Dec. 16, 19 coal miners died after being trapped for more than 24 hours after a gas explosion and raging fire at a mine in Hegang, operated by a small privately owned company. In November, 22 workers died in a fire at a mine in Jixi, operated by the Longmay Group, a state-owned company.Longmay was severely criticized by work-safety authorities for poor supervision, failing to repair conveyor belts in the mine and waiting nine hours before reporting the fire to the relevant authorities.A sodden mountain of excavated dirt and construction debris slid onto at least 33 buildings in an industrial area of Shenzhen on Dec. 20; at least 91 people were missing, according to the official Xinhua News Agency. The rain-soaked material had built up for nearly two years at the site of a former quarry, Xinhua said, citing residents. Some residents complained about a lack of official oversight that allowed the mound to grow unchecked to a dangerous height. Other residents said that the factories and worker dormitories built at the site were too weak to withstand the slide.Advertisement