By AMINA ISMAILDEC. 20, 2015
CAIRO — The Egyptian government took the unusual step on Sunday of releasing a 23-year-old student held on charges of belonging to a banned Islamist movement, in a rare bow to public pressure after photos of the student sobbing and hobbling on crutches went viral on social media.The woman, Esraa al-Taweel, who is also a photojournalist, was detained in June along with two friends. She was charged with belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood and spreading false news — accusations that she said are false, and that are typical of the charges leveled against thousands of other political prisoners in Egypt in the past two years.While the overwhelming majority of such detainees are left to languish in prisons, even for nonviolent offenses, Ms. Taweel appears to have benefited from an unusual burst of public pressure that human rights advocates say may be the only way to loosen the grip of the Egyptian authorities. Though she was released on humanitarian grounds, Ms. Taweel is still being prosecuted.The government has intensified its crackdown on political dissent since July 2013, when the military ousted the elected Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi. Tens of thousands of perceived government opponents have been imprisoned and are facing trials in courts that human rights advocates say are seldom inclined to deliver justice.AdvertisementIn a few recent cases, international pressure has helped secure the release of prisoners, including recently in the case of three journalists with Al Jazeera who were facing similar charges. President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi deported one, an Australian, and then pardoned the other two. The pressure of domestic social media has also been effective in certain cases, rights advocates say.Advertisement“I don’t trust the justice system,” said Gamal Eid, a lawyer and head of the Cairo-based Arab Network for Human Rights Information. “I am in support of the pressure movements that reach the point of shaming.”Gestures like the one toward Ms. Taweel are essentially cosmetic, he said, “to prove that it is a regime that listens to the people.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The pictures of Ms. Taweel, clearly distraught during a court appearance in November, were shared widely on social media and Internet news portals. Her lawyers and international human rights groups warned that she was not receiving proper medical treatment for a gunshot wound she received at a protest.On Saturday, a Cairo court ordered her “precautionary” release because of her deteriorating health and said Ms. Taweel was not allowed to leave her house without police approval. She is due to appear in court again in 45 days.Around 1:30 a.m. on Sunday, Ms. Taweel emerged from a Cairo police station, limping as her friends honked horns in celebration. Her mother, Hanaa Ali, said the court’s decision was “better than nothing.” At least her daughter will receive proper treatment at home, she said.In many other cases, the Egyptian authorities have shrugged off the pressure to release prisoners or dismissed it as interference in the judicial process.Another prisoner, Ibrahim Halawa, 20, who is an Irish citizen, was a minor when he was arrested for protesting against the government in 2013. In a resolution on Thursday, the European Parliament called on Egypt to release him.In response, the Egyptian Foreign Ministry condemned the resolution, calling it “an unacceptable infringement on the independence of Egypt’s judiciary.”Kareem Fahim contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 21, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Egypt Releases Student in Rare Bow to Pressure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.