AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa Hadid and Anne BarnardRAMALLAH, West Bank — A Hezbollah commander whom Israel reluctantly released in 2008 — nearly 30 years after he took part in a notorious terrorist attack — was killed in an airstrike in Syria, Hezbollah and his family said on Sunday.The commander, Samir Kuntar, was freed as part of an exchange that returned the bodies of two soldiers to Israel. He had served nearly three decades in prison for his role in the 1979 killings of a police officer, a civilian and his daughter in an Israeli coastal town near the Lebanese border. The civilian’s wife accidentally smothered their other daughter while trying to quiet her.Mr. Kuntar, in his early 50s, died when missiles slammed into a residential building in a crowded neighborhood of Damascus called Jaramana on Saturday night. A man who said he had seen the aftermath of the attack reported that a five-story building had been completely destroyed.Hezbollah, a Shiite militia and political movement, blamed Israel for the assault, but Israeli officials had no comment.The deal with Hezbollah that led to Mr. Kuntar’s release stirred an anguished debate in Israel, especially after he received a hero’s welcome in Beirut that included a red carpet and effusive praise from Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah.In the years since, Mr. Kuntar, a Lebanese Druse, took up arms again, this time in Hezbollah’s campaign to rescue the beleaguered government of President Bashar al-Assad in the Syrian civil war.A statement posted Sunday on the Facebook page of a Druse militia in Jaramana said that the building had been hit with “four long-range missiles.”Footage on Syrian television showed a blackened, smashed building, with men furiously digging through the rubble with their hands.Also killed in the attack, according to pro-government websites, was Farhan al-Sha’alan, a leader of the Syrian Resistance in the Golan, a group affiliated with Hezbollah.Residents interviewed on Syrian state television said they had seen the bodies of women and children, and Syria’s information minister, Omran al-Zoubi, told Al Manar, the Hezbollah channel, that the building had been home to families. The claims could not be independently verified, but the neighborhood is extremely crowded; its population has more than doubled by people displaced from other parts of Syria.Mr. Kuntar’s brother Bassam confirmed his death on Sunday without providing details. He called his brother a martyr, suggesting that he died in the context of a battle or military mission.“With pride we mourn the martyrdom of the leader Samir Kuntar, and we are honored to join families of martyrs,” Bassam Kuntar wrote on Facebook.But some other reactions to Mr. Kuntar’s death perhaps reflected the decline of Hezbollah in the imagination of the wider Arab and Muslim world since it veered from its usual mission of confronting Israel to instead helping Mr. Assad crush a rebellion dominated by Syria’s Sunni Muslim majority.“Hezbollah commander Samir Kuntar began by killing 4-year-old Israeli girl in 1979 and ended it killing Syrian people,” Abdurahman Harkoush, a self-identified supporter of the Syrian insurgency, said on Twitter.In Israel, Smadar Haran Kaiser, the mother of the two girls who died in the 1979 attack and who has since married and had two children, described the death of Mr. Kuntar as “a kind of relief.” His footprints were “full of blood of victims,” she said in a call to reporters.Hezbollah and its followers revered Mr. Kuntar for enduring nearly 30 years as a prisoner of Israel. Al Manar praised him Sunday morning as “the dean of Arab detainees.”The devastating 2006 war between Israel and Hezbollah began, in a way, because of him.That conflict started after Hezbollah captured two Israeli soldiers in a cross-border raid, planning to hold them hostage for the return of prisoners held by Israel, most notably Mr. Kuntar.In 2008, Israel released Mr. Kuntar, along with four other Lebanese prisoners, in exchange for the bodies of two Israeli soldiers killed in the 2006 raid.He was not one of Hezbollah’s most experienced military operatives, having entered prison as a teenager. His role was more symbolic, as a prominent figure who was well placed to reach out to non-Shiite communities like the Druse, who predominate in several strategic areas of southern Syria.Recently, he had been charged with setting up a Hezbollah-trained militia in the southern province of Swaida, populated mainly by Syrian Druse.Over the course of the Syrian conflict, Israeli warplanes have hit targets inside Syria several times, with most of those strikes said to be against weapons deliveries meant for Hezbollah.Israel does not confirm military action in Syria, and the Syrian government has tended to downplay them.“There is no doubt that whoever did it — this is a capability that is limited to a very small number of powers, states that can get to such capabilities, which begin with the level of very, very exact intelligence,” said Eyal Ben-Reuven, a retired major general, on Israeli radio on Sunday.When asked if Israel had those capabilities, he responded: “Israel is one of the leaders. And that is an understatement.”If the reports are accurate, Mr. Kuntar would be the second leader of Hezbollah’s southern front to die in an Israeli strike. Jihad Mughniyeh, the son of Hezbollah’s former operations chief, Imad Mughniyeh, was killed in January in Quneitra, near the Golan Heights. His father was assassinated in Damascus in 2008, a bombing also believed to have been carried out by Israel.The strike on Saturday also carried significance for the wider Syrian conflict, which now has numerous international players involved — most recently, Russia.It pierced the new sense of security on the part of Mr. Assad’s supporters that came after Russia began its direct military intervention in the conflict in late September.Government supporters in Damascus expressed anger on Sunday in conversations and in comments on pro-government websites, complaining that traitors must have revealed Mr. Kuntar’s whereabouts.They also asked why Russia’s warplanes and antiaircraft guns, deployed in Syria, failed to shoot down the Israeli jets. But Saturday’s attack, according to military analysts, was probably a so-called standoff strike, with four or five rockets fired by Israeli warplanes that did not cross into Syrian airspace.On Sunday night, according to Unifil, the United Nations peacekeeping force along the Lebanese-Israeli border, there was an exchange of fire that appeared to have concluded without casualties or escalation — suggesting that both sides had carried out essentially symbolic strikes in their customary effort to avoid another war.In a statement, Unifil said that three rockets had been fired from southern Lebanon, with two striking northern Israel and one falling in the sea. No one claimed responsibility. Israeli forces fired back approximately eight artillery shells that landed near the town of Zebqeen in southern Lebanon, according to Unifil.Diaa Hadid reported from Ramallah, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad from Beirut, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.Advertisement