By ANDREW E. KRAMEROCT. 7, 2015
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia celebrated his 63rd birthday by teaming with N.H.L. legends to play hockey against Russian tycoons and officials. Putin scored seven goals as his team won, 15-10.MOSCOW —  It would be hard to imagine a more perfect birthday for Vladimir V. Putin, the president of Russia, who turned 63 on Wednesday.After receiving a report from his defense minister that Russia had launched a major cruise missile strike on Syria — a move further confounding American policy in the Middle East — Mr. Putin celebrated his birthday by playing a game of hockey with N.H.L. veterans, and winning.Donning skates and a uniform, Mr. Putin took to the ice in the Shayba Arena in the Black Sea resort of Sochi as a member of a team called Stars of the N.H.L., which included, among other hockey legends, Pavel Bure, known as the Russian Rocket.The game was broadcast live on national television as the highlight of a day of adoring homages to the Russian leader.AdvertisementIt wound up with Mr. Putin holding aloft a gigantic trophy. Also playing on Mr. Putin’s team were Vyacheslav Fetisov and the defense minister who earlier in the day announced the missile strikes, Sergei K. Shoigu.AdvertisementPassed the puck by the N.H.L. greats over and over again, Mr. Putin scored seven goals to lead his team to a 15-10 victory. The opposing team included three figures on whom the United States had imposed sanctions for Russia’s military action in Ukraine: the businessmen Gennady Timchenko and the brothers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg. The cheering crowd chanted, “Happy birthday!”Mr. Putin founded the amateur hockey league in 2011 with Russian hockey stars, senior officials and longtime associates like the penalized tycoons. The games are regularly broadcast nationally.And they dovetail with Mr. Putin’s well-honed image as a lover of sports and derring-do. Earlier this year, for example, Mr. Putin descended in a minisubmarine in the Black Sea. On Tuesday, he signed a law reviving a Soviet-era fitness program for young people, called “Ready for Labor and Defense.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After spending most of the past year in international isolation, Mr. Putin has been muscling his way back into world affairs.Russia’s annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine and its military intervention in that country’s eastern provinces led to economically crippling sanctions for Russia. And American officials say Russia’s actions in Syria will only prolong that conflict.But on Wednesday, Mr. Putin told Mr. Shoigu, his defense minister — who also scored a goal for Mr. Putin’s team — that he sees the results of the Syrian action so far as “positive.”At the game, Mr. Putin spoke of the advantages of staying fit and playing sports, telling the crowd, “Whoever moves and goes toward victory will find it!”Elsewhere in Russia, the leader of Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov, rode with a pro-Kremlin motorcycle gang, the Night Wolves, to celebrate Mr. Putin’s birthday.In the Chechen capital, Grozny, a soccer game was dedicated to the president’s birthday, and a huge banner unfurled on the field. It read: “The best president. Happy Birthday!”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 8, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Putin’s Birthday Gift: N.H.L. Veterans and an Open Net.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.