By MUJIB MASHAL and MATTHEW ROSENBERGDEC. 21, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — In one of the deadliest attacks against American forces in Afghanistan this year, a Taliban suicide bomber on a motorcycle drove into a military convoy near Bagram Air Base on Monday, killing six American service members, United States officials said.Among the dead was Detective Joseph Lemm, 45, a New York police detective serving in the Air National Guard.The attack came as Taliban forces have continued seizing territory across Afghanistan, dragging more American troops directly into the fight despite commanders’ continued insistence that the focus of the NATO force in the country remains on training and advising. As the battle intensified this fall, the Obama administration even reversed plans to begin withdrawing troops this year, choosing to leave 9,800 American troops in Afghanistan through at least 2016.Even away from the most intense battlegrounds, in southern and eastern Afghanistan, and with Afghan forces taking the lead in the fighting, American forces have remained at risk, with at least 15 service members killed this year before the attack on Monday.AdvertisementThe Taliban suicide bomber struck a joint patrol of American and Afghan troops that was moving through a village near Bagram Air Base, a sprawling base north of Kabul that is populated largely by American service members and contractors, Afghan and American officials said.AdvertisementA statement by Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter confirmed that the six American service members had been killed, and it said that two had been wounded, along with a contractor for the American military. The White House expressed condolences to the families of the dead.“The United States condemns this cowardly attack on members of the U.S. and Afghan forces, and we remain committed to supporting the Afghan people and their government,” the White House’s statement said.Abdul Shakor Qudosi, the district governor of Bagram, which is north of Kabul, said three Afghan police officers were wounded in the attack, but it was not clear whether that was in addition to the wounded mentioned by American officials, or whether he had different information. “The suicide bomber was riding a motorcycle and struck a joint patrol” of Afghan and American soldiers, Mr. Qudosi said.The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack in a Twitter message.In a statement issued Monday night, the New York police commissioner, William J. Bratton, said that Detective Lemm was one of the Americans killed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Before the attack on Monday, 21 members of the coalition forces had been killed in Afghanistan this year, 15 of them Americans, according to the website iCasualties. Most of the deaths were said to have been caused by aircraft crashes or indirect fire.In recent months, however, American Special Operations forces have been drawn back onto the battlefield as Afghan forces have struggled against insurgent offensives that are threatening important population centers. United States military assistance from the air as well as on the ground was considered a crucial factor in the Afghan forces’ taking back Kunduz, the first city to briefly fall to the Taliban in 14 years.Now, as the Taliban make a major push in southern Helmand Province, overrunning districts and knocking at the gates of the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, American Special Forces have again been reported on the ground, to try to keep the entire province from falling.Local officials in Helmand on Monday pleaded with the national government for reinforcements, saying that the district of Sangin remained largely under Taliban control after insurgents overran it on Sunday.Advertisement“Last night, NATO forces targeted two locations in Sangin, but it has not affected the Taliban momentum, and heavy fighting still continues,” said Mohammad Karim Attal, the leader of the provincial council in Helmand.Mr. Attal said the Taliban leadership, based in Pakistan, decided six months ago to seize Helmand and base more of the insurgent command there.In addition to the conflict in Sangin, heavy fighting has continued in the districts of Khan Neshin, falling back and forth between insurgent and government forces in recent weeks, as well as in Marja, Gereshk and Washir. For weeks now, members of the Taliban have also been holed up in Babaji, a Lashkar Gah suburb.“If the central government does not pay attention to the security situation in Helmand, the province will eventually fall,” Mr. Attal said.Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Matthew Rosenberg from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Jawad Sukhanyar and Ahmad Shakib from Kabul; Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan; and Julie Hirschfeld Davis from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on December 22, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: 6 From U.S. Military Are Killed in Taliban Suicide Bombing in Afghanistan.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.