By SOMINI SENGUPTADEC. 22, 2015
UNITED NATIONS — The United States on Tuesday sponsored a United Nations Security Council session intended to draw attention to the dire consequences of the war in Yemen, but the meeting also raised questions about potential crimes committed by a Saudi-led military offensive that the Pentagon actively supports.The United States refuels military jets and provides intelligence support to the military coalition, led by Saudi Arabia, that is trying to defeat Houthi insurgents in Yemen. Since those airstrikes began in March, more than 2,700 civilians have been killed, dozens of schools and hospitals have been attacked and the United Nations has warned of breaches of international law.But during the session on Tuesday, the United Nations’ top human rights official said that the Saudi-led coalition bore the greatest responsibility for the civilian carnage. The official, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the high commissioner for human rights, said that while both sides in the conflict had engaged in attacks on civilians, “a disproportionate amount appeared to be the result of airstrikes carried out by coalition forces.”The United Nations deputy emergency relief chief, Kyung-wha Kang, also warned of the suffering inflicted on civilians by the war, pointing out that two million Yemenis were malnourished and that the country’s health system “is close to collapse.”AdvertisementAll that has placed the United States in an awkward diplomatic tangle. But the fact that American officials invited Mr. al-Hussein to brief the Council on Tuesday was an indication that cracks in the relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia are beginning to show.AdvertisementIndeed, in her public comments, the American ambassador, Samantha Power, urged Saudi officials to look into episodes in which civilian sites had been hit and to take precautions to avoid them in the future.On Monday, Ms. Power said that American officials had privately urged the Saudis to abide by international humanitarian law governing conflicts. “Those conversations have happened at really every level with the Saudi government,” she said.Despite those conversations, the Obama administration has not blocked a $1.29 billion weapons deal with Saudi Arabia. It has also not suggested that it would withdraw its support for the Saudi-led operations, nor said that it would conduct its own investigations into military airstrikes that might amount to serious crimes.Part of the difficulty in dealing with Saudi Arabia is its role as the Sunni Arab powerhouse of the Middle East. The United States must address Saudi interests in the region as it seeks to develop ties with Iran, and Saudi Arabia’s cooperation is vital to ending the war in Syria.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But increasingly, the war in Yemen is turning into a political liability for the United States, and Tuesday’s meeting in the Council was seen by many as evidence of the Obama administration’s frustrations. Political talks, mediated by the United Nations, produced little last week, and a promised cease-fire broke down.“The United States wants this conflict wrapped up sooner rather than later, and is frustrated by repeated violations of the cease-fire, including by the Saudi-led coalition,” said Stewart M. Patrick, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. “Having supplied many of the weapons that the Saudi coalition is using against their targets, the United States is clearly worried about being linked to the resulting atrocities and deteriorating humanitarian situation.”In September, Mr. al-Hussein recommended an independent commission to investigate accusations of human rights violations, but an effort to introduce such a resolution before the Human Rights Council in Geneva was shelved. The United States expressed no enthusiasm for the measure at the time.The laws of war stipulate that combatants must take adequate care to distinguish between civilian sites and military targets. It is also illegal to deliberately strike hospitals and clinics.AdvertisementHolding the warring parties to account is likely to be difficult. That would require establishing who had command responsibility for ordering a strike on a known civilian site. Moreover, Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the United States are not subject to the authority of the International Criminal Court. Among the coalition members, only Jordan has signed the treaty that created the court.So far this year, 70 health facilities have been destroyed by airstrikes and shelling, according to the United Nations. In one widely publicized episode, Doctors Without Borders blamed the Saudi-led coalition for bombing one of its facilities in the southern city of Taiz, despite receiving its exact location coordinates.In an unusual gesture, Saudi Arabia promised to set up a fact-finding committee to determine what happened, but it also warned aid agencies to stay away from areas controlled by the Houthi rebels.An article on Wednesday about a United Nations Security Council session intended to draw attention to the dire consequences of the war in Yemen misstated the size of a United States’ weapons deal with Saudi Arabia, which leads a military coalition trying to defeat Houthi insurgents in Yemen. The deal is worth $1.29 billion, not $129 million.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Saudi-Led War in Yemen Frays Ties With the U.S. .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.