By AXEL  GERDAUDEC. 22, 2015
The tide of migrants arriving in Germany could be an economic boon for its aging economy. But even qualified, German-speaking newcomers face an uncertain future in their new home.LÜBECK, Germany — The nearly one million asylum seekers arriving in Germany this year must navigate a complicated and uncertain bureaucracy that is struggling to accommodate migrants from cultures very different from Europe’s.For the newcomers who can assimilate quickly, there can be advantages — for them and for their hosts.Ehab Ali Musead, 25, arrived here last year from Yemen, where an increasingly dire  civil conflict has created a severe humanitarian crisis. But unlike most people arriving here from the Middle East, Mr. Musead spoke some German.“I was so lucky,” he said recently, in slightly accented conversational German. His father pushed him to study the language as a youngster in Yemen, Mr. Musead said, acknowledging that he did not see the value at the time.AdvertisementNow, living in an apartment in this northern German city of about 200,000 people, Mr. Musead may be a model for integration and opportunity in large part because of his language skills.AdvertisementThe German government is struggling to absorb the growing number of migrants in its cities. At the same time, German industry is confronting an aging population and more than half a million unfilled jobs. Some business leaders are hoping the arrival of thousands of young, motivated newcomers like Mr. Musead could be a boon for the country’s economy. Those who already speak some German or who are able to learn it quickly are especially sought after.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The manufacturing company Druckguss Service jumped at the opportunity to give Mr. Musead and Abdo Dohaim, 24, another migrant from Yemen, an apprenticeship at its factory in Lübeck.“It’s generally very difficult to find apprentices," said Michael Wächtler, a manager at Druckguss, which makes die-casting machines. “Most students entering the work force want to go into I.T. or continue their education, and we lose out.”Mr. Wächtler said that he wanted to keep Mr. Musead and Mr. Dohaim on as full-time employees after they finished their apprenticeships, but that it would depend on the outcome of their pending asylum applications.There is no guarantee that the men will be able to finish their apprenticeships or stay in Germany to work after their training is complete.Mr. Dohaim, like many asylum seekers, has little else but hope going for him. “If I lose my apprenticeship, my future is gone,” he said.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.