AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — Despite an Israeli security crackdown aimed at quelling a wave of Palestinian attacks and clashes with government forces, the turbulence showed no sign of abating on Wednesday, and in fact spread beyond Jerusalem and the West Bank to southern Israel and the Tel Aviv area.The violence prompted Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to cancel a one-day trip to Germany planned for Thursday. Mr. Netanyahu’s office said in a statement that he would “remain in Israel in order to monitor the situation closely.”In the Old City of Jerusalem on Wednesday morning, a young Palestinian woman stabbed and slightly wounded an Israeli man, who then shot her with a personal weapon, severely wounding her, the police said.The police said the attacker was an 18-year-old from East Jerusalem. She and the man were taken to an Israeli hospital in the city.Hours later, in the normally quiet southern Israeli town of Kiryat Gat, a young Palestinian man stabbed an Israeli soldier on a bus, slightly wounding him, and snatched his assault rifle. The Palestinian, identified by the police as Amjad Jundi, 20, from the West Bank town of Yata, got off the bus, fled into a nearby apartment building and forced his way into an apartment, according to the police and local residents.Police officers arrived and fatally shot him after he pointed the stolen rifle at them, the police said. Mr. Jundi was unable to fire the weapon, the police said, because he had left its magazine behind.Liat Ohana, whose apartment Mr. Jundi had holed up in, said she was coming out of the elevator with shopping bags and heading to her door when Mr. Jundi came up from behind, kicked it open and barged in. Ms. Ohana told Army Radio that she heard him rummaging through her cutlery in the kitchen, possibly looking for a knife, before she escaped and took shelter with neighbors.She heard the sound of gunfire as the police stormed her apartment. “He was gunned down in my kitchen,” she said.And in the evening, a Palestinian man from the Hebron area of the West Bank got off a bus outside a shopping mall in the Israeli city of Petah Tikvah, east of Tel Aviv, and stabbed an Israeli man in the upper chest, wounding him, according to the police. Passers-by overpowered the assailant, who was arrested, the police said.Unnervingly for many Israelis, these were the first indications that the latest surge of violence had spread beyond Jerusalem and the West Bank.Mr. Netanyahu has come under heavy pressure within Israel to bring the situation under control, particularly from the right wing of his government coalition. Mr. Netanyahu was in New York last week after addressing the United Nations General Assembly when Palestinian gunmen fatally shot an Israeli couple as they were driving on a West Bank road with their four children, and when another Palestinian fatally stabbed two Jewish men in the Muslim Quarter of Jerusalem’s Old City, not far from the site of the attack on Wednesday.“We are still in the midst of a wave of terrorism,” Mr. Netanyahu said after meeting with security officials at the Jerusalem district Police Headquarters.“We are taking strong action against the terrorists, rioters and inciters,” he said. “We have boosted our forces and are using all necessary means and methods in the fight against this terrorism.”He added, “Civilians are at the forefront of the war against terrorism and must also be on maximum alert.”Violent clashes continued Wednesday between Palestinian protesters and Israeli security forces in the occupied West Bank. At least two Palestinians were killed during the protests, including a 13-year-old boy described as a bystander.Elsewhere in the West Bank, about 300 Palestinian students from Birzeit University demonstrated and clashed with Israeli soldiers at a checkpoint on the outskirts of Ramallah. Some tried to reach the entrance of a military headquarters nearby and were chased back by soldiers who fired live ammunition in the air. The confrontation lasted seven hours, and more than a dozen students were injured.Undercover Israeli officers dressed in civilian clothes shot one student in the head and stepped on him, before driving him off in a car, according to witnesses and video clips. His condition was not known.Fadel Khaldi, an employee at Birzeit’s student affairs office, said university employees had “agreed to allow the student body to organize their event in solidarity with Al Aqsa,” referring to the contested holy site in the Old City of Jerusalem, revered by Jews as the Temple Mount and by Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary.Rami Nazzal contributed reporting from Al Bireh, West Bank.Advertisement