AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan SobleTOKYO — In the end, Japanese Olympic organizers went with simple and local.Plans for the main stadium to be used in the 2020 Summer Games here were completed Tuesday after months of controversy during which officials scrapped their initial design choice, by the Iraqi-British architect Zaha Hadid, because of soaring cost projections.The early stumble in preparations embarrassed the government of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who had extolled Japan’s reputation for no-nonsense efficiency when he lobbied for the Games two years ago. Critics accused the government of mismanagement, while Ms. Hadid suggested that she had been the victim of a xenophobic backlash.The new design is the work of Kengo Kuma, 61, a Japanese architect known for creating graceful art museums. His plan, a traditional oval shape with a partial roof that incorporates exposed wooden beams and other natural touches, will be smaller and — its backers say — cheaper than Ms. Hadid’s.It will cost an estimated 149 billion yen, or $1.23 billion, assuming builders can stick to projections. That did not happen the first time around: The price for Ms. Hadid’s stadium started at an even more economical 130 billion yen, but it doubled before construction could begin.“It’s a wonderful proposal that meets the demands for timetable and cost,” Mr. Abe said of Mr. Kuma’s design, which a seven-member panel chose over a similar proposal by another Japanese architect, Toyo Ito.Ms. Hadid’s design had its detractors even before the cost estimates soared. Imposing and futuristic, it was likened to a giant bicycle helmet and denounced as a poor fit for its surroundings: a mostly low-rise neighborhood and the leafy grounds of a Shinto shrine. The site previously housed the much smaller main stadium for the 1964 Games.Mr. Kuma’s stadium will have a smaller footprint and a lower height, though it will still accommodate 80,000 spectators in three tiers. When they look up, those spectators will see a lattice of interlocking wooden beams, a nod to traditional Japanese construction, which will support the canopy covering the seating area.“Consideration of Japaneseness” was an explicit part of the criteria for selecting the replacement. Whether that amounts to a justified attention to place or chauvinism is likely to depend on the observer. Last year, Ms. Hadid accused her critics in Japan’s architectural establishment of chauvinism, telling Dezeen, a design magazine, that they “don’t want a foreigner to build in Tokyo for a national stadium.”Rising costs for construction and materials, the results of a real estate rebound and a tight labor market in Japan, have been blamed for pushing up cost estimates for many Games facilities. In a rebuttal to her critics posted on her firm’s website in July, Ms. Hadid said Japanese Olympic and government officials had allowed contractors an excessively free hand in dictating costs.“Sadly the Japanese authorities, with the support of some of those from our own profession in Japan, have colluded to close the doors on the project to the world,” Ms. Hadid said Tuesday in an emailed statement.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement