
Sinosphere By                     
PATRICK BOEHLER and


VANESSA PIAO

DEC. 22, 2015
Pu Zhiqiang, the Chinese civil rights lawyer who was given a three-year suspended prison sentence on Tuesday, had campaigned for years to draw attention to travesties of justice in China’s courts, which often suffer from political interference.For one such case he worked on before his detention in May 2014, he conducted a video interview with a disgraced official who said he was detained by Communist Party investigators without due process and was tortured during questioning.In this video, with English subtitles provided by the Journalism and Media Studies Center at the University of Hong Kong, the official, Xiao Yifei, describes his ordeal to Mr. Pu:In this video made by Mr. Pu last year, which the J.M.S.C. in Hong Kong provided with subtitles, Mr. Pu interviews an ex-government official about how he was questioned by Communist Party investigators.Mr. Xiao said he had been subjected to “shuanggui,” an extralegal Communist Party investigation that isolates detainees from lawyers and relatives. A few months after the video was posted online, the police arrested Mr. Xiao on charges of taking bribes, which he denies having done, said Cai Ying, a lawyer familiar with the case.In September, Mr. Xiao was sentenced to 13 years in prison on those charges. He has appealed the verdict, but remains in custody at a police station in Shuangpai County in Hunan Province.Mr. Cai said he believed Mr. Xiao was arrested because he publicly discussed the torture he had endured. “This is a retaliatory strike by the authorities,” he said in a telephone interview.Calls to the Shuangpai County Public Security Bureau rang unanswered on Tuesday.Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter @mrbaopanrui and Vanessa Piao @VanessaPiao.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »