By RAPHAEL MINDERDEC. 23, 2015
MADRID —  The leaders of Spain’s two largest parties met Wednesday for the first time since inconclusive parliamentary elections on Sunday, and confirmed just how difficult it will be to form a new government.After speaking with Mariano Rajoy, the incumbent prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, the leader of the main opposition party, the Socialists, told reporters that his party would not allow either Mr. Rajoy or his conservative Popular Party to stay in government.“The verdict of the Spanish people last Sunday was a categorical no to Rajoy, to the Popular Party, to his policies and his way of doing politics,” Mr. Sánchez said at a news conference.Mr. Sánchez said he would instead try to form “a government of change,” even though his party came a relatively distant second in the elections to the Popular Party, only narrowly maintaining its position as the largest left-wing party in Spain. Podemos, a far-left party formed less than two years ago, came in third in the elections, winning a fifth of the votes.AdvertisementWednesday’s encounter was particularly important because only a coalition between Mr. Rajoy’s conservatives and the Socialists would be guaranteed a majority in the fragmented Parliament that resulted from Sunday’s vote. However, while such a “grand coalition” has governed in countries like Germany, there is no precedent for it in Spain.AdvertisementTwo parties — Podemos and Citizens — are set to enter Parliament for the first time, and their leaders gave their own proposals on Wednesday to help break the deadlock and form a new government.Pablo Iglesias, the leader of Podemos, wrote in a blog post published by The Huffington Post that the next Spanish government could be led by “an independent figure with prestige,” rather than either Mr. Rajoy or Mr. Sánchez. He did not suggest any specific candidate.Albert Rivera, the leader of Citizens, proposed forming a three-way pact between the Popular Party, the Socialists and his own centrist party. Spain’s politicians, he said at a news conference, should do “everything possible to think more of Spain than of our parties.”Still, Spain’s politicians are also facing internal challenges, particularly the two embattled leaders of the establishment parties, Mr. Rajoy and Mr. Sánchez, who both failed to avoid an exodus of their traditional voters on Sunday, many of whom embraced the two newer parties instead.Mr. Rajoy did not make any public comment after his meeting with Mr. Sánchez. But their frosty handshake on the steps to his government compound suggested that the two politicians will also struggle to repair a personal relationship that was badly damaged during the election campaign.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a televised debate just days before the vote, Mr. Sánchez accused Mr. Rajoy of being dishonest, referring to the prime minister’s failure to take responsibility for corruption scandals, including one involving the Popular Party’s former treasurer.The coalition negotiations are also complicated by disagreement over some specific issues, notably the status of Catalonia, where regional politicians have been caught up in their own debate over how to form a new coalition government that can lead the region to independence from the rest of Spain.Podemos won the most votes in Catalonia after promising to hold a referendum on independence there, an idea that has been repeatedly rejected by Mr. Rajoy’s government, the courts, and the Socialists and Citizens. The latter, in fact, first emerged as a Catalan regional party fiercely opposed to secession.AdvertisementMr. Rivera warned on Wednesday that “it’s necessary to prevent anyone taking advantage of the current situation to break up Spain.”The political deadlock is also expected to elevate the role of King Felipe VI as a political mediator, since the monarch is responsible for nominating a prime minister after the new Parliament convenes on Jan. 13.While that nomination has normally been a formality, the monarch’s duty could gain the kind of relevance it recently did in Portugal, where the president named two different government leaders within weeks after inconclusive national elections in October.In Spain, should no politician manage to be approved by lawmakers as prime minister within two months of receiving the royal nomination, new elections will have to be called.While stiffening his opposition to the Popular Party on Wednesday, Mr. Sánchez joined other leaders in arguing that another trip to the ballot boxes in spring was the worse-case scenario. “The repeat of the elections is the last of the options,” he said.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 Spanish Leaders Meet After Elections.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.