By RICK GLADSTONEDEC. 23, 2015
Tensions mounted between Iran and the United States on Wednesday over a new American law that limits visa-free travel, which the Iranians regard as a sanction and a violation of the recently completed nuclear accord.The Iranian foreign minister and Republican critics of Iran traded warnings about the visa law, which is barely a week old.The law applies to foreigners who would otherwise be eligible to travel to the United States without a visa. It denies that privilege to anyone who has visited Iran in the past five years or who holds Iranian citizenship. The same restriction applies to citizens of or visitors to Syria, Iraq or Sudan.The law is part of an American antiterrorism response to the recent attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., and is primarily directed at suspected members and supporters of the Islamic State, the extremist Sunni group that controls parts of Iraq and Syria. Sudan and Iran were included partly because they have been on the State Department’s list of state sponsors of terrorism for many years.AdvertisementIran, however, is a Shiite-majority country that opposes Sunni fundamentalist groups and is helping to fight them.AdvertisementIranian officials say that it is nonsensical to include Iran in the new visa law, and that the provision seems intended to sabotage the nuclear accord. The accord calls for Western nations to lift many economic sanctions against Iran and to not impose new ones, in exchange for verifiable guarantees that Iran’s nuclear work is peaceful.The accord, completed in July, was expected to take effect early in 2016, and Iran has been hoping that many more tourists and businesspeople from Europe and elsewhere will start to visit Iran once the sanctions are lifted.But many Europeans who now enjoy visa-free travel to the United States may be deterred from visiting Iran if a stamp from that country in their passports would disqualify them from easy access to the United States.In a letter on Saturday, the day after President Obama signed the law, Secretary of State John Kerry sought to reassure his Iranian counterpart, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, that the administration would use executive authority to waive the provision if necessary.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But five congressional Republicans who strongly supported the new law delivered a sharp rejoinder to Mr. Kerry in their own letter on Wednesday.“We are deeply concerned that the narrowly intended use of the waiver authority will be ignored in favor of applying the waiver authority to those who have traveled to Iran for business purposes,” read the letter, addressed to Mr. Kerry and Jeh Johnson, the secretary of Homeland Security.“Congress and the president strengthened the V.W.P. in order to protect the national security of the United States,” they wrote, using the initials of the visa waiver program. “Iran is impacted by this new law because it is a U.S.-designated state sponsor of terrorism. The simplest way to eliminate this restriction is for Iran to end its support of terrorism.”They urged Mr. Kerry to “press Tehran on this, as well as its recent missile tests and persistent jailing of Americans. The problem is with Iranian actions, not the new visa waiver law.”AdvertisementThe letter was signed by Representative Ed Royce of California, the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee; the House majority leader, Kevin McCarthy of California; Representative Bob Goodlatte of Virginia, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee; Representative Michael McCaul of Texas, the chairman of the Homeland Security Committee; and Representative Candice Miller of Michigan, the author of the new law.Mr. Zarif pushed back. The Tasnim News Agency in Iran quoted him at a news conference in Tehran as saying that “should the new law that tightens visa-free travel to the U.S. come into force, it would be tantamount to a breach of the July nuclear deal.”European officials have also reacted angrily to the new restrictions, which could lead to retaliatory steps in Europe against Americans who have enjoyed the reciprocal privilege. The president of the French Senate, who was visiting Iran this week, was quoted by French news agencies as saying that the American limits sent the “wrong signal.”A version of this article appears in print on December 24, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Tensions With Iran Rise Over U.S. Visa Measure .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.