AdvertisementSupported byBy Sewell ChanLONDON — An uproar grew in Britain on Wednesday over what many saw as an unspoken new American policy to bar British Muslims from visiting the United States, after revelations that a large Muslim family, including young children, bound for a Disneyland vacation was inexplicably stopped from boarding a London flight to Los Angeles last week. Social media reverberated with messages of anger and vexation by a diverse range of citizens in Britain, where around 5 percent of the population is Muslim, and where many people have expressed revulsion over calls two weeks ago by Donald J. Trump, a Republican presidential candidate, to prohibit all Muslim visitors. The Council on American-Islamic Relations, an advocacy group in Washington, said Wednesday that it had asked the Department of Homeland Security to investigate whether its officials had “implemented informally” Mr. Trump’s proposal. That request came amid signs that a number of British Muslims had been stopped without explanation at London’s Heathrow and Gatwick Airports in recent days — not just the 11-member Mahmood family, which was abruptly denied permission to board a Los Angeles-bound jetliner at Gatwick on Dec. 15. Their terminated plans became a catalyst for growing publicity and criticism of the United States. A member of the British Parliament, Stella Creasy, who represents a district in northeast London, demanded an explanation from the Americans for why the Mahmood family’s vacation had been ruined. “Widespread condemnation of Donald Trump’s call for no Muslim to be allowed into America contrasts with what is going on in practice,” Ms. Creasy wrote  on the website of The Guardian on Tuesday. Ajmal Masroor, a prominent British imam who has spoken out against Islamic extremism, said on Facebook on Wednesday that he was barred from boarding a flight at Heathrow on Dec. 17 by an American diplomatic official who gave no explanation. Mr. Masroor wrote in a Facebook posting: “I am amazed how irrational these processes are but does USA care about what you and I think? I don’t think so!”Daniel Hetlage, a spokesman for the Customs and Border Protection unit of the United States Department of Homeland Security, declined to discuss the specifics of any case, but he denied that religion was a factor in deciding who could enter.An applicant to enter the United States “must overcome all grounds of inadmissibility,” Mr. Hetlage’s statement said, adding that there were more than 60 such grounds, “including health-related, prior criminal convictions, security reasons, public charge, labor certification, illegal entrants and immigration violations, documentation requirements, and miscellaneous grounds.” The statement did not indicate which grounds, if any, caused the British family to be denied entry.Plainclothes officers from Customs and Border Protection are stationed at several “major gateway airports,” including Amsterdam; Doha, Qatar; Frankfurt; Madrid; Manchester, England; Paris; and Tokyo, along with Heathrow and Gatwick, a deputy assistant commissioner of the agency, John P. Wagner, said at a House hearing in June.Under what is known as the Immigration Advisory Program, the officers “work in partnership with host government authorities to identify possible terrorists and other high-risk passengers,” Mr. Wagner said. The agency uses several automated data systems to detect suspicious travelers, but civil liberties campaigners have complained that many innocent people are denied entry without explanation or legal recourse.The Guardian quoted Mohammad Tariq Mahmood, a member of the family stopped at Gatwick last week, saying, “It’s because of the attacks on America — they think every Muslim poses a threat.” Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement