
Sinosphere By                     
 AUSTIN RAMZY and
 

PATRICK BOEHLER

DEC. 23, 2015
In 2015, China’s citizens wanted to find out about health, money, the law and love — or marriage, at least.And they were preoccupied with deadly explosions, the erratic stock market, second children and a very public sex act in a dressing room.Those topics dominated China’s national psyche this year, if Internet searches are any indication, according to a year-end review by Baidu, the country’s most popular search engine.While not a formal survey, and subject to the limits of online censorship, the results are a snapshot into the thinking of China’s more than 668 million Internet users. The results broadly agree with other lists of topics discussed on social media in China over the past year.AdvertisementThe news of the year was led by the Sept. 3 military parade to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the victory over Japan in World War II. A rather less sanctioned display, of a couple who filmed themselves in a Uniqlo fitting room, was fourth on the list. The deadly explosions in Tianjin in August and the ending of China’s “one-child” policy were second and third.AdvertisementA separate list, ranking the top questions posed on the search engine, was led by inquiries about how quickly people could marry. Baidu users asked about the legal age of marriage — it is 20 for women and 22 for men — and the necessary paperwork.Several questions related to health and safety: What are the best foods to eat during menstruation? What color car should one buy for safety reasons? Are the nitrites in food really so terrible?The list included a question that permeates much online activity: Why do people get bored?Perhaps the most mysterious question was: “How is our subconscious leaking our secrets?” Part of the answer might be online search queries.
                Here are the news events that Baidu says most captured Internet users’ attention in 2015.             Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »