
DEC. 25, 2015

 Roman Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox and other Christian clergy members around the world reflected on Jesus’ birth and the challenges facing humanity after a year of war, terrorism and mass migration. “In a society so often intoxicated by consumerism and hedonism, wealth and extravagance, appearances and narcissism, this child calls us to act soberly, in other words, in a way that is simple, balanced, consistent, capable of seeing and doing what is essential. In a world which all too often is merciless to the sinner and lenient to the sin, we need to cultivate a strong sense of justice, to discern and to do God’s will. Amid a culture of indifference which not infrequently turns ruthless, our style of life should instead be devout, filled with empathy, compassion and mercy, drawn daily from the wellspring of prayer.”Sources: Papal Mass and “Urbi et Orbi” message“Christ calls on us to ‘live in the present time in a reasonable and just way,’ to become ‘a people passionate about doing good.’ Brothers and sisters, let us not be dragged into the violence that is so widespread in our society. We suffer from the violence of the terrorist attacks, but let us be careful not to become agents of violence ourselves. In our social lives, in our families, in our work, in our leisure time, in our relationships, let us not yield to the temptation of controversial relationships nourished by excessive presentations in the media. Let us become artisans of peace and reconciliation. In this Christmastime, why not look for the person with whom you could make peace?”Source: Diocese of Paris“Christmas is about joy. So often people do not know the difference between being happy and having fun. For some people, their whole life is one long pursuit of having fun. The joy of Christmas is not the product of successful shopping sprees, of fantasy or fairy tales, or addictions to entertainment, drugs or alcohol. The first Christmas instructions given to the shepherds were: Don’t be afraid. Go to Bethlehem. Go into the darkness seeking God’s loving presence, revealed in a child, in poverty and in humility. Christmas joy is about discovering that life must be lived in solidarity. The Ayn Rand extreme individualism of our culture is poison, whose antidote is community and solidarity. Christmas joy is about discovering and building solidarity with our families, with our community, with the human beings on the planet and with our creator.”Source: Archdiocese of Boston“A railway station is an unusual location for a Christmas service. But it is probably closer to the origin of our celebration than the churches we normally meet in. … We are here to honor the Christmas story and the precarious location in which it takes place. But we are also here to reflect and bring before God what has happened here at Munich station in the past months, to assess where we are now and to get guidance as to where we go — as refugees, as volunteers, as officials and simply as Christians who share the problems and the hopes of all those involved. Munich station has become a symbol of German welcome culture. The pictures of this September weekend went around the world. Pictures of people arriving in trains from Hungary being received with applause after having been shifted around back and forth in the days before. I will never forget the faces of those arriving, especially the children, a mixture of exhaustion, relief and joy for being welcomed this way. And I will never forget what I heard from volunteers. … Germany has changed. We have discovered how strong we are in empathy and in organizing help, receiving one million refugees this past year. We will never lose this experience.”Source: Facebook“No one is excluded from the joy of this night; let not even the sinner feel excluded, nor the old person weighed down by the years, nor anyone who in daily life has forgotten God. To anyone who receives this newborn child that God sent us, God gives that person the power to become the son of God, that is to say, to be reborn into a new life, regardless of age or personal merit. Immediately, the objection of Nicodemus comes to mind: How can a man be born again when he is old? It’s clear it’s not about a physical birth, but about a birth of the spirit. At Christmas, we have the right to cast off our years, our sins, our regrets and feel ‘like newborn children, able to plunge into joy and hope.’ Let us be children and come closer to the manger to worship the eternal word of God made child.”Source: Publimetro“Your efforts have borne fruit in the recognition of Palestine as a nonmember observer state by the United Nations. This recognition should be a decisive step toward peace and security for all.”“Christmas is an occasion for celebration, even at a time when many of you are suffering for one reason or another. Thousands of young people are anxiously waiting in prison to regain their freedom. Families are separated and awaiting travel permissions in order to live together or gather together under the same roof. You continue to suffer the unending occupation. Gaza and the south of Israel have just emerged from a war with consequences that are still visible both physically and mentally. Our prayers include all Arab and Jewish families that have been touched by the conflict.”Source: Haaretz“Today, across the Middle East, close to the area in which the angels announced God’s apocalypse, ISIS and others claim that this is the time of an apocalypse, an unveiling created of their own terrible ideas, one which is igniting a trail of fear, violence, hatred and determined oppression. Confident that these are the last days, using force and indescribable cruelty, they seem to welcome all opposition, certain that the warfare unleashed confirms that these are indeed the end times. They hate difference, whether it is Muslims who think differently, Yazidis or Christians, and because of them the Christians face elimination in the very region in which Christian faith began. This apocalypse is defined by themselves and heralded only by the angel of death. … To all who have been or are being dehumanized by the tyranny and cruelty of a Herod or an ISIS, a Herod of today, God’s judgment comes as good news, because it promises justice. As Isaiah makes clear, God’s judgment is one piece of a bigger story of salvation — God’s apocalypse of love — which declares, ‘For to us a child is born, to us a son is given.’ ”Source: Archbishop of Canterbury“So as we face 2016 with all its uncertainties, with its governance challenges and with its threats to our well-being as a nation, we must hold onto the belief that we can overcome them. And then let us act on that belief: Join together, organize, lobby and embark on what I call the New Struggle, the struggle to ensure that the sacrifices that so many made for our liberation are not wasted, the struggle against greed, corruption and nepotism, the struggle for true justice, including economic justice, and the peace from God that flows from justice.“That New Struggle began in 2015, when we saw a national mobilization of young and old alike against the failures of leaders who are allowing the corruption epidemic to rob the people of South Africa of the fruits of their hard-won freedom, gained over many decades by the old struggle against apartheid. We must use our words and our actions against those who put their own personal interests ahead of those of the people, promoting a culture of ‘me’ instead of a culture of ‘we.’ We must oppose those who take and don’t give, those who use hateful racist and xenophobic language, those who ignore the needs of our students, our neighbors and communities. Against all of this, we must rise up. If we learned anything from the courage of our students who said ‘enough is enough,’ it is that we are able to create a society rooted in human love and in God’s care for us and all people everywhere.”Source: Anglican Church of South Africa“Do you know this Christmas, in our country, there’s children in detention? Both onshore and offshore. Not only children, families, all sorts of people. In detention. In our country, Australia, people in detention. Something drastically has gone wrong. … Could you imagine also, that in this country, Australia, which has been so blessed for such a long time, there’s always that element to tackle the little people? …  I could be critical, but I’m as much to blame as everybody else. It’s no good blaming our political leaders and all our other leaders, I’ve got to blame myself for allowing it to happen. But I think we as a nation, citizens of this land, all of us together as brothers and sisters have to take responsibility for that as well. We can change it.”Source: Sydney Morning Herald“What is happening today in Iraq, Syria, Palestine and Lebanon — and what the whole world is witnessing — is the spread of violence and the widening of the economic paralysis and the consequent increase in the numbers of displaced and the rise of the numbers of poor. It creates a very fertile ground for the practice of various acts of spiritual and physical compassion that we have mentioned. Today, we look with pain and heartbreak at what has happened to the Christians in Iraq and Syria and their forced displacement.” Source: Hwaida Saad of The New York Times“The irony of Christmas, the great manifestation of God’s mercy, is that when Jesus was born, there was no room in the inns for him. A lowly stable welcomed the birth of the Messiah. Christmas therefore is a season to welcome Jesus and to welcome other people into our hearts and lives. Christmas is contrary to exclusion, marginalization, discrimination, neglect, indifference, manipulation and rejection of peoples, especially the poor and helpless. These manifest the lack of mercy!”Source: The Manila Times“When I was little, I remember thinking of dying in martyrdom after listening to the stories of a renowned pastor of the time. It was a very normal thing for a Christian to have such faith in those days. But now I feel we no longer talk about martyrdom. We talk about how Jesus will ‘save’ our lives and aid us in our living. We don’t mention anything about how we should be willing to die for him. I heard that Pastor Chu Ki-chol’s story will be broadcast on TV commemorating Christmas. I hope that program and this Christmas will wake up the strong and wild faith Koreans used to possess.”Source: Facebook“ ‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men’ (Luke 2:14). These wondrous words, sang by the host of angels and addressed to infant Christ born in Bethlehem, verily contain the greatest mystery of the Incarnation occurred for the salvation of the world. Over 2,000 years separate us from that radiant night. Yet, to this day Christ is being born in the hearts of people, sanctified by grace, comforting them with his love.”Source: Russian Orthodox ChurchAdvertisement