By MIKE IVESDEC. 24, 2015
HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam —  For nearly half a century, Margot Carlson Delogne had grieved over her father’s death. She battled alcoholism, wore a missing-in-action bracelet and deeply resented the Vietnamese who shot down his plane in 1966.Now she stood at the end of a long table in a conference room here, facing six Vietnamese men and women who had lost parents in the same war, fighting for the other side. It was her fourth such meeting in eight days, and the emotional toll was catching up with her.“We wondered if our coming together would open old wounds, or if any of us would be angry or sad all over again,” she started. Then she began to cry. “We have been sad,” she said, “but we have found no anger.”The encounter here last week was part of an odyssey of hope and redemption for Ms. Carlson Delogne, 51, who was born on a military base in Texas and now lives in Walpole, Mass.AdvertisementShe had traveled to Vietnam with five other grown children of American fathers who died or disappeared during the war. Their mission was to find the places where their fathers fought and died, and to speak with the children of fallen North Vietnamese and Viet Cong veterans.AdvertisementThe meetings were the first formal ones between children of the American and North Vietnamese service people killed in the war, Vietnamese officials said. They took place in a year in which the two countries, four decades after fighting a war that cost more than 2.5 million lives, began a third decade of normalized relations.Today, the United States sees Vietnam as a strategic buffer against China, and recently eased a longstanding ban on lethal arms sales there.Bilateral trade is now worth nearly $30 billion, and Vietnam is a member of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an American-led trade agreement among a dozen Pacific Rim countries.American corporations, including McDonald’s and Starbucks, have opened here hoping to tap into Vietnam’s emerging middle class.Bui Van Nghi, secretary general of the Vietnam-U.S.A. Society, a Communist Party organization that arranged the group’s 11-day trip, said it represented yet another step forward in the normalization process.“If we want the relationship between our two countries to develop, we need more mutual understanding,” he said.At four meetings across Vietnam this month between the six Americans and more than 20 Vietnamese sons and daughters, decades-old walls began to crumble brick by brick.AdvertisementIn Ho Chi Minh City, Susan Mitchell-Mattera, 51, a hospice nurse from Carson, Calif., played a few notes of a harmonica that her father, James C. Mitchell Jr., had owned before he was killed in the Mekong Delta in 1970. She had found it recently, she said, in a chest that her mother could not bring herself to open for 46 years.That story resonated with Nguyen Thi Hong Diem, 47, of Ho Chi Minh City, whose father and mother were Viet Cong soldiers and were also killed in the Mekong Delta.“I really feel that we share a common pain,” she said.A few seats down, Vu Ngoc Xiem, 66, was staring intently at the Americans, his face clenched in what looked like anger. Finally, he rose to speak, steadying himself with his hands.When he was 14, he said, American bombs had killed his father. Four years later, they struck his school, killing all but 19 students.For most of his life, he had wanted nothing more than revenge. Now, facing the children of his enemies, he faltered.“You must understand,” he said, “Vietnam is a country that loves its people and loves peace.”His desire for revenge had faded, he said.“Revenge cannot help us,” he said. “I fully believe that we can do something more useful for our countries and our people.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As the Americans watched Mr. Xiem’s hatred dissolve into something like acceptance, several felt a sharp pang of recognition. His words spoke to their own conflicted feelings.The Americans also sought solace in another way on this trip, visiting the places their fathers had died or gone missing.AdvertisementRonald R. Reyes, 47, followed a ridge to the base of a hill in Khe Sanh, where his father, Pfc. Ronald Reyes, had been killed during the North Vietnamese siege of 1968, a battle now seen as important mainly for persuading Americans that the war was futile.Mr. Reyes, a mortgage consultant from Simi Valley, Calif., fell to the ground, then leafed through a photo album that his father had carried during the war.“I’ve come back,” he said, “and the country is taking care of me.”In nearby Quang Ngai Province, Mike Burkett, 49, a food-and-beverage salesman from Houston, visited a peaceful river where his father, Spec. Curtis Earl Burkett, drowned in 1971.At the riverbank, Mr. Burkett left a laminated photograph of a 1968 Camaro that belonged to his father, along with some cigars.“That’s one thing I regretted,” Mr. Burkett said later. “I never got to smoke a cigar with my dad.”Ms. Carlson Delogne, who works in health care marketing, said she was less sure about how or where her father, Air Force Capt. John W. Carlson, had died.The F-5C fighter jet he piloted was reported to have crashed Dec. 7, 1966, about 39 miles from Ho Chi Minh City, then called Saigon. Her sister later spent years searching for further clues, without much success.But just before her trip to Vietnam, Ms. Carlson Delogne said, the Defense Department sent her a file identifying coordinates near Long Nguyen village that investigators believe may be the crash site.AdvertisementMr. Reyes plugged the coordinates into Google Earth, and three of the Americans left their hotel in a small bus.After more than 30 miles on a drab, four-lane highway, the driver turned off, stopping on a narrow gravel road between two stands of tall rubber trees.Ms. Carlson Delogne and Mr. Reyes leapt out and walked quickly through the trees. The digital trail ended 650 feet from the road in a shallow, bedroom-size crater.Mr. Reyes said the crater did not look natural.Ms. Carlson Delogne stepped inside and fell to her knees, sobbing violently for several minutes, as sunlight dappled her face and a light wind stirred the trees’ leaves.Then she spoke to the father she had longed to meet as a grown woman.“I don’t know where you are physically — maybe you’re here, or maybe you’re nearby,” she said, her voice quaking. “But I have always felt you with me as I stay sober each day, as I confront fears and do things that scare me, like being here right now.“I see the beauty of this place, and its people, and I’ve seen the effects of the bombs,” she continued. “And I don’t understand how someone who was so loving — and kind, and handsome and great — could be at war with this place.”She dug a small hole with her hands in the black soil, and buried the missing-in-action bracelet.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Journey to Vietnam in Search of Lost Fathers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.