By DIAA HADIDDEC. 24, 2015
RAMALLAH, West Bank —  The Israeli police said on Thursday that they were investigating a video that appeared to show young Jewish extremists celebrating the death of a Palestinian toddler in an arson attack last summer.Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu condemned the video, which was first aired on Israel’s Channel 10 on Wednesday evening.“The shocking pictures that were broadcast this evening show the true face of a group that constitutes a danger to Israeli society and to the security of Israel,” Mr. Netanyahu said. “We are not prepared to accept people who deny the laws of the state and do not view themselves as subject to them.”A 25-second clip, filmed at a wedding that occurred three weeks ago, according to Israeli news media reports, shows a room of jumping, dancing men wearing white skullcaps, many with the long sidelocks of Orthodox Jews. Some of them are brandishing guns and knives.AdvertisementTwo of them appear to be stabbing pieces of paper they hold in their hands, which the television station identified as pictures of an 18-month-old child, Ali Dawabsheh, who was burned to death in a July 31 arson attack that also killed his parents in Duma, a West Bank village. The only survivor was Ali’s brother, 4-year-old Ahmad, who is still recovering in an Israeli hospital. Israeli officials called the attack an act of terrorism and blamed Jewish extremists.AdvertisementLuba Samri, an Israeli police spokeswoman, said the police were investigating “the many and serious crimes presented in the wedding clip.” Among them, they said, were underage people holding military weapons.Palestinian anger over the arson attack was one of the triggers for a surge of violence against Israelis that began in October. Palestinians have since killed 19 Israelis, an American student and a Palestinian from the West Bank. Over 130 Palestinians have been killed during the same period, up to two-thirds of them while carrying out, trying to carry out or, according to the police, intending to carry out attacks.Several young Jewish extremists were arrested in early December in connection with the July 31 attack. Supporters of the arrested youths, including high-profile right-wing activists, have accused the domestic security agency, the Shin Bet, of abusing and even torturing the detainees. The agency has not released names or any other details about the detainees, and a court has imposed a gag order on the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many of the perpetrators are believed to belong to a violent fringe of extremist religious Jews who live in Jewish settlements deep in the West Bank.Lenny Goldberg, the father of the bride whose wedding was shown in the video, implied that the leaking of the video served the interests of security agencies. “Public opinion was against the G.S.S.,” Mr. Goldberg told Israeli news outlets, referring to the General Security Service, another name for the Shin Bet, “and then the wedding made kosher what they want to do.”The Shin Bet hinted at harsher than usual interrogation methods in a statement it issued on Thursday, but it rejected allegations of abuse and said the investigation was taking place under close judicial supervision.The video, much like the arson attack itself, prompted shock and outrage. “You disgrace your skullcap, your prayer shawl and the name of God,” news reports quoted Isaac Herzog, head of the political opposition in Parliament, as saying on social media. “Whoever dances at a wedding and celebrates the murder of a sleeping baby is not Jewish and not Israeli.”Israeli news media reported that Defense Minister Moshe Yaalon summoned advocates for Jewish settlements in the West Bank to his office to show them the video, apparently to impress upon them the seriousness of the extremists who have emerged at the movement’s fringes.“I look into my past, not just my military past, but my past as a settler, as a teacher, and wonder if I did not do enough so that there would never be such sights,” said Rabbi Avihai Ronsky, the head of a yeshiva in the Jewish West Bank settlement of Itamar. Still, he said, the extremist Jewish fringe consists of “a very small handful of people.”AdvertisementPalestinians and their supporters say the arson attack and the celebratory video were inevitable, complaining that the Israeli authorities have for years dragged their feet on finding and prosecuting extremist Jews who have physically attacked them and their property.Myra Noveck contributed reporting from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Video Indicates Jewish Extremists Celebrated Palestinian Boy’s Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.