By MONA BOSHNAQDEC. 24, 2015
LONDON —  Fire ravaged the maternity and neonatal intensive care unit of a hospital in Saudi Arabia early Thursday, killing at least 25 people and injuring more than 100 in the third mass calamity to hit the desert kingdom in the past four months.The blaze, which Saudi news media said may have been started by an electrical problem, left part of the general hospital in Jizan, a southwest port city, in blackened ruins. At least one of the dead was a child, and Saudi television quoted a witness as saying he could “hear the women screaming” as flames raced through the ground-floor ward.The hospital had been cited previously for safety violations, the state-owned Al Arabiya news channel reported. It quoted the region’s director of health affairs, Ahmed al-Sahli, as denying that the facility had any safety problems. He was also quoted as saying the cause of the fire had yet to be determined and that many people had escaped.But his remarks were later overtaken by a statement from his boss, Health Minister Khalid al-Falih, who acknowledged responsibility in saying that something had gone terribly wrong. “When we have deaths like this number, there is no doubt that there is a failure in the system of the Ministry of Health, and we would like to ensure that this will not occur again at any other hospital,” Reuters quoted his statement as saying.A civil defense spokesman discussed the investigation into a fire at a hospital in Saudi Arabia that he said had killed at least 25 people and had injured more than 100.Twenty-one ambulances and fire units were sent to the hospital after an emergency call at 2:10 a.m., according to a Facebook post by the Saudi Civil Defense Directorate, which attributed the information to Maj. Yahya bin Abdullah al-Qahtani, the agency’s spokesman in the area.AdvertisementThe fire also injured at least 107 people, the agency said on Twitter. The official Saudi Press Agency later reported that 57 patients had been discharged from other hospitals, while another eight were in intensive care.AdvertisementA correspondent for Al-Arabiya reported having seen several emergency doors chained shut after the disaster. Al-Arabiya also quoted Eissa Amaish, the sister of one victim, as saying, “What happened in this hospital was a crime of murder. This hospital was not equipped at all to deal with a fire.”While there is great reluctance in Saudi Arabia to criticize the ruling royal family and public officials, the hospital fire nonetheless raised new questions about negligence and accountability when an apparently avoidable calamity occurs.Officials have not yet explained why a crane toppled at Mecca’s Grand Mosque in mid-September, killing at least 107 people. Nor have they explained why hundreds of pilgrims were crushed a few weeks later in a stampede during the annual hajj.The tragedies have added to the challenges facing the government of the new king, Salman, who acceded to the throne in January after the death of his brother Abdullah. The kingdom is engaged in a fierce rivalry with Iran; faces spillover violence from the civil war in neighboring Yemen where it is carrying out airstrikes; and is dealing with plunging prices for oil, the kingdom’s lifeblood.Jizan, a city of 70,000 on the Red Sea that is just a few miles from the border with Yemen, was once a center of pearl fishing.The southwestern region is the only part of Saudi Arabia that receives enough rainfall to sustain crops. Farmers grow mangoes, papayas and cereals like wheat and barley, but the region remains quite poor.Saudi Aramco, the national oil company, is planning to build a major refinery and terminal for Jizan. On Tuesday, the Saudis said they had intercepted a missile fired by Houthi rebels in Yemen targeting an oil installation near Jizan.Sewell Chan contributed reporting from London, and Rick Gladstone from New York.A version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Fire in Saudi Hospital Maternity Unit Kills at Least 25.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.