By THOMAS FULLERDEC. 24, 2015
BANGKOK — A Thai court sentenced two men from Myanmar on Thursday to death for the murder of two British tourists last year, ending a high-profile trial shadowed by allegations that the police had mishandled the investigation.The men, U Zaw Lin and U Win Zaw Htun, both workers on the popular resort island of Koh Tao, were convicted of murder, rape and unlawful entry into Thailand. Their lawyers said they would appeal.The bodies of the two Britons, David Miller, 24, and Hannah Witheridge, 23, were found on a Koh Tao beach in September 2014. The police said that Ms. Witheridge had been raped, and that DNA evidence from semen retrieved from her body was at the heart of the prosecution’s case. There were no witnesses to the crime.The case was closely followed in Myanmar and in Britain, whose government at one point expressed concern about the investigation and sent representatives to Thailand to conduct an inquiry.AdvertisementLegal experts criticized the Thai police for many missteps and said that lingering questions hung over the conviction. Mr. Zaw Lin and Mr. Win Zaw Htun were arrested two weeks after the murder, when the police were under heavy pressure to solve the crime.AdvertisementIn a statement outlining the reasons for its verdict, the court said that “physical evidence at the crime scene as well as circumstantial evidence before and after the incident” established the defendants’ guilt. One of the men was also convicted of theft; the court said he had taken a phone and sunglasses from Mr. Miller’s body.The prosecution said the defendants had used a garden hoe to beat Mr. Miller and Ms. Witheridge. A bloodstained hoe was found near the crime scene, but a government expert testified that DNA retrieved from it did not match that of the suspects, one of several contradictions in the state’s case.A request by defense lawyers to retest the DNA samples retrieved from Ms. Witheridge’s body was turned down. The government expert said the police had “used up all the samples.”The family of a British man murdered in Thailand last year welcomed the conviction of two Myanmar migrants accused of his killing, shortly before their relatives left the courthouse.In addition, the defendants testified that the police had tortured them during interrogation. The court, in its statement on Thursday, called that allegation “groundless,” saying the defendants had provided no evidence of abuse.The police were also criticized for failing to seal off the crime scene, and for using a food vendor from Myanmar as an official police interpreter during interrogations.Britain’s Foreign Office said early in the case that there was “real concern in the U.K. about how the investigation has been handled by the Thai authorities.” British officers were sent to Thailand to conduct an inquiry into the investigation, and they reported their findings to the victims’ families.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After meeting with the officers, Ms. Witheridge’s family said they were “confident in the work that has been carried out into these atrocious crimes, and want to remind both press and public that they do not have the full facts to report and make comment on at this stage.”After the hearing on Thursday, Michael Miller, the victim’s brother, read a statement outside the court on the island of Koh Samui, saying that while the Thai police had had a “difficult start” in their investigation, the family believed the evidence against the defendants was “absolutely overwhelming.”Advertisement“We believe the correct verdict has been reached,” the statement said.More than 450 people are on death row in Thailand, according to Thai prison data, but executions are now rare. The last was in 2009, according to Sam Zarifi, the director of Asia-Pacific operations at the International Commission of Jurists, a human rights group.Mr. Zarifi said Thursday’s verdict could be overruled on appeal. “It’s hard to see how it would hold up based on a stringent reading of the law, as is required for capital punishment,” he said.He added that Thailand should address the defendants’ allegations of torture, which he said had not been properly investigated. “Thailand is obliged to treat them seriously,” he said of the accusations.The defendants are from Rakhine, one of the poorest states in Myanmar. Reporters in the courtroom said that the defendants’ mothers wailed loudly during the proceedings on Thursday, and that one of them had fainted and had been taken away by court employees.Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.