By AUSTIN RAMZYDEC. 24, 2015
HONG KONG —  A court in Shanghai sentenced a prominent former news executive on Thursday to four years in prison for extortion, Chinese state news media reported.The court found that Shen Hao, the former chairman of 21st Century Media, had demanded advertising purchases from businesses in exchange for positive news articles, or for covering up damaging reports, according to Xinhua, the state-run news agency. He was also convicted of embezzlement.The scheme brought in more than $30 million, Xinhua reported last year.A former vice president and chief financial officer of the news organization, Le Bing, was also convicted of embezzlement and was sentenced to a two-year suspended prison term, Xinhua reported. The news agency said additional rulings against other defendants were expected.In September 2014, the Shanghai police arrested executives from the newspaper 21st Century Business Herald, its affiliated website and the staff members of a public relations firm. In subsequent confessions that were broadcast by China Central Television, the state broadcaster, journalists described how they would target companies that were preparing for public listings and were vulnerable to damaging reports. The employees of the public relations firm were accused of helping the journalists select companies for the scheme.AdvertisementIn a letter quoted by Xinhua last year, Mr. Shen said that he had failed to uphold his professional duties as a journalist. “I failed to control my greed and resist temptations,” he wrote. “The power I had has become the tool for me to seek personal benefits.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The 21st Century Business Herald, which is based in the southern city of Guangzhou, was founded in 2001 and has been considered one of China’s most respected financial news outlets. It is owned by the Southern Media Group, which operates several journalistically aggressive publications that have come under increasing pressure from the authorities.The case against the executives has brought attention to one of the darker aspects of the news media in China. Journalists often receive low salaries, and some make extra money from public relations representatives who pay for positive coverage.AdvertisementThe 21st Century Business Herald executives were accused of taking that arrangement to extremes, demanding advertising orders of as much as $50,000, which companies were said to have routinely paid.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up hereA version of this article appears in print on December 25, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Journalist Is Sentenced for Extortion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.