AdvertisementSupported byQ&ABy The New York TimesAs Europe continues to struggle with a steady flow of migrants and the challenges of how best to receive asylum seekers from war zones, The New York Times asked readers for their questions about the refugee crisis. We have addressed some issues and used other questions to help inform our reporting. Here are answers to some recent questions.Q. How will the cultural and religious aspects of so many (primarily Muslim) migrants impact E.U. society, especially at the local community levels? — Joe, LondonA. The answer I got from most politicians, planners and business people in Stuttgart and Berlin was that, at a community level, it is crucial to integrate the new migrants, especially the young ones, as swiftly as possible. That means providing not only language, education and job training, but also access to the social and athletic clubs that bind many German communities. They can be the quickest route to integration.That did not happen in the 1970s and ’80s with Turkish guest workers in cities such as Berlin, where for various reasons communities avoided mixing for years, and the consequences are still obvious.The president of the chamber of commerce for the state of Baden-Württemberg, which includes Stuttgart, was not very optimistic when he talked to me recently about the prospects for integrating so many people all at once. Many of the asylum seekers in Germany are not skilled workers, or are not trained to German labor standards, and they come from a very different culture. But nearly everyone else I spoke with pointed out that the rapidly declining German population has created an urgent need for skilled labor. The influx of migrants could be a gift, especially in underpopulated areas like Brandenburg and parts of eastern Germany, where workers are scarce and businesses are desperate.Daimler may not be hurting for job applicants, but many companies in places that are less affluent than Stuttgart do need workers. A newly trained work force, welcomed and integrated into German schools, neighborhoods and social clubs, might bring prosperity.Companies can help provide training. Cities still have to find housing that suits extended families so they can mix with the existing population, and avoid creating ghettos. MICHAEL KIMMELMANQ. What are the reasons for Angela Merkel’s decision to welcome refugees? How much is humanitarian, how much a need for younger people (taxpayers), how much a desire for labor — cheap and otherwise? How much is prestige, how much World War II guilt? — Isa Mara Lando, Rio de JaneiroA. You have correctly identified the various motives; all of them likely play a part in Ms. Merkel’s decisions. In addition, I would note aspects of her biography: Ms. Merkel is the daughter of a Lutheran minister and she grew up in communist East Germany.The tone of her remarks since Germany received thousands of asylum seekers trapped in Hungary in early September has reflected a particular German obligation to offer asylum to those in danger that was not offered to Jews and other victims of the Nazis. But Ms. Merkel’s words also reflect a concern and sympathy for her fellow humans that was surely part of her upbringing.  ALISON SMALEQ. Are all the refugees arriving in Europe illegally, dealing with smugglers using unsafe boats? Is there no legal, safe way for them to reach Europe? Do countries who feel an obligation to accept them also have an obligation to provide one? — David Barnert, Albany, N.Y.A. Nearly all asylum seekers arrive illegally, in the sense that they do not have official entry visas. But the United Nations refugee convention states that people who face a clear danger of persecution or threat to their lives have a right to seek protection in another country, even when they do not have prior approval to enter that country.All asylum seekers can, in theory, apply in their home country for visas at the embassy of the country that they want to enter, but this is a long and laborious process. It also tends to weed out people who do not have a legitimate case for asylum; migrants who are seeking better economic opportunities usually prefer to take their chances and pay smugglers to get them to Europe before applying.Some of these migrants might believe that once they are in a country, it will be very difficult for that country to get them to leave if they are not granted asylum. Lots of people are rejected, but few are deported. And the process can take years.Countries that are party to the United Nations convention are obliged to examine the asylum claim of anyone who shows up at their border asking for refuge, but they are not obliged to provide safe passage to that border. It is up to the refugee to get to wherever he or she wants to go. ANDREW HIGGINSAdvertisement