AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalNURISTAN PROVINCE, Afghanistan — When the king of Afghanistan decided it was finally time, a bit over a century ago, to bring this forbidding mountainous eastern region to Islam by force, his soldiers faced a huge problem: There were no roads at all.The Afghan military’s only way to get into the province — now known as Nuristan but back then called Kafiristan, the land of the infidels — was to hack a 12-foot track for pack animals and gun carriages into the most remote and rugged area of a country famed for them. The soldiers finally succeeded, looting and burning temples as they installed government-picked mullahs, but only after a dauntingly high casualty rate that has haunted government enterprises here ever since.This month, a rare chance for a journalist to visit this remote area showed that some things have not changed. The people of Nuristan, some of the most deprived in Afghanistan, are still at the mercy of their geography. The provincial capital, Parun, has a government presence, but it is disconnected from six of its seven districts, and one of them, Barg-e Matal, has remained under Taliban siege for years now.The difficult terrain has brought the province little development over the past 14 years, despite hundreds of billions of dollars in foreign aid flowing into the rest of the country. The closest thing to a decent health care facility the province has is a 50-bed hospital, now under construction.There are a few roads at least, but according to the governor, none are paved — despite the supposed expenditure of $106 million on American military road projects in the province from 2004 to 2007 alone.The conditions are so rugged that it recently became the talk of Kushteki, a hamlet just outside the provincial capital, when a regular Toyota Corolla successfully braved the treacherous road winding through pine-covered mountains and cutting through streams that are half-frozen this time of year. Usually, only vehicles with four-wheel drive even try, and locals often have to hitch rides with the police in their trucks if they want to get around.In Kushteki, the homes are uniformly simple, with walls of stone and columns of wood covered in soot. The one new fancy house, with a slanted metal roof and maroon interiors, stands out in contrast: It belongs to a highway police commander.Governance, which remains minimal, has repeatedly disappointed with corruption and waste.“There is no doubt Nuristan has been let down,” said the province’s governor, Hafiz Abdul Qayoum. “Barg-e Matal district has been under siege for 10 years now, and the quality of life there has dropped by probably 50 years. Almost all the districts are not even connected to the provincial capital, yet the people still stand with this government.”A former senator, Mr. Abdul Qayoum walked through ankle-deep mud when he arrived for his inauguration at Parun almost two years ago. The bar was pretty low: His predecessor had been fired on charges of stealing hundreds of tons of wheat meant for the poor. The governor before him, a chronic absentee, was sentenced to prison for corruption in police salaries.Nematullah Khan, 55, a resident of Kushteki, held Mr. Abdul Qayoum to a pretty modest yardstick.“Whether he is providing services or not, at least we haven’t seen his corruption, Mr. Khan said.Now home to about 200 families, Kushteki was the site of the biggest infidel temple before the king invaded the area. Little remains of that time here except for a small stone fortress atop a steep mountain that was a battleground for warring tribes.The old temples have long since been replaced by mosques, and the wooden idols that made it to Kabul were fated to be smashed to pieces by conquering Taliban fighters (many of them have been recently restored for display). Nuristan has become known for fervent Islamic belief, and that, along with its remote districts and closeness to the Pakistani border, has made it a favored place for militant groups to take shelter.Provincial officials warn that it has become an even bigger problem in the past year, with the local Taliban, along with a mix of Arab and Pakistani militants, resupplying and turning Waygal District, in southern Nuristan, into an area of concentration.Security officials in Kabul also claim that Pakistan, in trying to rid its soil of militant groups as a condition for China’s recent promise of $46 billion in investment, is creating bases in Nuristan and Kunar Provinces for militant groups like Lashkar-e-Taiba, largely directed at fighting India in Kashmir. Lashkar-e-Taiba has long had sympathizers in Nuristan; for years, the group’s flag flew over buildings in districts here and dozens of men from Parun fought on its behalf in Kashmir.Old tribal feuds are another reason the ground is fertile for militants, and often brings them foot soldiers. The rekindling of one such feud in the district of Kamdesh, now into its 16th year, has resulted in the deaths of roughly 400 people and the burning of an entire village, Mr. Abdul Qayoum said.Still, the people of Nuristan tend to pride themselves in their history of fierce independence. The stories have long been more about whom they resisted than whom they joined.When the Afghan king tried to negotiate the surrender of Kafiristan in 1895, the elders made him an offer: an annual tribute of “100 lbs. of clarified butter,” paid to the British Empire next door, if Afghan troops withdrew. The king’s envoy refused, instead trying to bribe the elders with handsome gifts, which many of the elders made a point of publicly destroying on their return home.The American military tried its hand at development in Nuristan by setting up in 2006 what it called a Provincial Reconstruction Team, or P.R.T. The logic behind the teams was that military units, carrying cash, would try to spread the reach of the Afghan government.For the first several months, though, as David Katz, the State Department’s representative with the team, recalled, they struggled with the most basic question: “Where the hell do you put this P.R.T.? You can’t put a P.R.T. in the provincial capital, Parun, where are there no roads to the districts.”Mr. Katz, who has retired, first arrived in Nuristan as a doctoral student in 1975. He traveled freely, as long as he was content to walk for days to his destination in the absence of cars or roads. Returning 30 years later, he said, he found no change in the basic infrastructure.The reconstruction team’s work, out of a base set up in Nurgaram, was difficult, with money doled out for projects in faraway districts almost impossible to monitor.“I think the Nuristan P.R.T. was probably the last one stood up, and one of the first to close,” Mr. Katz said.Nevertheless, a few months into their mission, the Americans tried the ambitious idea of creating a base near Parun because of its symbolic importance. When the locals resisted, thinking it would just be “a bullet magnet,” as Mr. Katz recalled, the Americans managed to persuade the governor — who owned pizzerias in Sacramento — to give them permission to build.One day, as an American team was inspecting the site, according to Hajji Shergul, a local elder and former governor, a group of six or seven older men arrived. They put their shawls on the ground and prayed first. Then, rolling up their sleeves, they started advancing at the Americans with hatchets and clubs.“What is going on?” the Americans asked, according to Mr. Shergul.“We told you not to build a base here. Now that you are grabbing our land, we have to fight you.”The Americans backed off.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement