AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas ErdbrinkTEHRAN — Iran’s highest leader repeated warnings on Wednesday against further negotiations with the United States after the nuclear agreement the countries reached in July. Such talks are “forbidden,” the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, told an audience of Revolutionary Guards commanders.Iran’s leader, widely seen as both the architect and arbitrator of the agreement, also offered veiled criticism of Iran’s nuclear negotiating team, saying that its members had been alert, but that the opposite parties “had found chances” and made “damaging moves against Iran’s national interests” in the talks. He did not elaborate.Ever since the deal was concluded, Ayatollah Khamenei has given speeches against additional cooperation with the United States, arguing that the country is aiming to infiltrate Iran through negotiations.“An important part of the activities of the enemy is to change the calculations of officials and to manipulate people’s revolutionary and religious thoughts,” he said Wednesday. “Young people are the main target, and they must be alert.”Ayatollah Khamenei has been striking a distinctively different chord from President Hassan Rouhani, who last week at the United Nations General Assembly said that Iran wanted to change the atmosphere and that “we cannot live in the past forever.” Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif became the first Iranian statesman since 1979 to shake hands with an American president when he met President Obama on the sidelines of the assembly. (Mr. Zarif told The New York Times that the handshake had been “an accident.”)In his remarks on Wednesday, Ayatollah Khamenei blamed “careless or some simple-minded people who do not understand the facts” for Iran’s “problems.” He said that such people, presumably those advocating relations with the United States, were a small minority. Last month, he called upon the much-feared intelligence branch of the Revolutionary Guards to be vigilant, especially about those promoting cultural change. Under Mr. Rouhani, restrictions on concerts, nongovernmental organizations and fashion shows have been relaxed.Advertisement