AdvertisementSupported byBy Marlise SimonsTHE HAGUE — Stephen J. Rapp, a veteran American lawyer and a familiar figure in international courts, was doing what he most favors — talking about war crimes. Not just citing conflicts that demand the world’s attention, but also discussing how to pursue top offenders.For example, now that Islamic State militants are reaching far beyond the territory they control, he was asked on a visit to The Hague, do they become more liable under international law?“We need strategies for investigating and prosecuting them, going after their leaders in Europe, Syria, Iraq or wherever they strike,” Mr. Rapp replied. “It means working with prosecutors in Iraq, Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon to build cases so that they can make arrests in their countries.”Mr. Rapp, 66, a tall, imposing former United States attorney for the Northern District of Iowa, would know. He was himself an international prosecutor in earlier conflicts and is more than familiar with the many obstacles to bringing war criminals to justice.Having left his post this year as the United States ambassador at large for war crimes issues, Mr. Rapp now feels freer to discuss what works and what he thinks needs fixing in the growing field of international criminal justice and where to focus next.At this stage, with the conflict raging in Syria and tenuous peace talks underway, he conceded, it is early for court cases against leaders of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, as well as the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria or rebel groups who have all committed crimes against civilians. But it will be “unthinkable,” he said, to do without a future process of justice for any agreement to have the support of the Syrian people.The Islamic State has lost 14 percent of the territory it held in January, according to a new analysis.He is now an adviser to several groups, financed by Western governments, that have recovered documents and other evidence from the war zones in Iraq and Syria, preserving them for the day they could be used in court. Vital evidence that could be saved is often destroyed or lost in war, he said. To that end, he is working with both the United States Holocaust Museum and The Hague Institute for Global Justice to develop clear guidelines for fact-finding in conflict zones.In an interview, Mr. Rapp warned the countries that signed up to the International Criminal Court that the much-proclaimed fight against impunity will fail unless governments throw greater weight behind efforts to strengthen international justice.“The world and all its agencies actually do very little to help this court, or other means to prosecute the many large-scale atrocities,” he said. “It’s one of my frustrations. There’s wide support for prosecuting acts of terrorism, for big drug cases and increasingly to investigate large-scale corruption, but when it comes to asking for money to examine mass graves or to protect witnesses or to set up local courts, there’s often little response.”Putting it plainly, he continued, “There isn’t a global system of justice, just some cases in The Hague and a few other places.”For eight years, Mr. Rapp was a prosecutor at United Nations-backed courts, first dealing with perpetrators of the 1994 Rwandan genocide and later securing convictions of leaders of the 1990s war in Sierra Leone that brutalized uncounted child soldiers.Then, from 2009, as the United States ambassador at large for war crimes issues, he traveled the globe almost nonstop, prodding, flattering and admonishing government officials in war-torn countries to gather evidence of atrocities, to protect witnesses and to goad warlords to stop the violence.It is barely two decades since the first modern war crimes court, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, began hearing its cases. Other temporary tribunals and courts have followed. Amid a wave of euphoria among its backers, the first permanent institution, the International Criminal Court, opened in The Hague in 2002.But the high expectations raised by this permanent court have waned, with critics and supporters agreeing that it has handled its first few cases poorly, has focused almost exclusively on Africa and, until recently, has been short of investigators and long on cumbersome rules dragging out proceedings.The United States is not among the court’s 123 members, nor are China and Russia. But Washington, after first campaigning to undermine it, has decided it is in its best interest to engage with the court. This was part of the mandate of Mr. Rapp, himself a fervent supporter.“We need to work with the court and make it a successful institution,” he said. “There are things we can do to be helpful, short of joining.” Under United States law, no American money can be paid directly to the court, but assistance in kind is allowed.The United States already helped to bring two fugitives into court custody and has provided other help, such as offering public rewards for arresting fugitives, and, more discreetly, protecting crucial witnesses, sharing DNA data and giving forensic assistance. “We can use our rewards system to get arrests of ISIS militants, the right people who ordered or enabled crimes,” Mr. Rapp said.His six years on the road as ambassador at large, showing American support at human rights trials as far-flung as Cambodia, the Congo Basin, Guatemala and Senegal, have reinforced one of his main beliefs: “In order to have a global justice system to deal with atrocities, you need to strengthen the local judiciaries,” he said, “and where they are broken you can use a local court and mix in international judges and lawyers.”The permanent court in The Hague can only ever handle a limited number of cases and is restricted to places where it has jurisdiction. It is intended to be a court of last resort. Trying Islamic State suspects or Syrian officials would be a case in point: They could be tried in a number of countries if apprehended, but courts in the region would require the necessary skills.Beyond the present military and diplomatic campaign, Mr. Rapp said, justice should play a role in discrediting and crushing the Islamic State. It should expose the crimes of its leaders before their own people and the Muslim world. To make it effective, he said, “We need the police and the military to support the justice system, rather than focusing only on dropping bombs.” Bombs alone, he added, will produce more recruits.More than a dozen countries have had attacks since the Islamic State, or ISIS, began to pursue a global strategy in the summer of 2014.But that, he insists, will take training — preparing judges, lawyers, investigators. “War crimes and crimes against humanity, involving organized murder, are not like other organized crime cases, they are very difficult to do,” he said.The United States and other governments should give a firm place in their foreign aid budgets to legal training and judicial reform, Mr. Rapp said. “There is a lot of lip service,” he said, but programs for capacity building and training are sporadic. The European Union human rights budget is the world’s largest, but support for judicial reform has mostly been directed at the countries of Eastern Europe joining the bloc.Mr. Rapp started his tenure as ambassador saying he wanted to restore the place of the United States in the forefront of international justice.In The Hague, where he is widely respected, judges and diplomats have nonetheless noted in private that the existence of the Guantánamo Bay detention camp and the secret renditions of suspected terrorists still adversely affect the American justice record.Mr. Rapp himself laments that “not being a member of the I.C.C. affects our ability to speak out.” Even so, he said, there are easy and overdue steps the United States can take by defining and incorporating more international crimes into American law, for example, the crime of “command responsibility” and “crimes against humanity.”“We have applied these crimes to others in the tribunals,” he said, “so we need to have these laws ourselves. There is no reason not to.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement