By REUTERSDEC. 26, 2015
MELBOURNE, Australia —  Bushfires burned down more than 100 homes in a popular tourist area on Friday, and on Saturday officials predicted more blazes to come.While about 500 firefighters and 13 firefighting aircraft battled the flames along parts of Victoria State’s Great Ocean Road, teams moved in to assess the damage.A spokesman for the state’s emergency services said 98 homes had been destroyed in the community of Wye River and 18 in nearby Separation Creek. The two townships are about 75 miles southwest of Melbourne.Top emergency officials warned that dry summer conditions increased the risk for more fires along the Great Ocean Road area and in the rest of Victoria.Advertisement“This fire doesn’t go away,” said Craig Lapsley, the state’s emergency services commissioner. “We will be back into hot, windy weather in January, without a doubt,” Mr. Lapsley said. “Everything’s available to burn.”AdvertisementThe Great Ocean Road is one of Australia’s biggest tourist draws with its spectacular scenery and unusual offshore rock formations. It remained mostly closed to traffic on Saturday during what is typically one of its busiest times of the year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although an evacuation alert was lifted for the popular tourist town of Lorne, and rain overnight helped the firefighting operation, officials said the situation remained potentially dangerous, with many hot spots. Televised images from the scene showed hillsides charred to the ground all the way down to the coast.The Victoria premier, Daniel Andrews, surveyed the area from the air and commended the emergency services, noting that there had so far been no deaths. But he warned that the number of homes destroyed could rise.Hundreds of people were moved out of affected towns on Friday, and many spent Christmas night in hurriedly organized shelters.The fires started with a lightning strike on Dec. 19 and, fanned by winds, have burned more than 4,900 acres. Walking paths in the nearby Great Otway National Park have been closed to the public because some of the fires are within the park itself.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Bushfires Are Scorching a Popular Australian Tourist Area.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.