By SOMINI SENGUPTA and ANNE BARNARDDEC. 26, 2015
The United Nations said Saturday that it intended to move ahead with peace talks between the Syrian government and rebel forces in late January, a signal to all parties that a tenuous political process aimed at ending the war would not be quashed by gains and losses on the battlefield.The announcement by Staffan de Mistura, the United Nations special envoy for Syria, set a “target date” to start talks on Jan. 25 in Geneva. It included a nudge not just to the Syrian rivals but to their patrons in capitals around the world, who for the first time in nearly five years have agreed on a road map to end the nearly five-year war.“Continuing developments on the ground should not be allowed to derail it,” the statement said.The announcement came a day after the death of the leader of a powerful rebel group that had been taking part in preliminary talks to choose the rebels’ representatives for any negotiations mediated by the United Nations.Both the government and the opposition confirmed that airstrikes on Friday killed the rebel leader, Zahran Alloush, a commander of the so-called Army of Islam, which is opposed to both the forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad and the Islamic State. It was unclear whether those airstrikes were carried out by Russia, which says it is targeting terrorist groups inside the country, or by Syrian warplanes.AdvertisementIn any case, the airstrikes appeared to have been intended as a message to the rebels and their backers in the Arab world that Mr. Assad and his supporters were trying to weaken any potential bloc of armed opposition groups.AdvertisementMr. Assad has long contended that there is no difference between the Islamic State and figures like Mr. Alloush, while his opponents note that Mr. Alloush had clashed for years with the militants of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and blocked them from establishing a major presence around the capital, Damascus. It is unclear whether the Army of Islam will continue to participate in the peace process and how its backers in the region will react.The killing of Mr. Alloush led to the suspension of an ambitious truce that was being negotiated for one of the southern suburbs of Damascus. That may be a bad sign for the plan backed by the United Nations; its most ambitious element is a nationwide truce.That cease-fire was to have removed some fighters from areas around Damascus, including the Palestinian refugee camp Yarmouk, south of Damascus, which has long been besieged by government forces and controlled by rival armed factions. Fighters willing to abide by the cease-fire would be allowed to remain in the areas around the capital. The deal appeared to be modeled on one struck this month in Waer, a district of the central city of Homs.But the southern Damascus deal was more sweeping and ambitious. It was to have eventually covered nearby areas that included Hajjar al-Aswad, Yalda, Babila and Tadamon. Several hundred Islamic State fighters and their families would have been evacuated on buses, bound for the northeast province of Raqqa, where the group has its headquarters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Among the other insurgent groups, those less extremist and more Syrian in composition, loosely calling themselves the Free Syrian Army, would have stayed in place. The wild card was the Nusra Front, Al Qaeda’s branch in Syria, which objected to the deal.According to people familiar with the talks, the Syrian government had authorized Palestinian groups to facilitate the talks and the truce.Mr. de Mistura’s statement on Saturday, calling for “full cooperation of all the relevant Syrian parties in this process,” sought to prevent Mr. Alloush’s death from setting back the peace plan adopted at the United Nations this month.Led by Secretary of State John Kerry and his Russian counterpart, Sergey V. Lavrov, the talks brought regional rivals, including Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, around the table three times in the past few months to agree to a plan for ending the conflict.AdvertisementThe negotiators initially envisioned direct talks between the Syrian rivals in early January, along with a cease-fire that would exclude the two terrorist organizations that the Russia and the United States agree on isolating: the Islamic State and the Nusra Front.At the moment, though, there is no cease-fire, and the United States accuses Russia of attacking a far broader range of rebel groups that are opposed to Mr. Assad.Many questions remain unanswered about the January talks. The government has not said who will lead its delegation, and the opposition list could change; a preliminary opposition bloc emerged out of a meeting in early December in Saudi Arabia.“This is an exercise forced upon them, which is very good,” one United Nations diplomat said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the delicacy of the negotiations. “But we still need to test how far they will want to go.”Somini Sengupta reported from New York, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Damascus, Syria.A version of this article appears in print on December 27, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Syrian Peace Talks Set, but Obstacles Remain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.