AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — A year of surprising election outcomes in Spain ended on Sunday with a bizarre result: A far-left Catalan party split evenly over whether to keep Artur Mas as the leader of both Catalonia and its secessionist movement.In a secret ballot of registered activists of the Popular Unity Candidacy party — known by its Catalan acronym, CUP — 1,515 votes were cast for and 1,515 against a proposal to allow Mr. Mas to serve another term as the head of a coalition of separatist parties.The activists voted after Mr. Mas lost a crucial parliamentary vote last month that underscored divisions within the separatist movement, which has been feuding with the central government in Madrid over whether Catalonia should be allowed to secede from the rest of Spain.That friction worsened after Mr. Mas’s party, Convergence, became embroiled in a corruption scandal. Although Mr. Mas has not been accused of wrongdoing, CUP leaders have called for his ouster.As the secessionist drive gained momentum over the past three years, it has divided Catalan society. In regional elections in September, separatist parties won the most parliamentary seats, but fell short of a majority.After last month’s parliamentary rebuff, Mr. Mas tried to cut a deal with the CUP leadership, offering to raise spending on social services, as well as to allow regional lawmakers to hold a vote of confidence on his leadership in the second half of 2016.After the split vote on Sunday, the party’s political committee announced it would meet on Saturday to determine how to break the deadlock. The CUP leaders urged Mr. Mas and the other separatist parties to use the coming days to improve their offer — or come up with another leader. Party officials would not say exactly how the offer might be made more desirable.If no deal is reached by Jan. 9, new Catalan elections will have to be called, at a critical moment in the territorial conflict and amid great turmoil in Spanish politics.A new Spanish Parliament is to convene on Jan. 13, after inconclusive elections on Dec. 20 in which the conservative party of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy got the most votes but lost its parliamentary majority.Mr. Rajoy is hoping to stay in office, leading either a minority government or a coalition. On Monday, he is to hold talks with the leaders of Podemos and Citizens, the two emerging parties that won enough seats to bring about a parliamentary deadlock that could force new national elections in the spring.The leader of Spain’s main opposition Socialist party, Pedro Sánchez, has already told Mr. Rajoy that he will vote to keep the conservatives out of a new government. Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement