By IBRAHIM SAWABDEC. 28, 2015
MAIDUGURI, Nigeria —  Dozens of people were killed and scores more wounded in bombings and other attacks in northern Nigeria on Monday and overnight Sunday, officials said.In the city of Maiduguri, 52 people died and 124 were injured in attacks, hospital officials said.While there was no immediate claim of responsibility, the state’s governor blamed the militant group Boko Haram, which has waged a six-year uprising that began in Maiduguri.The onslaught involved attackers with rocket-propelled grenades as well as shootouts around the city, The Associated Press reported, citing Muhammed Kanar, area coordinator of the National Emergency Management Agency. He reported the toll to be at least 30 dead and more than 90 wounded overnight in Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State.At dawn on Monday 20 more were killed and 91 injured outside a mosque, Mr. Kanar told reporters.Borno State’s governor, Kashim Shettima, blamed Boko Haram and urged residents to be vigilant.“Our head is bloody but remains unbowed,” he said at a news conference at the State Specialist Hospital after visiting the injured. “They will not deter us; we will continue to preach for peace, dialogue, tolerance and understanding. But these lunatics, by the grace of God, their days are numbered. They can inflict pains on us certainly, but our spirit remains high.”Maiduguri, a city of about one million people, has endured many deadly assaults from Boko Haram over the course of its uprising.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Militants have attacked markets and schools and blasted their way into prisons. Last January, hundreds of Boko Haram militants, coming from two directions, tried but failed to invade Maiduguri.This week’s violence came days after President Muhammadu Buhari declared that Nigeria had “technically won the war” against the group, which he said was no longer capable of mounting “conventional attacks.”Also on Monday, two female suicide bombers blew themselves up at a market in Madagali, a town about 95 miles southeast of Maiduguri, killing many people, said Brig. Gen. Victor Ezugwu, an army commander northeast Adamawa State.Sadik Mohammed, who was injured during the mosque attack, said from the State Specialist Hospital that he had been praying at the mosque with his family when what appeared to be a female suicide bomber struck.“Three of my siblings and my father were killed and buried,” he said.Those wounded in the Maiduguri attacks were sent to three hospitals. A nurse at the State Specialist Hospital told The Associated Press that it was so overwhelmed with patients that some had to be cared for in the maternity ward.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Boko Haram Is Blamed for Series of Deadly Attacks in Nigeria’s North.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.