By STEVEN ERLANGER and STANLEY REEDDEC. 28, 2015
LONDON —  Prime Minister David Cameron walked the flooded streets of York on Monday as Britain’s Environment Agency warned that the country needed “a complete rethink” of its flood defenses.Thousands of people in the north of England spent another day dealing with what they called unprecedented flooding, with roads in York and in nearby Leeds still underwater and some electricity cut off. David Rooke, the deputy chief executive of the Environment Agency, said that “we are moving from known extremes to unknown extremes.”Some scientists speculated that the effects of climate change could be evident in a year of record flooding. “We are having more severe floods in the U.K. than 10 years ago,” said Reza Ahmadian, a lecturer on water management at Cardiff University. “This is not something just happening in the U.K. — and we will see more and more of this.”He added, “We need to be more creative about flood defenses.”Mr. Ahmadian suggested that building temporary reservoirs for flood relief in less populated areas could be more effective than building ever-higher and more expensive flood walls, which “just create further problems downstream.”AdvertisementMr. Cameron defended the government’s record on flood defenses, saying that it had committed to spending 2.3 billion pounds, about $3.4 billion, over the next six years and that he would consider doing more.“Let’s have a look and see whether more needs to be done and whether the flood defenses need to be made even higher than they are already,” he told Sky News. Over the weekend, he had deployed several hundred soldiers to help with flood defenses.AdvertisementOfficials in Leeds, about 25 miles southwest of York, criticized Mr. Cameron for not coming there and said his government blocked a more expensive flood-prevention plan in 2011. Judith Blake, the Labour Party leader of Leeds City Council, said the government had favored the south of England over the north, echoing the Yorkshire Evening Post, which wrote on its front page on Monday, “A northern powerhouse is nothing when it is under several feet of mucky water.”Mr. Cameron rejected the claims of southern bias. “We spend more per head of the population on flood defenses in the north than we do in the south,” he said. “The key thing is to spend the money where it is needed.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There was a lull in the heavy rain on Monday, and the Environment Agency said river levels were stabilizing or starting to fall. But nine severe flood warnings remained in place, and more rain was expected Wednesday.Estimates of the cost of this recent flooding reached up to several billion pounds. Extreme weather events are becoming more common, and more expensive, representatives of the British insurance industry said.“Flood events have become more likely than 20 to 30 years ago,” said Malcolm Tarling, a spokesman for the Association of British Insurers, an industry group. “What was once classified as extreme is now being classified as normal.”The group estimated that flooding in Cumbria in northwest England this month would cost insurers about £520 million. More recent flooding had the potential to cost more because flooded areas like the center of York and parts of Leeds include more businesses, Mr. Tarling said, and the average business insurance claim is higher than the average household claim.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of a picture caption with this article misstated the day the picture of rising floodwaters outside a bar in York was taken. It was Monday, not Tuesday.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Cameron Visits Flood Zone in North England .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.