By CHRIS BUCKLEYDEC. 28, 2015
BEIJING — Twelve people have been detained over a debris dumpsite collapse in southern China that left dozens missing, the police there said on Monday. They also said that a former district official whose office approved and oversaw the huge site had committed suicide by jumping from a building.The dozen people placed under “mandatory measures” — a broad term for confinement — included at least one senior manager of the Yixianglong Investment Company, which operated the dumpsite at Hong’ao Village on the industrial outskirts of the city of Shenzhen, according to a brief announcement that the city police issued through a microblog service.The detentions followed a pattern in Chinese disasters, in which the government often responds by pinning criminal charges on company managers and officials found culpable.The Shenzhen police will “fully cooperate” with the central government’s investigation of the accident and will “investigate and punish criminals suspected of breaking the law,” the statement said.AdvertisementOn Friday, central government investigators said that they had determined that the disaster was a man-made accident, not a freak of nature, and the Communist Party secretary of Shenzhen vowed that any officials found culpable would be punished.AdvertisementThe Guangming New District government in Shenzhen originally contracted out operation of the dumpsite to Luwei Property Management, but that company promptly subcontracted the task to the Yixianglong Investment Company.Residents nearby complained that the site was taking in huge amounts of dirt and other building waste, day and night, causing dust and noise pollution. Few realized that it was also a potential disaster, but engineers who examined it warned of dangerous erosion and poor monitoring.The husband of Long Huamei, the executive director of Yixianglong, said on Monday that she was missing. The husband, Long Aihua, a hydrologic engineer in Beijing, said by telephone that he had been unable to contact her. He denied knowing anything about her investments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The former district official whose office approved and oversaw the Hong’ao Village dumpsite jumped to his death on Sunday, news reports on Monday cited the police in Shenzhen as also saying.The police said that the man was formerly the head of the urban management bureau in the Guangming New District, where the dumpsite for construction waste collapsed on Dec. 19, Xinhua, the official news agency, reported. The police concluded that his death was a suicide, Xinhua said.The police identified the former official by only his surname, Xu, and did not suggest his death was related to the disaster. By Sunday, officials said, 75 people were still missing around the dumpsite, and seven were confirmed dead, although their identities had not been publicly disclosed.Several news reports, however, identified the former official as Xu Yuan’an. The urban management bureau that he once ran was the main agency that oversaw the dumpsite, which experts had warned was hazardous and poorly regulated.The reports about Mr. Xu’s death left unclear what role he might have played in approving or overseeing the dumpsite, which had been operating for about two years before the disaster.Mr. Xu, who reports said was in his early 50s, was appointed head of the district urban management bureau in 2009 and was still in charge in 2013 when the bureau issued a public tender notice for operating the dumpsite at Hong’ao Village, the business and current affairs magazine Caixin said on its website. That and other reports did not say whether Mr. Xu was under criminal or Communist Party investigation.Adam Wu contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; China: 12 Are Detained in Collapse, and Ex-Official Commits Suicide.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.