By MILAN SCHREUERDEC. 29, 2015
PARIS —  The Belgian authorities have arrested two people in connection with a plot to attack Brussels around New Year’s Eve, prosecutors said on Tuesday.In a series of raids on Sunday and Monday around Brussels, the surrounding Dutch-speaking region of Brabant and the city of Liège, the authorities found Islamic State propaganda and military-style hardware and computer equipment in the homes of the two suspects.Investigators say they believe that the two suspects being held “were possibly planning” and “had the intention to carry out” terrorist attacks on Brussels’s city center “in the same style” as the coordinated series of attacks in Paris on Nov. 13, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor’s office said.No arms or explosives were discovered, prosecutors said. The authorities did not identify the suspects, and they have not established any links to the Paris attacks. Four other people were held for questioning before being released.AdvertisementThe authorities said they had found evidence of “serious threats” to multiple locations in Brussels, including the police headquarters for the city center and the nearby central square known as the Grand Place or Grote Markt. It is the city’s biggest tourist attraction, and it is packed with crowds around Christmas.AdvertisementOne suspect, who is believed to be the lead plotter, is expected to be charged with leading a terrorist organization and recruiting others for terrorist purposes. The other suspect is likely to be charged as a participant in a terrorist organization.Brussels’s alert level was raised to the highest one possible for several days after the November attacks in Paris, which killed 130 people and were carried out mainly by attackers who had connections to Belgium.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The national crisis center, which sets the alert level based on its analysis of potential threats, said Tuesday that the authorities believed that police officers and soldiers in Brussels might be “specifically targeted” for attack.In response, the police have adopted new security measures. Officers now patrol in groups of two or more, with at least one member armed, around the headquarters. Members of the police force will be allowed to wear bulletproof vests while traveling to and from work.The city has since returned to relative normalcy and plans to proceed with fireworks on New Year’s Eve. But the festivities, which could draw as many as 50,000 visitors, will be closely guarded by police officers and soldiers, a spokesman for the mayor said. Visitors will not be allowed to bring fireworks, bottles or pets.Nine men have been charged in Belgium in connection with the Paris attacks, and a global manhunt continues for Salah Abdeslam, a Belgian-born Frenchman who is believed to be the only survivor among those who directly participated in the attacks.One week after the attacks in Paris, the Belgian authorities expressed concern that the threat of a similar terrorist attack in Brussels was “serious and imminent.”The police raided several homes throughout the country and arrested 16 people, 15 of whom were released the next day without being charged. Although no arms or explosives were found during those raids, the authorities said they had averted a major terrorist attack.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 30, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Dec. 31 Plot Brings Raids and Arrests in Belgium.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.