AdvertisementSupported byBy William Neuman and Patricia TorresCARACAS, Venezuela — The Supreme Court on Wednesday blocked four newly elected lawmakers from taking office, three from the opposition and one from the governing Socialist party.The move, in response to a challenge from a Socialist candidate, came days before the Jan. 5 swearing in of the new National Assembly and stoked fears in the opposition that the government of President Nicolás Maduro was seeking to chip away at the two-thirds majority that would enable it to remove cabinet ministers and take other extraordinary steps to challenge his policies.The opposition won a landslide victory in legislative elections on Dec. 6, wresting control of the National Assembly from the Chavismo movement for the first time since a new Constitution was approved in 1999.“We will defend the majority,” Freddy Guevara, who leads an opposition party, wrote in a post on Twitter. He called for a demonstration on Jan. 5 to support the incoming legislators, adding, “The best response we can give this moribund regime is to show in the streets how many of us there are.”Earlier on Wednesday, opposition leaders warned that the government was seeking to use the court to cut into its majority in the legislature. Jesús Torrealba, the head of the opposition’s Democratic Unity coalition, made public a letter to the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, appealing for his support and warning that Mr. Maduro’s government was seeking to stage a “judicial coup against the decision of the Venezuelan people expressed at the voting booth.” He also wrote to other world leaders.The court action on Wednesday granted an injunction that would bar the four lawmakers from being sworn in while a court challenge to their election proceeds. All four lawmakers were from the sparsely populated Amazonas State. The case was brought by a Socialist candidate who is also a former cabinet minister.Challenges to at least four other opposition victories were also filed this week with the court. In those cases, the court did not issue injunctions but ruled that the legal challenges to the victories could go forward.Information available on the court’s website did not explain the legal arguments behind the election challenges.The opposition won 112 seats in the 167-member assembly, giving it exactly a two-thirds majority. The United Socialist Party won 55 seats.On election night, Mr. Maduro acknowledged the opposition victory. Yet he has since accused the opposition of “playing dirty” in the election. Some government officials have accused the opposition of buying votes, especially in Amazonas, yet during the campaign Mr. Maduro and other officials presided over numerous giveaways in which supporters received cars, apartments and other valuable items — all typical of the country’s electioneering.In the past, Mr. Maduro and other government officials have scoffed at opposition claims of voting irregularities, frequently boasting that the country’s electronic voting system is fraud-proof. The departing Assembly this month approved 13 new judges to the Supreme Court in what critics said was an effort to extend government influence over the court and keep it packed with government supporters. Human rights groups have accused the court of being a rubber stamp for the government. The legislative election hinged on discontent over a failing economy and rising crime.Advertisement