AdvertisementSupported bySinosphereBy Chris BuckleyBEIJING — For many in China’s capital, the smog that has obscured buildings and dimmed the sun into a pale disk this winter is a fitting metaphor for the uncertainty that has marked their year.In interviews and private conversations, people here say that 2015 was a year of biding time until China’s outlook, political and economic, becomes clearer.“The whole nation is in a state of waiting,” Ouyang Jin, a businessman and magazine publisher from southern China, said in an interview during a visit to Beijing.“Nobody knows what direction the future will take,” Mr. Ouyang said. “It’s a complicated time, with complicated feelings — anxiety, hope, fear. So the only thing we can do is wait.”Investors, worried by a slowing economy and volatile stock market, waited to see whether growth would pick up. Bureaucrats waited to see how long President Xi Jinping’s unrelenting campaign against corruption would overshadow their work. Academics and writers waited to see whether the Communist Party’s icy grip on intellectual life would loosen. Rights lawyers and political dissidents waited to find out whether they might become the next ones selected for detention or arrest.Residents in Beijing and other northern cities waited for the smog to come and go.It would be “tempting to say — though it seems inapt given how bad the air has been in Beijing lately — that a lot of people were waiting to exhale,” said Jeffrey Wasserstrom, a history professor and China specialist at the University of California, Irvine.The uncertainties for China surpass the usual unknowns for a country so big and complicated.Mr. Xi has set out a bold yet paradoxical agenda that involves restoring Communist and Confucian tradition and more centralized control to propel China into the future. For China to achieve drastic changes, it must also restore its past, Mr. Xi appears to believe. But three years into what is likely to be a decade in power for Mr. Xi, that agenda has left many citizens unsettled about where Mr. Xi is taking them.For China, it was “a year of mixed signals or, perhaps, sharpening contradictions,” Professor Wasserstrom said. Mr. Xi seemed to waver between turning inward and reaching outward, he said.“On the one hand, we saw Xi Jinping doubling down on presenting China as capable of being able to go its own way, invoking the Chinese classics — of both the pre-Communist and Communist varieties,” he said. “But on the other, he traveled abroad further and more often than any Chinese leader in decades.”The insecurity has seeped into the Chinese bureaucracy and into the economy, said several businesspeople and officials, who asked not to identified. Even officials who are free of corruption have become more reluctant to make major decisions, for fear of accusations of favoritism, they said. And the disappearance of “gray income” because of the crackdown on graft has sapped the morale of grass-roots administrators.“Officials don’t know when the anticorruption campaign, the study sessions, all that, will end, and until then you don’t know who might be next to fall,” said Zhang Ming, a historian at Renmin University in Beijing who often writes about current events.“On high and below, there’s no clear sense of direction,” he said. “Previously, in the 1980s and 1990s, it was much simpler — reform, build a market economy. But now, the policies are harder to read, for officials and for ordinary people.”Communist Party leaders have scoffed at the idea that their own policies, including the scorching drive against corruption and political liberalism, have sapped official morale and contributed to uncertainty about the economy. Reaping the fruits of an economic restructuring will take time and patience, they argue.But Sun Liping, a prominent sociologist at Tsinghua University in Beijing, warned in a recent lecture that the uncertainties about China’s future threatened to slip into a dangerous malaise.The mood at the end of 2015, he said, could be summed up in one word: “Bewilderment.”“This time feels a bit like driving in the desert, the Gobi,” Professor Sun said.“The road ahead is very clear, but as you go along, the road disappears, and ahead lie sand dunes,” he said. “What road can finally lead us out? Perhaps now we don’t know.”Follow Chris Buckley on Twitter @ChuBailiang.Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement