By IVAN NECHEPURENKODEC. 30, 2015
MOSCOW —  Lawmakers in the former Soviet republic of Georgia voted late Tuesday to approve former Foreign Minister Giorgi Kvirikashvili as the country’s new prime minister amid increasing public dissatisfaction with the government.Mr. Kvirikashvili replaced Irakli Garibashvili, also a member of the governing Georgian Dream party, who resigned in a surprise move last week after two years in office.Only 18 percent of Georgians said in a National Democratic Institute poll released this month that the governing party was their first choice, down from 42 percent in August 2014. Only 19 percent of respondents said that Georgia was moving in the right direction; 44 percent said it was moving in the wrong direction.After his confirmation, Mr. Kvirikashvili, 48, said that no drastic change of policy was planned and that Georgia’s pursuit of membership in the European Union and NATO remained the top priority for the government.AdvertisementLocated in a strategic spot in the Caucasus region, Georgia has been challenged by Russia’s reluctance to let it leave its orbit. The two countries fought a brief war in 2008 over two Georgian breakaway regions, South Ossetia and Abkhazia.AdvertisementAfter the war, Russia recognized the two regions as independent states, in a move widely condemned by Western governments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Speaking to Parliament on Tuesday, Mr. Kvirikashvili said he would pursue a “pragmatic” approach to Russia. That approach “aims first and foremost to lessen risks, to prevent threats to our main foreign policy course,” he said.Georgia adopted a more conciliatory stance toward Russia in 2012, when the Georgian Dream party defeated the party led by Mikheil Saakashvili, then the president. A staunch opponent of the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, Mr. Saakashvili was stripped of his citizenship this month after obtaining a Ukrainian passport. He is currently the governor of Ukraine’s Odessa region, on the Black Sea.Bidzina Ivanishvili, a billionaire Georgian businessman who made his fortune in Russia, founded the Georgian Dream party in 2011. Before joining the government in 2012, Mr. Kvirikashvili was the chief executive of Mr. Ivanishvili’s Cartu Bank. He holds a master’s degree in finance from the University of Illinois.Mr. Kvirikashvili’s former deputy, Mikheil Janelidze, replaced him as foreign minister.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Lawmakers in Georgia Vote to Approve New Prime Minister.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.