By ANDREW E. KRAMERDEC. 30, 2015
After a Russian fighter jet was shot down on Nov. 24, relations between Turkey and Russia became heated. A look at how things deteriorated between the two countries.MOSCOW —  Russia broadened its sanctions against Turkey on Wednesday to bar new Turkish construction and curb tourism activities in Russia, an expansion of measures put in place last month after Turkey shot down a Russian warplane under disputed circumstances.Turkish construction companies working on skyscrapers, soccer stadiums and other projects in Russia can continue, but Turkish businesses will be prohibited from signing new contracts after Jan. 1.The exemption for all current contracts seemed to reflect that the Russians will go only so far in limiting Turkey’s activities here for fear of being left with no roofs over their heads.Turkish companies are participating in all aspects of Russia’s infrastructure development, including the construction of stadiums for the 2018 World Cup soccer championship. In fact, it was a Turkish firm that in the 1990s refurbished the very government building where the Russian cabinet met this week to adopt the new sanctions.The new restrictions prohibit firms owned or based in Turkey from “activities in architecture, engineering, technical testing” of buildings. The expanded sanctions also prohibit Turkish citizens or companies from operating tourism agencies in Russia. Turkey is a popular destination for Russian tourists.AdvertisementThe ban is the latest in Russia’s escalating trade disputes with countries it is at odds with on foreign policy, which include members of the European Union and former Soviet states like Georgia and Ukraine.AdvertisementAfter Turkey shot down a Russian jet in November, asserting it had crossed into Turkish airspace from Syria, President Vladimir V. Putin canceled energy projects, banned fruit and vegetable imports and hinted at more retribution to come.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We shall remind them many a time what they have done and they will more than once feel regret for what they have done,” Mr. Putin said this month in an address to Parliament.On Dec. 9, Russia’s state nuclear company, Rosatom, suspended work on a $20 billion nuclear power plant in Akkuyu, Turkey.Russia is the largest market for Turkish exports after Germany, with about $6 billion worth of goods in 2014, or 4 percent of all exports. And it was the biggest source of Turkish imports in 2014, with $25 billion or 10 percent of total goods, according to an analysis by Renaissance Capital.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Kremlin Widens Sanctions Imposed on Turkish Firms.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.