By MARGAUX BENNDEC. 30, 2015
Voters in the Central African Republic began casting ballots on Wednesday in long-delayed elections after three years of sectarian violence.BANGUI, Central African Republic —  Citizens of the Central African Republic began casting ballots on Wednesday in long-delayed elections that represent the best hope of reuniting the country, one of the world’s poorest, after three years of sectarian violence that has displaced hundreds of thousands of people.Turnout was heavy among the 1.8 million registered voters, nearly 40 percent of the population. Stores were largely closed so that workers could cast their ballots, a process that took hours.Many lined up outside schools and other polling places well before they opened at 6 a.m., as United Nations peacekeepers from Burundi, Egypt, France, Mauritania, Pakistan and other countries, along with 40 election monitors from the African Union, kept watch. As polls prepared to close at 4 p.m., people were still waiting to vote, including older men with walking sticks and women carrying babies on their backs.Thirty candidates are running for president in the first round of voting, and elections are also being held for Parliament. Because of technical and organizational problems, the vote had been delayed numerous times.AdvertisementIn a referendum on Dec. 13 and 14, which had also been delayed, voters overwhelmingly approved a new Constitution, clearing the way for the elections and raising hopes for lasting peace.AdvertisementLast month, Pope Francis visited the capital, Bangui, expressing hope that the elections would “enable the country to embark serenely on a new chapter of its history.” He shocked residents by touring PK5, a volatile, largely Muslim neighborhood that is normally surrounded by armed Christian militias.In recent days, the archbishop of Bangui, Dieudonné Nzapalainga, and a Muslim leader, Omar Kobine Layama, have also appealed for peaceful elections.The voting on Wednesday seemed largely free of violence, though logistical problems persisted. In the courtyard of a school in PK5, voters shouted angrily because bureaucratic delays had blocked the arrival of some election materials.Illiteracy is rampant in the country, and many of those overseeing the election received only a day or two of training. Voter registration cards were issued by the election authority, but many contained inaccurate information, according to several people.Bintou Abakar, who voted at the school in PK5, said that she, her husband and their three children had moved to the neighborhood after their house burned down two years ago. She said she hoped a new president would “reopen” the neighborhood so that her children could “live in a country where people are free to go wherever they want.”Amadou Warfai, a father of two, had come to the same polling place to vote in the constitutional referendum — only to run for his life when gunfire broke out. He said that he was not deterred from returning to exercise his right to vote, and that he hoped for leaders and institutions that would “put criminals in jail and let good people live freely.”Voters also turned out at a camp in Bangui for internally displaced persons, named after Pope John XXIII. “We are citizens too, and this is proof,” said Martin Bissidi, a young man who took a break from fixing a motorcycle he shares with some friends to proudly show his voter registration card and his ink-stained finger, a sign that he had voted.AdvertisementThere were scattered reports of voting irregularities.Marie-Madeleine N’kouet Hoornaert, the president of the National Election Authority, said in a statement on Wednesday that some poll workers were blocking access to election documents and materials in an attempt to disrupt the voting.She called on them to “immediately stop all attempts to undermine the aspirations of almost two million Central Africans who want to express themselves unequivocally and help their country to end its crisis, via the ballot box.”The balloting offers the country a chance for stability after years of turmoil. In December 2012, fighting among Muslim and Christian factions upended the country’s political situation. In March 2013, a mostly Muslim rebel alliance known as the Seleka overthrew President François Bozizé, a Christian, who had himself taken power in a civil war a decade earlier.One of the rebel leaders, Michel Djotodia, became president, the first Muslim to hold the position. But he failed to deliver on his promise of a peaceful transition to a unity government and resigned in January 2014.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By then, Christian militias known as the “anti-balaka” had begun a brutal backlash against Muslim civilians. Nearly one million people were displaced, and 2.7 million, nearly half the population, needed humanitarian support, a huge setback for what was already a poor country. More than 400,000 refugees — primarily in neighboring Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Chad — have yet to return.The violence prompted a military intervention by France, which ruled the country until 1960, and has sent troops there several times since.To this day, the country remains divided: Anti-balaka militias hold territories in the west of the country and small pockets in Bangui; the former Seleka rebels control the north and center of the country; and the Lord’s Resistance Army, a brutal rebel movement that also operates in the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan and Uganda, controls parts of the east.Voting was reported to be taking place peacefully in areas such as Bambari, where deadly sectarian violence erupted this summer, and even in parts of the north controlled by Noureddine Adam, a Muslim rebel leader who surprised the country recently by publicly supporting the elections, even though he had called for a breakaway republic in the north.Catherine Samba-Panza has served as interim president since January 2014 but is not a candidate.Three leading candidates — two former prime ministers, Anicet-Georges Dologuélé and Martin Ziguélé, and an independent candidate, Abdou Karim Méckassoua, who lives in PK5 — all cast their votes Wednesday morning.AdvertisementMr. Dologuélé’s party recently forged an alliance with that of Mr. Bozizé, the former president. He sought to return from exile and take part in the election, but was prohibited from doing so, ostensibly because he had agreed not to run when he stepped down. The United Nations Security Council imposed sanctions last year against Mr. Bozizé and two others for their role in the country’s disorder.“When you see how many people are lining up to vote, it’s evident that Central Africans want to vote,” Mr. Dologuélé said after casting his ballot. “Logistical glitches are normal. They just need to be corrected as we go along.”Mr. Ziguélé was less sanguine: “I have no choice but to be faithful to this electoral process, despite its flaws, despite the risks of fraud.”Officials from the French and United Nations peacekeeping forces said they would ensure that all ballots, even from remote villages, would be sent to Bangui to prevent a repeat of logistical problems that bedeviled the constitutional referendum this month.Election results are not expected until next week, and a second round of balloting is scheduled for Jan. 31. Whether the outcomes are accepted as legitimate will determine the country’s future.“The warlords will have to accept the results of the elections because the elections are democratic,” the country’s interim prime minister, Mahamat Kamoun, said in a recent interview in Paris, where he was attending the United Nations climate change conference.“Elections are one of the solutions to bring people back to peace,” Mr. Kamoun said, “but they can also be a new source of crisis if we do not manage to make them democratic, transparent and credible.”Sewell Chan contributed reporting from London, and Caroline Chauvet from Paris.A version of this article appears in print on December 31, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Elections in Central African Republic, Long Postponed, Are Peaceful.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.