AdvertisementSupported byBy Frances RoblesMIAMI — Two weeks after the release of an imprisoned spy whom President Obama called “one of the most important intelligence agents the United States has ever had in Cuba,” the man’s family is still asking: Where is he?Rolando Sarraff Trujillo, 51, is a former Cuban intelligence officer who was serving a 25-year prison sentence for espionage. Few people in or out of Cuba had heard of him until Dec. 17, when Mr. Obama announced that a man “whose sacrifice has been known to only a few” was safe on American shores after 19 years behind bars in Cuba. In exchange for Mr. Sarraff, the United States freed three Cuban agents jailed here since 1998, as the two countries moved toward normalizing diplomatic relations. The Cuban government also freed an American subcontractor held for five years for bringing communications equipment into the country. But Mr. Sarraff has yet to surface in public or to contact his parents, whom he had been calling daily from prison.Mr. Sarraff’s sister, Vilma, said her family grew alarmed on Dec. 16 when her brother failed to make his daily phone call from prison to his parents. They then learned he had been released from Cuba’s Villa Marista prison, but since then, no American or Cuban official has notified the family of his whereabouts, she said.“We still don’t know where he is,” Ms. Sarraff said.A senior American official said it was unclear why the former secret agent had not contacted his parents in Havana or his sisters in Spain because he was free to make phone calls. “He’s not being held captive,” the official said.Although the president did not publicly name Mr. Sarraff, a first lieutenant who was jailed in 1995, several current and former American officials confirmed his identity.In a statement, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said only that the C.I.A. asset freed in the prisoner exchange provided information that helped the government identify and convict several American and Cuban spies inside the United States.In previous cases, the United States has held foreign spies received in prisoner exchanges at military bases, where they were extensively debriefed before the authorities began the process of moving them back into society.“My debriefing took two years,” said Enrique García Díaz, a former Cuban intelligence official who defected from Cuba in 1989. Mr. García said he was interviewed at a military base, held at a safe house in Virginia and then in another house near C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va.He eventually had his own place to live as well as a car, and he could come and go as he pleased, but he continued to be debriefed by the agency. It was eight months before he was allowed contact with the news media, and even that was with the United States-funded Radio Martí, he said. Because the Cuban government had cut off his parents’ phone as soon as he defected, it was two years before he had contact with his family.“Sarraff’s debriefing should not take so long because he has been in prison so long that he probably does not have current information,” Mr. García said. “But someone has to explain how he got arrested — who ratted him out.”During the Cold War, the United States often gave new identities, money and security protection to Soviet spies because of concerns that undercover operatives working for the Soviet Union could seek retribution.“My impression is that he’s going to be out of circulation for quite some time,” said Domingo Amuchastegui, a former Cuban intelligence official who is now a political analyst in South Florida. “They have to learn all the things that were connected to his arrest, where he was arrested, how he was arrested, what failed, what are the questions that have been going on over these 20 years.”Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting from Washington, and Michael S. Schmidt from Kailua, Hawaii.Advertisement