AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBRASÍLIA — President Dilma Rousseff on Thursday was sworn in to her second term in office, during which she will have to confront an expanding kickback scandal at the state-run oil company, a moribund economy and less congressional support for her governing coalition.Ms. Rousseff’s surprisingly narrow victory in October and the weakening of her governing coalition among lawmakers will make it harder for her to tackle the challenges she faces, experts said. Some also said she would have to change her rigid management style and seek compromise.But in a 40-minute inaugural speech before the National Congress, Ms. Rousseff sharply defended her record, noted the great strides that Brazil had made in addressing social inequities with her government programs and said she was ready to fight graft and end impunity for the rich and powerful.“The Brazilian people want even more transparency and more combat against all types of crimes, especially corruption,” she said. “And they want the arm of justice to reach everyone equally. I’m not afraid to face these challenges.”Thiago de Aragão, a political analyst for the Arko Advice consulting firm, based in Brasília, the capital, said Ms. Rousseff needed to “solve the economy by stimulating growth, fiscal responsibility and domestic and international credibility.”The scandal at the Petrobras oil company “is the most tricky” problem, Mr. Aragão said, “because it’s not over yet and we don’t know the range of destruction it could cause.” The accusations concern a graft scheme that could be the biggest yet uncovered in Brazil’s history, and it complicates what Mr. Aragão said was the president’s third big problem: keeping support among her base in Congress.A federal investigation into the accusations surrounding the kickback scheme has already resulted in charges against 39 people, including top executives from Brazil’s biggest construction and engineering companies, and it is expected to implicate dozens of politicians, many from the governing coalition, by the end of February, according to Brazil’s attorney general.Challenges aside, Ms. Rousseff’s inauguration on Thursday was the seventh consecutive time that a directly elected president started a term in office, something that had not happened in Brazil in nearly a century.Advertisement