By DAVID BARBOZAJAN. 1, 2015
SHANGHAI —  With a dazzling light show set to begin at midnight, a huge crowd of revelers had gathered for an outdoor New Year’s Eve in this city’s historic riverfront district. They began to grow unruly.“We were just trying to walk up the steps to see the light show, and then people at the top began pushing their way down,” said a 20-year-old man. “Then I heard someone scream, and people began to panic.”The man, who spoke while awaiting a friend at Shanghai No. 1 People’s Hospital, said, “We got crushed.”In an instant, a stampede trampled and asphyxiated dozens of people. So thick were the crowds here that ambulances struggled to reach the victims, who had been partying moments before and now lay suffering or lifeless, some with dirty footprints on their clothes.AdvertisementBy Thursday afternoon, at least 36 people had died in the stampede and 47 were known to be injured, and the police conceded that they had been ill prepared.AdvertisementEven for China, the world’s most populous country, with a history of fatal stampedes and constant worries about crowd control, it was one of the worst public tragedies. It was made more so because the stampede happened during a celebration in a historic showcase area of Shanghai, its version of Times Square.The BundChen YiSquareChen Yi SquarePudongDISTRICTZhongshan RoadShanghaiShanghaiTowerHUANGPUDISTRICTHuangpuRiver BeijingchinaShanghai1/2 mileMost of the victims were Chinese in their teens and 20s, who had hoped to ring in 2015 partying in the area, the Bund, the city’s famed riverfront promenade.The stampede was a reminder of the challenges the authorities face in managing China’s megacities. Like other metropolises around the world, Shanghai has made its New Year’s Eve celebration a signature event, with light shows and performances late into the night.This year’s big attraction was billed as a “5D Light Show” that was supposed to project colorful blazes onto the Bund. The light-show festivities included the city’s newest landmark, the 2,074-foot Shanghai Tower, one of the world’s tallest buildings. But at least one of the shows had been canceled ahead of the stampede, and word had not reached all the revelers.Many people who had been milling around the Bund on Wednesday night said the huge crowds simply overwhelmed the authorities and the event organizers in this city of 25 million.Among the dead were 25 women, aged 16 to 36, according to Xinhua, the official news agency. Besides the Chinese residents, the authorities said the casualties included one person from Taiwan and one from Malaysia.A video posted on youku.com appears to show an enormous mass of celebrators pushing and yelling and crushing young people under its weight.AdvertisementSome participants said the crowd may have been even larger than the 300,000 people who, according to an official count, had attended a year ago.After the stampede, and the ensuing chaos as ambulances tried to reach victims sprawled in what is usually a busy traffic intersection, the remaining light show was canceled. Police officers stood shoulder to shoulder to permit ambulance access. But many victims died before reaching a hospital, the authorities said.President Xi Jinping ordered an immediate investigation. And by afternoon, the police were even looking into reports that partygoers in a nearby building may have contributed by tossing fake $100 bills into the area.The police later ruled out that theory, saying that the phony currency had been tossed after the stampede.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, they admitted having not anticipated such a problem. The Xinhua account said “the police expressed regret over their failure to effectively intervene when the tourist flow ‘increased irregularly’ at 11:30 p.m.”Stampedes are more than an occasional risk in China and are not confined to cities, according to examples cited by Xinhua. Last September, six students were killed because of a blocked stairway at a primary school in the southwestern province of Yunnan. Last January, 14 worshipers were crushed at a mosque in northwest China. Thirty-seven people were killed on a Beijing bridge in 2004 during a lantern festival.On Thursday afternoon, four Shanghai hospitals were treating the injured while friends and relatives waited. In the lobby of Changzheng Hospital, the mother of a 16-year-old stampede victim dropped to her knees when told that her daughter had not survived.“I can’t take it! I want to die,” the woman cried as her relatives tried to console her. “I don’t want to live. I can’t go on!”In China, New Year’s Eve celebrations are a relatively new affair, far less significant and theatrical than the annual Chinese New Year celebrations that take place according to the traditional calendar, usually in late January or early February. And yet, every year, the crowds that gather in major Chinese cities on Dec. 31 seem to get bigger.AdvertisementIn Shanghai, the Bund is one of the most popular tourist spots, a strip of hulking, pre-World War II buildings built largely by the British. Now elegantly restored and illuminated at night, the buildings house banks, upscale restaurants, nightclubs and five-star hotels, including the Peace Hotel and the Waldorf-Astoria Shanghai.The city spent $732 million between 2007 and 2010 to renovate the Bund, expanding the promenade and making more room for tourists to delight in gazing at the historic buildings or across the Huangpu River toward the new financial district, filled with high-rise apartment buildings, office towers and oversize advertising displays.The makeover was so successful that much bigger crowds now tour the riverfront day and night, so numerous that some of the luxury shops have relocated.On Thursday, there were large crowds once again walking the Bund, but also police cars and vans in the area near Chen Yi Square. Some visitors placed bouquets near the statue of Chen Yi, a former military commander and onetime Shanghai mayor.At No. 18 on the Bund, police officers could be seen Thursday afternoon visiting the building where a party was held and fake $100 bills were handed out. Inside the building, and out on the street, crumpled bills could still be seen. Calls to the police and the building went unanswered.At Changzheng Hospital, there were tears and even scuffles as visitors demanded information about relatives. A man who declined to give his name said he was at the Bund on Wednesday evening with his 21-year-old cousin, who was crushed to death. The man was comforting that cousin’s older sister and describing what happened.“I was pushed down. I couldn’t breathe,” he said. “I felt I was going to die because I couldn’t breathe. But I couldn’t find my cousin. Now, I came to the hospital. I’ve been here since last night. But now we know my cousin died.”A version of this article appears in print on January 2, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Moments, New Year’s Revelry Became Fatal Crush in Shanghai.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.