AdvertisementSupported byBy Marlise SimonsPARIS — The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has signaled her plans to pursue war crimes charges related to the 2008 war between Georgia and Russia, which was fought over control of the separatist Georgian province of South Ossetia.The prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, did not identify the targets of her investigation but said in a statement made public on Thursday that there was “a reasonable basis” to believe that crimes had been committed within the court’s jurisdiction.This is the first time the court’s attention has turned to Russia, but Mark Kersten, a legal scholar in Toronto, said he had learned that the prosecution’s primary focus would be on officials from South Ossetia and Georgia, not on Russian troops who backed the Ossetians in Georgia.Asked about the timing of the move, amid rising East-West tensions over the war in Syria, Mr. Kersten, who is the author of the Justice in Conflict blog, said the case had been in the works for almost two years. “The request to open an official investigation was inevitable,” he said.On Thursday, the court named the pretrial judges to whom Ms. Bensouda must present her evidence to obtain the green light for a formal criminal investigation. She is expected to disclose details next week. During the brief war, both sides are believed to have committed crimes in Georgian territory, where the court has jurisdiction because Georgia is a member. Russia has not joined the court. Ms. Bensouda’s office, in a report dated Dec. 2, 2014, said that 138,000 ethnic Georgians had been displaced by the war, and that thousands had been unable to return home because their villages had been destroyed.“South Ossetian forces have been responsible for systematically beating, killing and intimidating ethnic Georgians,” the report said. After the war, Moscow said that Georgians had killed 10 Russian peacekeepers and wounded others. Georgia said the Russians had participated in hostilities and had thus became legitimate military targets. Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.Advertisement