By HARI KUMAR and NIDA NAJARJAN. 2, 2015
NEW DELHI — The Indian police said on Friday that they were searching for two officers in the Budaun district of Uttar Pradesh after a 14-year-old girl from a local village accused them of raping her.The two officers, Veer Pal Singh Yadav and Avnish Yadav, who were in charge of patrolling the girl’s village and are not related, were suspended and are now missing, according to Santosh Kumar Singh, the police chief of Budaun.“I am on the move with a police team and raiding different places to arrest the named constables,” said Ram Lakhan Yadav, a police official in charge of the Musajhag police station in Budaun, where the rape was said to have taken place.In an interview with the Indian news channel Times Now, the girl’s mother, who under Indian law could not be identified, said that her daughter went to relieve herself in the fields outside their house on Wednesday night when she was seized by the two police officers, taken to a room in the local police station and raped. The girl’s family said she was brought home at midnight.The brutal rape of a young woman in New Delhi in December 2012 has led Indians to ask why women are so unsafe in public spaces. Daily travels are often filled with a sense of insecurity.The girl’s uncle, who was at the government hospital in Budaun where she was being examined on Friday afternoon, said she was snatched at 8 p.m. Wednesday by the officers, who often kept watch over her village, Prahladpur. Her mother called him and the head of the village, and the family took the girl to the district headquarters to report the case the next morning.Advertisement“These two cops are the area constables,” said Sudhir Pathak, the head of the village. “They used to come to our village quite frequently. They would frequently sit in front of the girl’s house.”AdvertisementThe girl was at home with her mother on Wednesday night, while her father was out of town for eye surgery, her uncle said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The district of Budaun came under intense national scrutiny in May after the bodies of two girls were found hanging from a mango tree. The family initially said the girls had been raped and murdered by a group of men abetted by local police officers, and the police said they had confirmed the rape. But in November, India’s top investigating agency announced after an inquiry that there had been no rape and that the girls had committed suicide.The case initially provoked a public outcry, and many criticized the state government for not going after the accused forcefully enough.The office of the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, Akhilesh Yadav, confirmed on Twitter on Friday that the suspects in this week’s case had been suspended. It said that he had demanded “serious disciplinary action” against them and sent senior police officials from the capital to coordinate with the police in Budaun.A version of this article appears in print on January 3, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: India: Policemen Accused of Rape.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.