Jeremy Wallace, 35, is a political scientist at Ohio State University. His new book, “Cities and Stability: Urbanization, Redistribution, and Regime Survival in China” (Oxford University Press), is a look at how China has avoided the instability that urbanization has brought to many other countries around the world. In an interview, Mr. Wallace discussed why big cities pose a danger for authoritarian governments, what China has done to undercut those threats and whether the current push to create megacities might change all this:How did you come to write “Cities and Stability”?
I always wondered how China had avoided the slums that seem to dominate the large cities of other developing countries. When I started my research for this book, I heard that China was concerned about “Latin Americanization” — meaning megacities, inequality and instability. At the same time, the government was abolishing agricultural taxes that had been collected in some form for over two and a half millennia. These developments seemed important to understand.
In your book you describe how China escaped the usual social unrest that accompanies preferential policies for cities thanks to its hukou, or household registration, system. China’s household registration system separates its rural and urban populations. While those born in cities have a local hukou that gives them access to social services, those born in the countryside have a harder time getting access to services when they migrate to cities. Most poor countries favor cities to promote development and ensure that people living in cities are pro-government. I argue that this kind of “urban bias” might tamp down protests today but also encourages more and more farmers to move to favored cities. These large cities, often full of slums, can explode. Urban protests can quickly overwhelm regimes, even seemingly stable ones like Mubarak’s in Egypt. China’s hukou system is a loophole to this Faustian bargain: favoring urbanites while keeping farmers in the countryside and smaller cities.Do the new reforms change this?In early December, China’s State Council released plans for reforming the hukou system. The new reforms make it easier to move to small and medium cities but still maintain the system’s core: strictly controlling the population of large cities. What’s the problem with big cities for an authoritarian government?Big cities are dangerous because they are more likely to produce economically and politically destabilizing protests. But it’s important to note that China hasn’t prevented urbanization. It’s managed it. It’s not that it’s anti-urbanization. It’s anti-concentration. Compared even to India, which is dominated by its biggest cities, China’s city system is flat. It has many large cities that are fairly anonymous.Why does concentration matter politically?Having a flat hierarchy of cities doesn’t prevent unrest, but it makes it less likely for any city to be powerful enough to bring down the government. If, for instance, Zibo explodes in protest, China won’t collapse. But when one or two big cities dominate the urban landscape, big protests can end a government, as we saw in Tunisia and Egypt in the Arab Spring.  It’s an important part of the longevity of the regime.Yes. Managing urbanization and urban threats has been important since the beginning of Communist rule in China. Although the Communists came to power on the back of a rural-peasant army, they quickly switched to talk about the importance of the city. They quickly implemented the hukou system to prevent the “blind flow” of farmers into cities. Even though Mao was perceived as a champion of the peasantry, his government didn’t work on their behalf. What’s behind the urban bias of China and other developing countries? First, governments in developing countries typically think that ensuring the basics for urban residents — cheap food, housing, education — will help secure political stability in their major cities. To pay for these benefits, governments have to tax someone, and that burden usually rests on rural farmers. In addition, the Chinese followed a Soviet model of focusing on heavy industry, believing that the only way a country can become modern is through industrialization, in particular through industrialization in cities. What the Chinese had that most countries didn’t was a system to prevent flows of people into cities. Controlling the population flows allowed them to industrialize without having surplus populations of underemployed that fill the slums in other countries. And it created the elaborate danwei, or work unit, system with cradle-to-grave social services for lucky urban factory workers.The state took care of urban workers through their danwei. The difference between the danwei system and situation in the countryside starkly reflected China’s urban bias under Communist rule. The state provided nothing for the farmers and in fact taxed them to pay for the construction of urban factories and social services. The farmers understood they weren’t benefiting from this arrangement. They wanted to join this urban proletariat and began to move to cities, but the regime was unable to find or afford jobs for all of these migrants. So the regime in the 1950s began registering individuals based on where they lived, then separating urban and rural populations, and eventually restricting migration from rural to urban areas through the hukou system. Under Mao’s planned economy, people could only purchase food and other staples with coupons, and those coupons were tied to one’s home locality.But China has moved away from a planned economy. Does the system still work? Even with market reforms, China continues to manage urbanization through the hukou system. People born in rural areas that move to cities for work aren’t given the same access to social services. These migrants are treated as second-class citizens. The state has tried to incentivize farmers to stay in the countryside or move to small cities. Many leave their children in the countryside with relatives, since the state supports free primary education for them only in the countryside and would make them pay hefty fees to attend urban schools.  Despite the hukou system, Beijing and other cities are growing quickly. Is this a danger for the government? Beijing is a very large city, but it’s also the case that Beijing is for the most part full of winners, who have done well through the reforms. These people are likely to be pro-regime and proponents of the status quo. On the other hand, there are migrants who have not done as well. While they live in the city, they aren’t of the city. Because the state limits farmers’ ability to sell their rural land, they tend to think of themselves as temporary migrants. During the recent global financial crisis, tens of millions of Chinese migrant workers lost their jobs. Because of the hukou system, millions of suddenly unemployed workers left coastal cities and dispersed to the villages and small cities of China’s interior.  Why do some cities witness more protests than others? It seems that some are predisposed toward it.James C. Scott talks about the spatial geography of cities. Wide boulevards help the state see and govern its cities. The narrow streets of Paris created bottlenecks that could be barricaded by revolutionaries in a way that was impossible after, [beginning in the 1850s, Georges-Eugène] Haussmann created wide boulevards which heavy artillery can access.Beijing, similarly, is full of boulevards wide enough for tanks. Even its housing tends to take the form of super-block apartment compounds. There are still walls inside China’s cities. The hukou system itself has been called an invisible wall around China’s cities, but the cities themselves contain many walls inside that can help the government maintain social control. Chinese university students have also been pushed farther and farther away from the city center. In Beijing, for example, university expansions are closer to the Great Wall than to Tiananmen Square. By contrast, Hong Kong is a different case. It is an example of a city with high density. News travels so quickly. Beijing increasingly seems to be spread out in a tremendous way, with its Sixth Ring Road marking its physical growth. It takes people a long time to travel. In Hong Kong, because it’s more dense and proximate, protests can spread more quickly and unexpectedly, as we saw during the so-called Umbrella Movement this fall. What about the government’s plan to promote megacities, like the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei supercity?
From the beginning of this project, I’ve heard stories about China abolishing the hukou system, and it hasn’t happened yet. So I remain skeptical about whether or not these megacity plans are actually going to happen. That said, the Chinese government faces a tradeoff. Megacities should be helpful economically. If shaping urbanization has helped the regime’s longevity, economic growth has obviously been critical as well. Perhaps the government will be willing to trade off the political benefits of spread-out urbanization for the continued economic benefits that megacities might provide. And it remains the case that these megacities would likely be filled with people that have benefited from the government’s policies and so likely to be pro-regime.