By GAIA PIANIGIANIOCT. 8, 2015
ROME —  He endured a monthslong political and media siege over the inefficiency and degradation of public services and a corruption scandal that left him unblemished but ensnared several city officials.But on Thursday Rome’s reform mayor, Ignazio Marino, resigned after a scandal over his expense account, which had called into question his own integrity.In a letter to Romans, he said that in his 27 months in office, he had initiated “epochal changes” to the city’s often shady bidding procedures and governance, but faced a problem of “political conditions” needed to carry them out.Hours earlier, three members of Mr. Marino’s cabinet also resigned, heightening the feeling that opponents both inside and outside his own Democratic Party were intent on forcing the mayor from office.AdvertisementMr. Marino, 60, a former surgeon, born in Genoa and trained in the United States, was elected in 2013 by Romans hoping for an honest outsider capable of cleaning up a city famed for political intrigue and services that were sluggish at best.Advertisement“That image is now gone. It’s a big damage to the city’s image just ahead of the jubilee,” said Marco Damilano, a political commentator for the magazine L’Espresso, referring to the year of mercy proclaimed by Pope Francis. “Rome will welcome millions of pilgrims, tourists and institutions with no real mayor. It’s embarrassing.”In recent days, prosecutors had opened an investigation after several reports suggested Mr. Marino might have used his official credit card to pay for personal outings, pretending they were business expenses. People who were supposed to have been the mayor’s guests at expensive restaurants told newspapers that they knew nothing about the meals.Mr. Marino denied wrongdoing, but also offered to pay back the entire credit card bill— 20,000 euros. That only heightened the attacks on him, with critics saying that their suspicions had been confirmed.Mr. Marino has been increasingly isolated as his popularity has dropped and the city has been embattled by an extensive investigation that has revealed corrupt bidding on city contracts for services ranging from refugee centers to sanitation to public parks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even though much of the bid-rigging took place under his predecessor’s administration, critics have accused Mr. Marino of being naïve and too distracted to impose order on a notoriously disorderly city. Last summer, he was vacationing in the United States when a mob family staged a Hollywood-style funeral for its boss, including a private helicopter that dropped roses onto the procession.Many saw that as a lavish showcase of organized crime’s enduring power while ordinary people were dealing with subway strikes, government cutbacks and a faulty sanitation system.Some of his decisions irritated constituents, like the closing of a main thoroughfare through the Foro Imperiali to automobiles, further snarling traffic. He angered those who benefitted from the old bidding system, too. After he tried to change how contracts were awarded, someone left bullet casings and a dead pigeon on his doorstep.Although Mr. Marino overhauled the managing boards of several city service providers, the services themselves were still seen as coming up short.AdvertisementLast month, Mr. Marino suffered a humiliating blow from, of all people, Pope Francis. At the end of his visit to the United States, Francis seemed irritated over Mr. Marino’s reported suggestion that the Vatican had asked him to join the pontiff at his final American Mass, in Philadelphia.“I did not invite Mayor Marino, is that clear?” Francis told reporters as the papal plane was flying back to Italy.Mr. Marino tried to assume an easy-going, casual style as he attempted difficult reforms and challenged entrenched interests. Unlike his predecessors and other Italian politicians, he rode a bicycle around the city.Eventually, however, he became a victim of old-time accusations.“The most damaging impact is in fact the idea that Rome cannot change, regardless of who governs it,” Mr. Damilano said.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Mayor of Rome Resigns Amid Expenses Scandal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.