AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini SenguptaUNITED NATIONS — Two days after a former president of the United Nations General Assembly was indicted in federal court in Manhattan on charges arising from a bribery investigation, the United Nations Secretary General, Ban Ki-moon, ordered an audit of the organization’s financial transactions with two obscure foundations implicated in the indictment.Mr. Ban ordered the organization’s Office of Internal Oversight Services to look into funds that the United Nations received from the two foundations: the charity arm of the Macau-based Sun Kian Ip Group and the Global Sustainability Foundation, Mr. Ban’s spokesman, Stéphane Dujarric, told reporters on Thursday.The two organizations are not registered as nonprofit entities in the United States. Their staffs include former United Nations personnel and diplomats, including the former General Assembly president, John W. Ashe of Antigua, who was among the six people charged in a graft scheme that involved payments in exchange for assistance in facilitating real estate deals.According to a criminal complaint, Mr. Ashe, a former diplomat representing his country at the United Nations and the president of the General Assembly from September 2013 to September 2014, received cash payments not only in his own personal bank accounts, but also in the official accounts of the president of the General Assembly. He used some of the money from the official account, the indictment said, to “pay for his personal expenses,” including the mortgage on his house in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., payments on his leased BMW car, and to buy Rolex watches. The case has drawn sharp scrutiny at a time when United Nations appeals for private donations are more insistent than ever, for both urgent humanitarian crises and long-term economic development for poor countries. The indictment raises fresh questions about the organization’s ability to vet where money comes from and how it is used.“The secretary general reaffirms that there will be no tolerance for any corruption at the United Nations or in the name of the United Nations,” Mr. Dujarric said in a prepared statement. In answer to questions from reporters, Mr. Dujarric also said that the allegations should not “impact our ability to work with the private sector or foundations.”Little is known about the two foundations named in the indictment. Their officers overlap, indicating how senior diplomats can sometimes use their influence to curry favor with private businesses and the United Nations bureaucracy. Though Mr. Ashe was charged with filing false income tax returns, not bribery, the complaint said that he took money from a billionaire Chinese real estate developer, Ng Lap Seng, also known as David Ng, and in turn, took up the cause to build a United Nations facility in Macau, the Chinese territory where Mr. Ng has business interests.Mr. Ng, who heads the Sun Kian Ip Group and was arrested last month, appears to have donated handsomely to the United Nations offices directly as well. His Sun Kian Ip Foundation gave $1.5 million to the Office for South-South Cooperation, intended to foster links among developing countries. The director of the office, Jorge Chediek, said this week that the donations had been used in part to pay for a conference held in Macau in August.Mr. Dujarric took pains on Thursday to say that the United Nations comptroller had found no reason to suspect that disbursements from the foundation had been “misdirected.”A related entity, the Global Sustainability Foundation, has in the past co-sponsored a gala event for another United Nations agency, called the International Telecommunications Union. Among those involved with that foundation are Edith Kutesa, the wife of another former General Assembly president, Sam Kutesa, of Uganda; and a former General Assembly spokesman, Jean-Victor Nkolo. They were not charged in the graft case.But someone else connected to the foundation, Francis Lorenzo, the deputy permanent representative to the United Nations for the Dominican Republic’s mission, was one of those arrested this week on bribery charges. Advertisement