By MAJD AL WAHEIDI and KAREEM FAHIMJAN. 3, 2015
GAZA —  Palestinian officials are demanding that the Egyptian government investigate the fatal shooting of a 16-year-old boy from Gaza who they say was killed by Egyptian soldiers, condemning what the officials called excessive force against a teenager who had been crossing the frontier to find work.The shooting of the boy, Zaki al-Hobi, on Friday was the first time in several years that Egyptian security forces had been accused of killing a Palestinian on the border, according to Palestinian officials. It highlighted the Egyptian military’s intensifying clampdown to deter smuggling in an area that the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi increasingly regards as its most serious security threat.An Egyptian military spokesman denied that soldiers had killed the boy, saying in a text message that “the shooting was not from our side.”Palestinian officials and the boy’s family said he had been shot as he and three friends crossed the border. The friends, arrested by the Egyptian authorities, said they had been trying to buy cigarettes in Egypt to sell in Gaza, according to police officials quoted by Reuters.Advertisement“The child was defenseless and did not pose any threat to Egyptian security,” Iyad al-Buzom, a spokesman for the Ministry of Interior and National Security in Gaza, said in a statement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the past few months, Egypt’s military has moved aggressively to create a security zone along the border, demolishing houses and smugglers’ tunnels and displacing thousands of Egyptians. Palestinians say that the military’s actions, which followed the killing by militants of 31 soldiers in the Sinai Peninsula in October, have worsened the economic deprivation in Gaza. With border crossings tightly controlled by Israel and Egypt, the tunnels were the only passages to the outside world.AdvertisementZaki, who had left school to work odd jobs like selling ice cream and repairing shoes, was typical of those desperate to leave, his cousin Bassem al-Hobi said in an interview. Zaki had made his way to Egypt once before, about three months ago, and was arrested and sent home. He had not told his family about his trip on Friday.He was not one of the militants Egypt has been so desperate to keep out, Mr. Hobi, his cousin, said. Mr. Hobi, a member of the militant Islamic Jihad group, said he had tried several times to persuade Zaki to join, to no avail.“He was smart and energetic,” Mr. Hobi said as the family prepared for the funeral on Saturday. “But Gaza made him depressed, and he wanted to escape by any means.”Majd Al Waheidi reported from Gaza, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: After Killing of Gaza Teenager, Calls for Egyptian Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.