By NIDA NAJARJAN. 3, 2015
NEW DELHI —  Five men have been arrested in connection with the alleged abduction and rape of a Japanese woman who said she was held captive for 12 days, the Indian police said Saturday.The young woman, who had been staying in Kolkata, said she had been lured by a man posing as a tour guide to travel to the Gaya district in the state of Bihar, the site of one of India’s holiest Buddhist temples, according to the Kolkata police. When she arrived in Gaya, two other men were waiting, she told police, saying the two held her at gunpoint and raped her.The police said the episode occurred sometime after her arrival in Kolkata on Nov. 20 and that she had first been taken to Digha, a resort in West Bengal by men involved in the case. The Press Trust of India, a news service, quoted the police as saying that she had been forced to remove money from her bank account.Anxiety in India over violence against women has been very high since the December 2012 gang rape of an Indian woman on a Delhi bus, an attack so brutal that she died of her injuries.AdvertisementDetails of the latest case, including how long the woman was reportedly held, varied widely as the police continued their investigation Saturday. It was unclear how two of the five men were involved in the case.The police said that at least one of the five men spoke Japanese and that two were brothers.A senior police official in Kolkata, Pallab Kanti Ghosh, said on Saturday that after being held, the woman went to the city of Varanasi, where she told a group of Japanese tourists what had happened. She then returned to Kolkata and the Japanese Consulate put her in touch with the police in late December, Mr. Ghosh said.AdvertisementIt remained unclear if she had been released by the men or had escaped.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Five Arrested in India Rape Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.