By KENNETH CHANGDEC. 31, 2014
Ben Ammi Ben-Israel, a former Chicago metal worker who led a migration of hundreds of fellow black Americans to what they consider their ancestral homeland, Israel, died on Saturday in a hospital in Beersheba, Israel. He was 75.His organization, the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem, announced his death on its website. The cause was not disclosed.To his followers, who called him the father or the holy father, Mr. Ben-Israel was a prophet-like figure who maintained that he had a vision in 1966 in which the angel Gabriel told him to lead an exodus of black Americans to Israel.Since the first African Hebrews arrived there in 1969, the community has grown to about 3,000 members, half of whom were born in Israel. Most live in the city of Dimona, at the edge of the Negev Desert in Israel, and two nearby towns.Advertisement“We were returning to be reconciled with the Creator,” Mr. Ben-Israel said in a 2008 interview with WBEZ, a public radio station in Chicago.AdvertisementThe African Hebrews, like many black Americans in a wider movement that sprang up in the early 1900s, believe that their ancestors were biblical Israelites, members of the tribe of Judah who dispersed to West Africa after the destruction of the Second Temple in Jerusalem in A.D. 70. Generations later, they say, descendants of those Israelites were taken to America as slaves.Under Israel’s Law of Return, any Jew can live there and become a citizen. But the African Hebrews do not consider themselves Jews and refuse to convert. “That is our tribal origin,” said Ahmadiel Ben-Yehuda, a spokesman. “We’re not adherents to the religion of Judaism.”For decades, Israelis regarded the African Hebrews as a strange and possibly dangerous cult. The African Hebrews wear vibrant clothing, follow a vegan diet and do not smoke or drink. Birth control is prohibited. The men often have multiple wives.Since they were not Jews, the Israeli government denied them work permits and health care and threatened to deport them. Mr. Ben-Israel, in turn, lashed out with anti-Semitic remarks and accusations of racism.“We came here offering ‘shalom,’ ” Mr. Ben-Israel told The New York Times in 1971. “We have been met with no jobs, no decent housing and Jim Crow policies similar to what we left behind.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later that year, he told The Baltimore Sun that two million blacks from the United States would wrest Israel from its Jewish inhabitants. “The Lord personally ordered me to take possession of Israel,” he said.More followers made their way to the African Hebrew compound in Dimona, overstaying tourist visas. Tensions flared anew on April 17, 1986, when the police surrounded the village to prevent a planned protest march. Mr. Ben-Israel made an impassioned proclamation of strength to his followers but without the inflammatory talk of earlier years, and they did not push ahead with the march.“We’re sons and daughters of peace,” he said. “We will not leave. We will wait. We will wait.” In 1990, the Israeli government offered the African Hebrews a path to permanent residency and citizenship. In return, the African Hebrews agreed to stop the flow of new members.AdvertisementThe community soon became more entwined with Israeli society. Many of its children who grew up in Israel have served in the country’s military. The African Hebrews have opened a small chain of vegan restaurants, and they manufacture tofu cheese for a vegan pizza sold by the Domino’s pizza chain.Mr. Ben-Israel became an Israeli citizen in 2013.He was born Ben Carter in Chicago on Oct. 12, 1939. After dropping out of high school, he served three years in the Army while earning his equivalency diploma, Mr. Ben-Yehuda, the spokesman, said. After his discharge he worked as a metallurgist at the Howard Foundry on the West Side of Chicago, where, he recounted, a black co-worker came up to him one day in 1961 and asked, “Did you know we are descendants of the biblical Israelites?”Mr. Ben-Israel adopted his Hebrew name after studying the Bible. In the turmoil of the 1960s, he allied himself with those who believed that blacks would be better off leaving the United States than trying to change it from within through the civil rights movement. They established a congregation and a meeting place, calling it the A-Beta Hebrew Israel Cultural Center.Mr. Ben-Israel took about 350 of his followers to Liberia in 1967 as part of what he called a cleansing process, which lasted two and a half years. Some followers died. A few remained in Liberia. Most went back to the United States, but Mr. Ben-Israel and about 140 others went on to Israel.He is survived by four wives, Tikvah, Yoninah, Baht Zion and Baht Ammi; 25 children; 45 grandchildren; and 15 great-grandchildren.His followers spoke of Mr. Ben-Israel as having been anointed by God to lead them, though he made no claims to being divine, Mr. Ben-Yehuda said. Yet, he said, Mr. Ben-Israel was once asked if he was the messiah, and he answered with a parable:“Someone came up to two people — a wise man and a fool — saying, ‘Ben Ammi is the Messiah!’  The fool jumped up and said, ‘No, he’s not!’  Whereas the wise man looked around at the state of the world and replied, ‘I don’t know, but I sure hope that he is!’ ”A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2015, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Ben Ammi Ben-Israel, 75; Led Exodus of U.S. Blacks to Israel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.