A Chinese college that banned Christmas festivities has stirred up a new controversy with its assertion that the New Year’s Eve stampede in Shanghai that left at least 36 people dead has vindicated  its restrictions on merrymaking.On Friday, the Modern College of Northwest University in Xi’an published a statement on its website titled, “The unfortunate Shanghai holiday stampede tragedy confirms that our school’s position on holiday management is indisputably correct.”The statement, by the college’s cultural work office, continued: “If the Shanghai incident had occurred in Xi’an, if the Xi’an incident had occurred on Christmas Eve and if students had been killed in the stampede incident, then the value of the Modern College’s Christmas Eve management would be even more clear.”
On Sina Weibo, a popular microblog service in China, many users criticized the school for using the events in Shanghai to justify its prohibition on celebrating Christmas.“Lighting a fire to cook a meal can also lead to a fire disaster! Go back and starve your mother then!” a user named Bai Bu Za De wrote. “Drinking water can lead to fatal choking! Go frighten the headmaster!”Another user, Messy Winds Drunken Hearts, wrote: “Really an idiotic school. According to what they say, all colleges should prohibit the celebration of Christmas?”Still, some commenters supported the school’s effort to play down Christmas festivities.“Rationally approach the foreign holidays, don’t be so fanatical and remember which country you belong to,” Centenarian-O-Yang wrote.The statement was posted just over a week after the college barred its students from taking part in Christmas celebrations and forced them to watch patriotic films, with faculty members guarding doors at the screening.By Monday afternoon, the statement had been removed from the college’s website, though images of it were still available online.In an interview on Monday, a university spokesman, Cao Fenghe, said that the statement was written with concern for the students’ safety.He said it was taken down Monday afternoon because that time is an exam period at the college, and the heavy traffic on the school’s website was preventing many students from finding their exam locations online.“One of the reasons we wrote the statement is that we feel have to manage the holidays,” Mr. Cao said. “Because we’re a school, we have to manage our students. We have to help students rationally pass the holidays.”He said the curbs on Christmas celebrations had more to do with student welfare than with antiforeign sentiment. “A lot of our buildings are European style, and we respect the integration of Western culture,” he said. “Many foreigners come to our universities.”But he added that the university had a responsibility to watch out for its students. “Even during our annual winter vacation, we often publish notices on our website reminding students that during holidays they should keep in touch with their parents, and if they go out they should let their parents know where they are,” he said.