Since Mao Zedong’s time, few sins have been more repugnant to the Chinese Communist Party than forming factions. And under President Xi Jinping, that abhorrence has resurfaced.Cadres should be the selfless tools of the party leadership’s will. While graft is bad enough, it is usually diagnosed as an individual failing, but “cliquism” (or “mountaintopism,” as Mao called it) is seen as a political blight threatening the party’s bedrock of centralized unity.So a recent burst of official Chinese commentaries asserting that corruption scandals have exposed a “culture of cliques” points to the deeper tremors detonated by Mr. Xi’s campaign to root out graft among both “tigers” and “flies” — senior and junior officials.
“Behind some of the ‘big tigers’ who have fallen in recent years, there have often been gangs of officials with countless collusive interests,” said a commentary issued by Xinhua, the state news agency, over the weekend. “They have formed into ‘gangs’ and ‘factions,’ either openly or hidden, loosely or tightly knit.”The commentary identified some of those cliques: gangs of aides or secretaries to leading officials; bureaucrats who rose through China’s oil sector under Zhou Yongkang, the former chief of domestic security who was arrested and formally charged last month; and officials who turned Shanxi Province, with its abundance of coal, into a kleptocratic bonanza. There, the commentary noted, the most noteworthy targets were linked to Ling Jihua, the Shanxi-born official who rose to become chief aide to former President Hu Jintao.A commentary on Monday in People’s Daily, the party’s main newspaper, amplified the theme that corruption and factionalism were conjoined evils.“Some cliques of officials are in essence parasitic relationships of transferring interests, and turning public power into private goods,” the commentary said. “The violations of laws and discipline are shocking, and the repercussions threaten to bring ruin to the country and its people.”Since last year, as Mr. Xi’s anticorruption investigations took hold, Chinese newspapers and websites have presented elaborate lattice-like graphics explaining the links among officials, their families and the business people accused of bribery and cronyism. The website of People’s Daily has also introduced a guessing-game graphic challenging readers to identify some of the fallen officials.Mr. Zhou, Mr. Ling and other investigated officials appear certain to face trial, followed by conviction and imprisonment. But it is much less certain that the indictments against them would spell out accusations of factionalism. The last major trial of fallen officials on charges based on factional collusion was of the “Gang of Four” in 1980, when the accusations against Mao’s wife, Jiang Qing, and three of her associates, included attempting to seize state power.Since then, criminal charges against fallen officials have tended to avoid incendiary political accusations and instead focus on graft.Mr. Xi comes from a long line of Chinese leaders who see corruption as a symptom not only of personal greed, but also of dangerous disunity. The People’s Daily commentary, which was written by a propaganda official, Qin Qiang, warned that the collapse of Chinese dynasties was often accompanied by the spread of self-serving bureaucratic factions.“The toxic abuses of clique culture have not been eradicated,” it said.Mr. Xi has shown his familiarity with Han Feizi, a Chinese aristocrat-turned-political thinker who over 2,200 years ago offered advice that seems resonant today:“If appointments to office are controlled by cliques, then men will work only to establish profitable connections,” Han Feizi advised, according to Burton Watson’s translation. “They will lay a hundred plans for the advancement of private family interests, but give not one thought to how the ruler should order his estate.”