By ISMAIL KHANJAN. 4, 2015
PESHAWAR, Pakistan —  At least six foreign militants were believed to have been killed in an American drone strike in the North Waziristan tribal region on Sunday morning, a Pakistani security official said.The Pakistani official said a drone fired two missiles into a compound in the Datta Khel subdistrict at 6:40 a.m. The area is close to the border with Afghanistan and to Miram Shah, the main town in North Waziristan and the site of the region’s administrative headquarters.“The drone targeted a base of an Uzbek commander known as Usman, killing six Uzbek militants. Two militants are wounded,” the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the news media.It was unclear whether Usman was there at the time of the attack. The local news media has reported that he is allied with Hafiz Gul Bahadur, a local warlord and militant commander.
                Maps of the major attacks since June.            Drone strikes in Pakistan, often attributed to the United States, prompt regular diplomatic protests from the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs.AdvertisementSeparately, the Pakistani military said four terrorist hide-outs and a training center for suicide bombers were destroyed by fighter jet strikes late Saturday in the remote Tirah Valley of the nearby Khyber tribal region.AdvertisementIn a brief statement, the military said that “31 terrorists, including some suicide bombers, were killed in precise aerial strikes.” There was no independent confirmation of the military’s claim.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last summer, the Pakistani military launched a long-awaited offensive against Taliban and foreign militants holed up in the North Waziristan region. The military claims that it now controls 90 percent of the region.On Sunday, Gen. Raheel Sharif, the Pakistani Army chief, arrived in Peshawar, the capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province in the northwest of the country. General Sharif was scheduled to hold meetings with senior civil and government officials to review security in the region.A Taliban attack last month on an army-run school in Peshawar left at least 149 people dead.Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Drone Strike in Pakistan Is Said to Have Killed 6 Militants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.