By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 4, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  North Korea denounced the United States on Sunday for imposing new sanctions on it after a cyberattack on Sony Pictures, calling them byproducts of American “hostility” toward the North.North Korea reiterated its denial of involvement in the hacking of Sony computers and said Washington’s sanctions would only strengthen resolve to pursue its “military first” policy. That policy calls for an arms buildup, including nuclear weapons development, as a “deterrent” against Washington’s policy.“The persistent and unilateral action taken by the White House to slap sanctions against the D.P.R.K. patently proves that it is still not away from inveterate repugnance and hostility toward the D.P.R.K.,” an unidentified government spokesman was quoted as saying by the North’s official Korean Central News Agency. D.P.R.K. stands for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, North Korea’s official name.The statement from the spokesman was the North’s first reaction to the new sanctions the Obama administration announced on Friday.AdvertisementThe retaliatory sanctions came days after the United States officially blamed North Korea for the hacking of Sony, which produced “The Interview,” a comedy film about a C.I.A. plot to assassinate Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader. The hacking destroyed many of the studio’s computers and leaked numerous private emails and business files.AdvertisementNorth Korea called the film an “act of war,” but it has repeatedly denied involvement in the hacking. In its statement on Sunday, North Korea noted that many cybersecurity experts had expressed skepticism about Washington’s evidence that the country was responsible for the cyberattack.Dismissing such doubts, Washington on Friday announced sanctions against 10 North Korean government officials and three organizations, including the North’s main intelligence agency, which American officials said was the source of “many of North Korea’s major cyberoperations.”Analysts said the sanctions would have limited effect because North Korea had already been under tough United States sanctions for several decades.A version of this article appears in print on January 5, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: North Korea Denounces U.S. Over Its Latest Sanctions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.