When Lei Feng was a “rustless screw” in Mao Zedong‘s revolution, he enthusiastically devoted himself to tasks that forwarded the socialist cause: He darned his fellow soldiers’ socks, gave up his lunch to hungrier comrades and donated his wages to the local commune.At the time of Lei Feng’s death in 1962 — he was hit by a falling telephone pole at age 22 — his heroic deeds had already been featured in a series of widely produced photos, and he was well on his way to becoming a propaganda icon. Since then, his story has been seized at regular intervals as a model of altruism to be emulated by the public at large.But like the hundreds of pounds of manure he supposedly collected over a brief holiday, some Lei Feng legends have smelled a bit off. Now one has been confirmed as fake.
Since the 1980s, the Chinese news media has reported that cadets at the United States Military Academy at West Point learn about the propaganda icon of the People’s Liberation Army.“Among the stories that have filled Chinese newspaper and television reports daily is one claiming that even cadets at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point are studying Lei Feng,” The Associated Press noted in 1990, “and that his portrait hangs in a prominent position among military heroes at the academy.”But a West Point spokeswoman, Andrea Hamburger, said “there is no specific part of the curriculum at West Point that discusses Lei Feng,” The A.P. report continued. “This seems to be a rumor that’s gotten out of control.”The origin of the West Point tale became somewhat clearer this week when a Chinese writer, Li Zhurun, said that he had picked it up from a story published by an unspecified American news media outlet on April 1, 1981. Not realizing it was an April Fool’s joke, he repeated the news item, and another layer of Lei Feng myth was created.Mr. Li, a former employee of the state-run Xinhua news agency, said that he had used the West Point material in an article that he wrote under a pen name, and that it had no connection with his work at Xinhua.Mr. Li wrote on his Sina Weibo account on Sunday that after seeing a magazine’s investigation of the matter in 1997, he learned that the West Point story was fake. Now a journalism professor, he uses the episode to teach his students a lesson about the value of fact-checking.Revealing the story to a broader audience online helped him “cast off an anxiety,” he wrote.