Xidian University, with more than 30,000 students on two campuses in the ancient city of Xi’an, has a storied history. The original academy was personally established by Mao Zedong in 1931, when the Communist Party and Red Army were leading an insurgent movement to overthrow the Kuomintang government. Based in Jiangxi Province, where the Communists had their headquarters for a period, the school’s mission was to train radio operators for the military. Mao had set it up in his role as head of the party’s Central Military Commission.One specialty then was cryptography, and the university’s website boasts that the institution has the finest cryptography program in the nation. The website lists 16 schools or departments, most of them in engineering sciences.On Monday, the website of People’s Daily, the main party newspaper, published an article saying that the university was opening what will be its 17th school — one specializing in network and information security and cyberengineering. The announcement was a sign that cybersecurity had become an increasingly important academic discipline for the Chinese government and military. The article was originally published by Science and Technology Daily, a newspaper managed by the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
The article caught the attention of scholars overseas who study China’s Internet capabilities in the areas of defense, espionage and warfare. Amy Chang, a research associate at the Center for a New American Security in Washington who last month published a paper on the subject, posted a link on Twitter to the People’s Daily page.“As cybersecurity threats pose new and significant challenges to countries, the establishment of the School of Cyber Engineering and Innovation Center is an attempt by the university and the central government to foster greater thought leadership and innovation on an issue that has traditionally been understudied and overlooked in China,” Ms. Chang wrote in an email interview.She said the programs at Xidian, whose full name translates to the University of Electronic Technology and Science at Xi’an, were at least partly funded by a 2011 central government plan to promote innovation at universities. The cyberengineering school appears to have support from the Communist Party’s Central Committee and the State Council, China’s cabinet.“Xidian’s close connection with the People’s Liberation Army may indicate a potential linkage between civilian and military research on cybersecurity,” she said.For two years, cyberespionage has been a central point of tension in the relationship between the United States and China. The Obama administration has accused units in the People’s Liberation Army of being responsible for large-scale theft of corporate secrets via the Internet. Last May, the United States Justice Department indicted five Chinese men on charges of hacking into the computers of American companies to steal commercial secrets. The indictment said the men were members of an army hacking unit. Last month, following the hacking attack against Sony Pictures, American officials said that North Korean hackers were operating on Chinese soil or using Chinese network infrastructure.Chinese officials have denied the accusations and say that China is itself often the victim of hacking attacks. They have pointed to the leaks from Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency contract employee, as evidence that the United States is a major player in cyberespionage.A person answering the telephone at Xidian University on Tuesday said the school had no immediate comment on the new programs.The university has websites in Chinese and English that give general background information. The university has more than 1,900 full-time teachers. One page on the website says the university “has established the ideas of ‘people-oriented’ and ‘teachers being the core competitive ability of a university,’ and forged a well-structured contingent of teachers with an innovative spirit.” The English-language website has two slogans at the top of the homepage: “Great Virtue Truth-seeking” and “Endeavor to Study Honesty in Behavior.”At least one other university in the city, Xi’an Jiaotong University, provides training in network security and other computer specialties. There is little public information about the training, and it is unclear how those programs differ from the ones at the new school at Xidian University.“While the school and innovation center both underscore innovation as a major objective, a challenge China may eventually face, however, is that its leadership will have a difficult time forcing strategic thinking in a culture that is relatively limited in intellectual freedom and in access to information,” Ms. Chang said. “Funds can only cultivate so much innovation. Whether the programs will truly foster new, original solutions to managing cybersecurity is to be seen.”Mia Li contributed research.