By CARLOTTA GALLJAN. 5, 2015
LONDON —  A former government official of the dictatorship in Tunisia, Habib Essid, was nominated Monday to be prime minister and charged with forming a new government.Mr. Essid, 65, an American-trained agricultural economist, served in a variety of government positions under the autocratic President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, who was ousted in a popular uprising in 2011.After the uprising, Mr. Essid was appointed interior minister in the interim government, and stayed on as a security adviser in the Islamist-led government in 2012.He was nominated for prime minister on Monday by the country’s leading political party, Nidaa Tounes, which won the most seats in parliamentary elections in October and is entitled to form the government. Nidaa Tounes does not hold a majority of seats, and Mr. Essid will have to seek a coalition with other parties and independent legislators.Advertisement“We have chosen Essid because he is independent and has experience in the areas of security and the economy,” the speaker of Congress, Mohamed Naceur, said Monday outside the congressional palace.AdvertisementMr. Essid is not a member of Nidaa Tounes but an official with considerable experience in government. He is well known to President Beji Caid Essebsi, who led the 2011 interim government and who won the presidential election in December.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is also known to leaders of the main Islamist party, Ennahda, which holds the second-largest bloc in Parliament and is a potential coalition partner. Ennahda issued a statement on Monday saying it was ready to cooperate with Mr. Essid.The choice of Mr. Essid, and his experience as an official in the government of Mr. Ben Ali, has already raised concerns. He held several positions in the Ministry of Agriculture in the 1990s and also served four years as chief of staff to the interior minister. In that position he oversaw the 1999 presidential election in which Mr. Ben Ali suspiciously received more than 99 percent of the vote, the independent Tunisian website Webdo reported.Mr. Essid was chosen over a leading former trade unionist and founding member of Nidaa Tounes, Taieb Baccouche.Hamma Hammami, the leader of the leftist Popular Front movement, has raised concerns that Mr. Essid will be a pawn of President Essebsi, a former leader of Nidaa Tounes, who is now installed in the presidential palace in Carthage.“What program will Habib Essid execute? And from whom will he receive his orders?” Mr. Hammami asked in an interview on the popular Radio Shems FM. “The real power will not be in the hands of the government, but in the palace of Carthage.”A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Ally of Deposed Leader Is Nominated to Be Premier of Tunisia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.