By ALISON SMALEOCT. 8, 2015
BERLIN —  An Austrian historian who has long criticized his country’s fumbling restitution of Jewish property seized by the Nazis began a one-year prison term in Vienna this week after losing his final appeal of a conviction for defrauding the state.The case, unfolding over a decade, has stirred the ghosts of Austria’s murky Nazi past. It has also fanned outrage among Holocaust historians, dozens of whom wrote to the Austrian authorities pleading for the case to be dismissed. Last month, President Heinz Fischer rejected a plea for clemency, arguing that he had no mandate to intervene in such a case.The historian, Stephan Templ, 54, was co-author of a book in 2001, “Our Vienna,” which documented hundreds of properties seized under the Nazis that were never returned to Jewish owners or their heirs after World War II. The book outraged many Austrians, exposing long-held secrets about the Nazi era, and helped set off a flurry of legal claims.Mr. Templ himself became involved in a restitution case in 2005, the tangled strands of which resulted in his imprisonment on Monday after all existing avenues of appeal had apparently been exhausted.AdvertisementMr. Templ’s lawyer, Robert Amsterdam, said in a telephone interview that his client was a victim of “selective persecution.” He “has been subjected to all of this as retribution for the publication of his book,” Mr. Amsterdam said.AdvertisementUntil 1991, when Chancellor Franz Vranitzky declared that Austrians were not only victims but also perpetrators of Nazi crimes, Austria had identified itself as the first victim of Hitler, who annexed his native Austria in March 1938. Many Austrians welcomed the Nazis; others resisted and were punished. Vienna’s 200,000 Jews were decimated, and though some managed to flee, 65,000 were deported and perished in death camps.This contorted history has been clearly on view in the still-halting restitution of Jewish property, most recently chronicled in the movie “Woman in Gold,” about the return of one of Gustav Klimt’s most famous paintings.Mr. Templ’s case began when he acted for his mother, Helene, a Holocaust survivor. He applied for her share of a onetime hospital in central Vienna that had belonged to a cousin of Mr. Templ’s maternal grandmother and the cousin’s wife.That couple committed suicide in 1938 and their property was seized.The building, now a luxury residence, was listed in the 2001 book by Mr. Templ and a fellow historian, Tina Walzer, but he did not know then that his mother had any claim. Eventually, it was returned to various heirs and sold in 2010 to property developers. Mr. Templ’s mother received 1.1 million euros as her share of that sale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Templ’s estranged aunt, Elisabeth Kretschmer, could also have staked a claim, but in an interview last year, she said she did not learn about her rights to the property until after the deadline to file claims had passed.In 2013, state prosecutors accused Mr. Templ of defrauding the Austrian state, asserting that he should have listed his aunt’s claim. The prosecutors argued that by failing to do so, Mr. Templ had deprived the state of 550,000 euros — half of Helene Templ’s share — that it could have been entitled to in the absence of Ms. Kretschmer’s claim.Mr. Amsterdam and Ms. Walzer both noted that there were no other known cases of restitution in Austria in which the government took ownership of property shares unclaimed by heirs. Nor is it clear that Mr. Templ was legally obliged to find the aunt or other heirs, said Eva Blimlinger, who headed the Austrian Historical Commission’s search for stolen property until 2004.Mr. Templ was first sentenced to three years in prison in 2013, a punishment that was reduced on appeal to one year. The sentence was relatively severe because of the large sums involved, Ms. Blimlinger said.Ms. Walzer, a freelance historian, said she now skirted restitution controversies and focused instead on Jewish cemeteries. Despite her long experience with the many prejudices and problems that surround Vienna’s Nazi past, Mr. Templ’s case is simply baffling, she said.Advertisement“Either I give back property, or I do not give it back,” said Ms. Walzer, summarizing the Austrian government’s choice in restitution cases. “But not both at the same time.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 9, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Historian Who Studied Austria’s Nazi Past Is Jailed .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.