By ANAND GIRIDHARADASJAN. 5, 2015
I have long believed in the 80-hour week. That’s the quantity of sleep I aspire to, including naps and droopy-eyed bed reading.So whenever I meet people who live by the 80-hour workweek rather than sleep-week, I’m intrigued. In always-on, digital-age America, they are multiplying like email-addicted bunnies. Ostensibly out of concern (and perhaps out of guilt for my relative sloth), I invariably ask these bankers, lawyers and technologists: Couldn’t you work less?Couldn’t you work one-quarter fewer hours, and still afford your 48-inch, dual-fuel Viking cooking range? Couldn’t you share your job with a colleague?And what America’s overworked high-performers invariably reply is: No. We can’t. We’re indivisible.AdvertisementBankers say they can’t leave at 8 p.m. during an all-night deal closing because their relationships and intangible knowledge can’t be handed off. High-end software coders argue that their output is art, and working less would mean Da Vincis finishing what Michaelangelos started: Impossible!AdvertisementThis indivisibility has enormous consequences, particularly for women. As scholars like Claudia Goldin, a Harvard economist, have shown, all-consuming jobs at the top of many professions drive lots of mothers out of the work force, and ensure that those who stay but seek flexible hours are penalized. For many, working fewer hours spells fewer hours to be paid, and a lower per-hour wage for the hours that are worked.Indivisible jobs are responsible for an economic irony that widens already vast inequality: Those who can most afford to cut back often work nonstop, and those who need more income struggle to get full-time employment and even enough hours in part-time jobs.So is the admission fee to much of the American elite inevitably a willingness to answer email at 11:30 p.m.? Is the flexible, parent-friendly career path that Anne-Marie Slaughter famously called for a fantasy? Ms. Slaughter, you’ll recall, is the think-tank president and former State Department official whose viral essay in 2012 took a tire iron to the idea of women “having it all” under present conditions, while calling for new multispeed, life-accommodating careers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Now there is mounting evidence that such careers may be possible, and in fact materializing in fields from retailing to brokerage, according to work by Ms. Goldin and her Harvard colleague Lawrence F. Katz. Pharmacists, they argue, show us the way.Between 1970 and the present, the once-considerable penalty for pharmacy’s part-timers faded away, as people working 20 hours a week began to earn roughly the same hourly wage as those working 45. As a result, the profession became more parent-friendly and welcoming of flexible hours and narrowed the gender pay gap. In 1970, 11 percent of pharmacists were women; today, a majority are.The crux of why that happened, the professors say, is that pharmacists became much better substitutes for one another. The standardization of protocols and medicines — plus the deployment of computer databases that seamlessly follow patients from doctor’s office to insurance company to drugstore — makes it possible for pharmacists to pick up where their colleagues leave off. That, in turn, makes it easier to rescue your son from an injury in school and know that your patients will still get good care. The job of pharmacist, in short, became divisible.Doing the same for other professions requires both cultural change and new information systems, Ms. Goldin says. Cultural change, because clients must accept, say, meeting one investment banker during daylight hours and another at night. New information systems, because flexibility depends on ever-smoother handoffs.“There will always be 24/7 positions with on-call, all-the-time employees and managers, including many C.E.O.s, trial lawyers, merger-and-acquisition bankers, surgeons and the U.S. Secretary of State,” Ms. Goldin writes. “But, that said, the list of positions that can be changed is considerable.”Join an online conversation at http://anand.ly and follow on Twitter.com/anandwrites A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.