By EDWARD WONGJAN. 5, 2015
BEIJING — China has made a formal diplomatic complaint to North Korea after a soldier fleeing the North killed four Chinese citizens in late December during a robbery attempt, according to a statement on Monday from a Chinese official and news reports from China and South Korea.The killings took place near the border between China and North Korea. A Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Hua Chunying, said at a regularly scheduled news conference in Beijing on Monday that the North Korean had been detained by Chinese security forces and that the Public Security Bureau in China was “handling the case according to law.”A report by Xinhua, the state news agency, said the soldier had crossed the border into China in search of food. It gave no other details.A South Korean report by the Yonhap News Agency said the killings took place on Dec. 28 in the village of Nanping, north of the Tumen River, which marks the border between North Korea and China.AdvertisementThe Yonhap report said the deserter had a gun and carried out the killings in the victims’ homes. One person was also wounded, the report said, adding that the Chinese police and military personnel caught the soldier after a manhunt.AdvertisementA report in Beijing News, citing the head of the village, said the four people killed in Nanping were two older couples. The two households were said to have had children working in South Korea, and the parents lived alone.The North Korean soldier broke into the home of a man with the surname Che; ate some of his food; stole 100 renminbi, or about $16; and wounded Mr. Che, the article said.The northeast border with China is a common escape route for North Korean defectors. But in recent years, there have been fewer reports of defectors arriving in the area, perhaps in part because Kim Jong-un, the North’s leader, has ordered tighter security at the frontier.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.China has traditionally been North Korea’s closest ally, and opinions vary on what the Chinese leadership thinks of the North Korean government.Some American officials say they believe China has grown tired of North Korea’s behavior. For example, a retired Chinese general, Wang Hongguang, published an essay in a state-run newspaper last month saying that China should stop cleaning up North Korea’s “mess” and that North Korea was fated to collapse.But some North Korea analysts say that Beijing remains a strong supporter and that the United States should not count on China to turn on its neighbor in any significant manner.President Obama, citing evidence gathered by the F.B.I., has said that North Korea was behind a large-scale hacking attack in November against Sony Pictures. Though some cybersecurity experts say the case against North Korea is thin, the White House has asked for China’s help in reining in North Korean hackers and has announced new economic sanctions against Pyongyang.Some American officials have said that North Korean hackers are working from inside China or carrying out attacks through its networks.On Monday, Ms. Hua, the Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, addressed Washington’s request, saying: “The current situation of relative stability on the Korean Peninsula has not been easy to come by. Relevant parties should act cautiously and avoid taking measures that might lead to the escalation or worsening of the situation and work together to safeguard the peace and stability of the peninsula.”AdvertisementShe added that China has “repeatedly emphasized” that it is against any form of cyberattack and that it does not allow any countries or individuals to use China’s infrastructure or work from within the nation’s borders to carry out network attacks and other illegal activities.Bree Feng contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on January 6, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: China: Diplomatic Protest Filed With North Korea Over Killings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.