Pvt. Richard Halvey scribbled his last letter home in the passenger seat of an Army radio vehicle rumbling somewhere through North Africa in February 1943. He wrote on the desk built into the front of the car while his friend Ryan drove, passing across chocolate bars and sticks of gum. He complained about his warts (“I even have an idea they are bringing friends”). He asked after his driver’s license and his brother, Bob. He spoke of regret that he had to shave his mustache without taking a photo first (“Beards aren’t permitted in this company and mustache was starting to strain coffee etc so rather than have it dry cleaned I decided to dispense with it”). The last letter addressed to my grandmother, Patricia, his sister, was just a quick note about a $30 money order, later carefully pressed flat; his mistake in dating the top delicately corrected in Pat’s spindly hand.He was 23 when he succumbed to his wounds in a Tunisian hospital. The war department sent a Purple Heart to Philadelphia and, later, his body to Virginia.Death visits on the mundane a heightened gravity, making the trivial beautiful and the everyday weighty. Had Private Halvey lived, had his letter not been followed by a terse telegram reporting his death “of wounds received in action in defense of his country,” that letter might be softly rotting in an airless attic now, or forgotten in an estate sale trunk. He might have grandchildren, kids with blue eyes and long limbs and the borrowed grace of a once and future basketball star. Instead, the letters are stuck together in a scrapbook made by my grandmother, a tribute to her beloved brother. There would be no girl and no wedding band, no sons, no forwarding address.I first read my great-uncle’s letters in high school, an audience he could never have imagined. Growing up, I’d heard stories and seen a picture of him, posed with a rifle over the mantel. But it wasn’t until I opened the faded green scrapbook that I became fixated on his short life. It was not that he was exceptional, but rather that he was so ordinary: a normal, kind-hearted young man who had marched into a storm set in motion before he was born, at nearly the same age that I am now. On Veterans Day, especially, I think of my grandfathers, both in the Navy and lucky enough to survive the war, and then of Dick Halvey, grinning on his parents’ porch, hand raised in a salute, and I open the scrapbook again. It contains his letters home, his obituaries, condolence cards, high school grades, a map of Arlington.The early letters, mailed from Camp Wheeler and Camp Meade and now glued to the book’s first pages, described his bunkmates, his meals, the bedroom slippers he wished his mother would send. In one, he wrote about a Harvard man asking him for shoe polish. He described an overnight train ride. Without access to a map, he asked how many days’ journey Macon, Ga., was from home. A few men were mentioned: Ryan, who told him about the street cars in Glasgow; and Joe Shea and Bill Haggerty, who were also from Philadelphia. From North Africa, he wrote about a cactus thorn burrowed in his thumb, making his job as a radio operator painful. If he had lived to see the close of the war, he might have written, too, of the ruins of Italy and the crowded banks at Normandy.In his high school valedictorian speech for the class of 1936, my great-uncle wrote of the gathering conflict abroad: “Is it strange that peace delays her coming? Where are the men of good will who are to receive her benefactions?” America must abandon its isolationism if peace was what it sincerely wanted, and it was the duty of principled men to act for peace. “Only by producing men of good will can we advance the cause of universal peace.” And so he volunteered, a ready and spirited recruit — a man of good will. His father, Brendan, later wrote of his sons, “I am mighty proud of the two boys; fellows who answered the call the hard way, seeking neither matrimony to dodge it, nor commissions to soften their journey. They went when their time came, took what their Government saw fit to give them and asked no favors.”The son of a janitor and a writer, Richard Halvey played basketball for Roman Catholic High in Philadelphia (my grandmother became a lifelong basketball fan, although none of her five children were on a team). He borrowed his aunt’s roadster for weekend trips to the Jersey shore. He was popular and handsome and loved to sit up with the fathers of the girls he took out on Saturday nights, drinking whiskey and telling jokes. To my homely grandmother, he was something of a hero.In the Army, Private Halvey wanted more than anything to drive a vehicle — a truck or tank or car of any kind. But he was assigned to record an endless parade of dots and dashes, tedious work he despised. In Tunisia, he must have been exhausted, existing on canned rations in the rocky, treacherous desert. But he rarely complained, telling his family about serving Mass every morning, wearing a knife and revolver instead of a cassock.My great-grandfather’s attempts to seek more details about his son’s death and last days were met with refusals from the war department, so all we ever knew was in the few scraps of information sent at the time: that Private Halvey was wounded in action and died a few days later in March 1943, carrying his high school ring. His letters revealed that he was under fire for most of his time in North Africa. He was originally buried in Tunisia; his body was shipped to Arlington after the war.His absence drew a dark gash through the lives of his family back home: My grandmother’s own youth snapped over his death, and her mother’s a year earlier. My great-grandfather’s grief kept him housebound for months. In the wake of their loss, my grandmother took charge of the household, caring and cooking for her brother and tormented father. It was a responsibility that she forever shouldered, and one that probably kept her from marrying until she was in her 30s, a spinster by the standards of the day. Even after her wedding, Brendan and Bob continued to live with her. She named her first son for the brother she had lost.Two years ago, I copied the cemetery map in the scrapbook (the route to his headstone traced in red pencil) and took it with me to Arlington. There I found a kind of solace in this place that my grandmother had once visited, bringing her children and now elderly father with her. My dad, at 7 years old, remembered that they watched a nearby funeral procession wind to a stop. Taps played and my grandmother cried. Brendan Halvey, so stoic for much of his life despite all he had endured, cried, too. Bob took a photo of the family clustered around the grave: my dad and his brothers with buzzcuts and ears like open shutters; Brendan in a dark suit and tie despite the summer heat.My favorite photograph of the three Halvey siblings was taken at the Jersey Shore in the early ’30s. They were 14 or 15, posing with their dad on the beach in Atlantic City. Dick and Bob Halvey, both in belted swim costumes, stand with feet apart, hands on hips, wearing jubilant grins and tousled hair. My grandmother, Pat, wears pigtails and a half-smile next to Dick, her sideways gaze on his face.Kiley Bense is a recent graduate of Columbia University’s Graduate School of Journalism and the University of Pennsylvania. She currently works as a longform intern at Entertainment Weekly. Her writing has appeared online at Saveur, Real Simple, and Narratively. Follow her on Twitter: @kileybense
