By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 6, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  The Defense Ministry of South Korea said Tuesday that North Korea appeared to have made a “significant” advance toward making a nuclear warhead small enough to fit onto a long-range missile capable of reaching the West Coast of the United States. The ministry, which included the assessment in its latest white paper, also suggested that the North now had a missile that could fly that far.Ministry officials stressed that North Korea had yet to conduct a test to demonstrate an ability to deliver a nuclear warhead by missile at such a long distance. The white paper also did not elaborate on how South Korean officials had reached their conclusions, except for noting the North’s success in putting a satellite into orbit on a long-range rocket in 2012 and its third underground nuclear test in February 2013.The South’s assessments, if correct, could change calculations about the vulnerability of the United States.American officials have struggled for years to figure out how close North Korea has come to building a nuclear-tipped intercontinental ballistic missile and have sometimes issued conflicting conclusions. In early 2011, Robert M. Gates, who was the defense secretary, said that North Korea was within five years of being able to strike the continental United States with an intercontinental ballistic missile.AdvertisementIn April 2013, the United States Defense Intelligence Agency said that it had “moderate confidence” that North Korea had mastered the technology of building a miniaturized weapon to fit atop a missile. Within days, however, President Obama said he did not believe that the North had that capability.AdvertisementThen last October, the commander of the American forces in South Korea, Gen. Curtis Scaparrotti of the Army, effectively sided with the Defense Intelligence Agency. But he too cautioned that North Korea had not tested a miniaturized weapon, and said that for a weapon “that complex, without it being tested, the probability of it being effective is pretty darn low.”The South Korean defense white paper noted another growing threat from North Korea, saying that it has boosted its numbers of cyber warfare specialists to 6,000. It did not disclose how South Korea had acquired the estimate.Last week, Washington imposed new sanctions on North Korea, blaming it for a recent cyberattack on Sony Pictures Entertainment. Pyongyang has denied responsibility, and some cyberexperts have also voiced skepticism.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: Ministry Suggests North Has Made Nuclear Strides.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.