By CEYLAN YEGINSUJAN. 6, 2015
ISTANBUL —  A suicide bomber wearing a large coat that concealed her explosives attacked a police station in the heart of Istanbul’s most tourist-filled district on Tuesday, killing herself and wounding two police officers, one fatally.It was the second attack on the police in this city in less than a week, and the first time in more than four years that a suicide bomber had struck such a heavily visited part of Istanbul. The attack was also reminiscent of a suicide bomb assault on the United States Embassy in Ankara nearly two years ago.Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu told reporters in Ankara that he had “given instructions for the most comprehensive investigations.” The Turkish news media said that two police officers were wounded and that one of them had died.The identity of the bomber was not immediately clear, but the Istanbul governor, Vasip Sahin, told reporters at the scene that she had spoken English. She told police officers she had lost a wallet, the governor said.AdvertisementThe attack took place on a snowy day in the historic city’s Sultanahmet district, home to some of the most storied and heavily trafficked visitor sites in Istanbul, including the Blue Mosque and the Hagia Sophia Museum, which was once the leading church of Eastern Orthodox Christians.AdvertisementA street merchant who was in the area at the time of the explosion said the woman had walked past a souvenir shop and asked for directions to the police station minutes before blowing herself up. “She was well-dressed and looked decent,” said the merchant, Omer Cenker, a tea seller.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It’s snowing, so there was nothing suspicious about her big coat or what she was wearing,” Mr. Cenker said.Shop owners in the vicinity said they had heard a loud explosion followed by gunfire.“Thank God there was a storm outside, because everyone was inside when the explosion went off,” said Yusuf Akyun, a clerk in a souvenir shop. “Normally, there would have been more people by the police station.”Last Thursday, a man lobbed grenades and fired a weapon at officers near the Istanbul offices of the prime minister before he was subdued.The leftist Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party — an extremist militant group in Turkey that claimed responsibility for the suicide bombing at the United States Embassy on Feb. 2, 2013, which killed the assailant and a security guard — took responsibility for Thursday’s attack.The last time a suicide bomber struck a popular site in this city was on Oct. 31, 2010, when a 24-year-old man linked to Kurdish separatists blew himself up in Taksim Square, wounding 15 police officers and 17 civilians.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Suicide Bomber in Istanbul Kills Officer at Police Station.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.