By ALAN WONGJAN. 6, 2015
HONG KONG —  The Hong Kong government vowed on Tuesday to press ahead with an election proposal that ignited months of street protests last year, using a report originally offered as a concession to student demonstrators to warn that the authorities would not shift course from plans laid down by Beijing.The report, which was presented by the local government as a summary of the protests that erupted in late September and the state of public opinion in the city, was released as the police told organizers and prominent supporters of the protests to prepare for arrest. And the city’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, warned against any attempt to repeat street blockades.Mr. Leung said that there would be a new round of public consultations on the election plans but that any suggestions had to follow the Basic Law, the framework that established Hong Kong’s status as a special region under Chinese sovereignty. China has said the Basic Law rules out the protesters’ demand that members of the public have a more direct say in nominating future candidates for Mr. Leung’s job. The chief executive is now chosen by an elite committee loyal to Beijing.“Nothing can coerce the central and special administrative region government,” Mr. Leung said on Tuesday, according to his website. “Because Hong Kong is, I repeat once more, a society of rule of law.”AdvertisementOpponents of the government, however, promptly accused Mr. Leung and the Chinese government of ignoring the protesters’ legitimate demands.AdvertisementHong Kong 2020, a political group led by the city’s former No. 2 official, Anson Chan, said in a statement that the report “fails totally to convey the deep sense of disappointment and betrayal felt by Hong Kong people” over the terms Beijing imposed on elections.“The Basic Law promises us the right to elect our chief executive by universal suffrage,” the group said, “but we are now being fobbed off with a sham version of democracy that makes a mockery of this promise.”During the months that protesters blocked major roads, the only concession they won from the local authorities was an offer to submit the report that was released on Tuesday, which officials said would inform Beijing of the protesters’ demands.The report concludes that it is the “common aspiration” of Beijing, the local government and Hong Kong’s people that electoral changes be carried out “strictly in accordance with the Basic Law” and the Chinese government’s interpretation of it.The report did not deliver any surprises, but it set in motion steps likely to bring renewed contention. The unyielding positions laid out by the Hong Kong authorities and the Chinese government appear likely to meet resistance, and possibly renewed protests, from activists demanding fully democratic elections.Resistance is also likely to come from pro-democratic members of the city’s legislature, who have the numbers to stymie any changes to the voting system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We will veto any proposal that’s limited by the Aug. 31 decision,” Alan Leong, a pro-democracy legislator from the Civic Party, said at a news conference on Tuesday afternoon, referring to the date China set out its plans. He also said the report had misrepresented the will of the people in Hong Kong in saying they shared the same aspirations as the authorities.The Chinese government responded to the report by saying its initial electoral plan in August had already taken public opinion into account, the state-run China News Service reported.AdvertisementThe proposals issued in August “were made on the basis of fully considering the views and suggestions of all sides of Hong Kong society,” said a spokesman for the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, the Chinese government’s arm for dealing with the two former colonies. “Voicing demands by wrecking rule of law and ruining normal social order is unacceptable.”The proposal released in August would, for the first time, allow the Hong Kong public to vote directly for the chief executive in 2017. But Beijing would effectively have the power to vet the candidates.Arrests of protest leaders are expected this month, and the authorities have begun asking some of them, including Joshua Wong, an 18-year-old activist, to report to the police next week.In a statement, Mr. Wong said the police had called and told him that he would be arrested “for the offense of ‘inciting others to take part in an unlawful assembly.’ ”“To be frank, it’s expected,” he said.“I’m facing five charges since I was first arrested on Sept. 26, but I do not regret my disobedience actions,” Mr. Wong added. “Under pressure from those in power, we must still plow ahead in the coming year to change our future. We have no room to compromise.”A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hong Kong Leaders Insist Election Will Follow Beijing’s Rules.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.