By DAN BILEFSKYJAN. 5, 2015
PARIS — Leo Tindemans, a former prime minister of Belgium who pushed for greater European integration and helped set the stage for the introduction of the European Union’s single currency, the euro, died on Dec. 26 in Edegem, in the Flemish province of Antwerp. He was 92.His death was announced by the European People’s Party, which he helped found.Mr. Tindemans, a Christian Democrat, was the prime minister of Belgium from 1974-78, and later its foreign minister.In Belgium, divided among Dutch-speaking Flanders in the north, French-speaking Wallonia in the south and a German-speaking minority in the east, Mr. Tindemans is credited with helping to shape the decentralized federal state that has contributed to holding his country together.But it was on the European stage that he earned his reputation as an elder statesman and pioneer of what is today the European Union. Known as Mr. Europe, Mr. Tindemans was an ardent exponent of more closely uniting the political and economic policies of the European Union, the world’s biggest trading bloc.AdvertisementIn 1975, he wrote an influential report in which he called for a “people’s Europe” and advocated European economic and monetary integration, a goal that culminated in the creation of the euro. He also called for greater coordination of Europe’s foreign and defense policies.AdvertisementHis vision was embraced by those who sought a more federal Europe, and much of it came to pass. But skeptics in Britain and elsewhere in Europe have criticized his approach, calling it a perilous encroachment on countries’ national sovereignty.Leonard Clemence Tindemans was born on April 16, 1922, in Zwijndrecht, a Flemish community near Antwerp, the son of a mechanic and a homemaker. He witnessed the devastation of his country during World War II.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Guy Korthoudt, a senior member of the European People’s Party and his former campaign manager, said Mr. Tindemans was among a generation of European politicians who saw European unity as the best means to overcome the virulent nationalism of the past. “He believed deeply in uniting Europe, inspired by a sense of reconciliation and compromise,” Mr. Korthoudt said.Mr. Tindemans was elected in 1979 to the European Parliament, the European Union’s only democratically elected body. He received 983,000 votes, the most for any elected official in Belgian history, or about one out of every three qualified voters, Mr. Korthoudt said.Mr. Tindemans served two years before returning to the Belgian government as the foreign minister. He was elected to the European Parliament again in 1989, and until 1999 remained a potent voice in the assembly as the group leader of his party.In 1995, Mr. Tindemans helped the financier and philanthropist George Soros and others set up the International Crisis Group, a private organization, now based in Brussels, that monitors troublespots around the world. At his death he was a senior adviser to the group and a former board member.He is survived by his wife, Rosa Naesens; four children, Thomas, Pia, Nora and Bruno; and 12 grandchildren, according to European news reports.Manfred Weber, the current chairman of the European People’s Party group in the European Parliament, and Manuel Valls, the French prime minister, both called Mr. Tindemans a “visionary” who had played a major role in shaping present-day Europe.A version of this article appears in print on January 7, 2015, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Leo Tindemans, 92, Former Prime Minister of Belgium.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.