An American charter airline has been accused by the United States Department of Agriculture of violating an animal protection law while shipping monkeys to laboratories in the United States from China.In its inspection report, the Agriculture Department said that Air Transport International shipped 1,148 crab-eating macaques to Houston from the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou on Dec. 7 and failed to provide the animals with food and water for more than 24 hours, in violation of the Animal Welfare Act. The report also cited insecure crates that it said put the animals in danger.The case reflects recent shifts in the international trade in animals for experiments, as more commercial airlines have halted such shipments under pressure from animal welfare advocates, and as research facilities and pharmaceutical companies have increasingly had to rely on charter flights — a more expensive alternative.
China is the leading supplier of primates to the United States, exporting more than 10,000 monkeys in 2013, or 56 percent of the total, according to the International Primate Protection League, an advocacy group. Crab-eating macaques, which are widely used in biomedical experiments, are not native to China but are bred there commercially for export. The cost of raising a monkey in China is about half that of the United States.It is the second time Air Transport International has run afoul of the law while transporting monkeys from China for laboratory research. In July, it was accused of neglecting to feed more than 1,700 macaques for more than 32 hours.Air Transport International and Air Transport Services Group, its parent company, did not respond to requests, via telephone and email, for comment. The Agriculture Department has not opened an investigation on either citation of noncompliance yet, said a department public affairs specialist, Tanya Espinosa, adding that the report was posted on the department’s database on Jan. 2.If an investigation confirms the inspector’s report, the Agriculture Department may impose a fine. Last year, China Southern Airlines, a state-owned carrier, settled an animal welfare violation charge with the Agriculture Department and paid a fine of $11,600. It later announced that it would no longer transport monkeys to the United States.China Southern’s decision to end such transports was hailed by the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals and other animal welfare advocates who have campaigned for years to cut off the supply of monkeys for laboratory experiments. But defenders of such experiments argue that primates, and other species, cannot be completely replaced, and that the greater reliance on charter airlines only increases the cost of important research.“The shipments they are doing are quite large, as you can see in these reports,” Justin Goodman, PETA’s director of laboratory investigations, said of the charter flights. “Unfortunately they are picking up the slack of many Chinese companies that now refuse to take part in this bloody industry, and they are capitalizing on that.”Another challenge is that charter airlines “are not as accountable to the public as the passenger airlines,” Mr. Goodman said. “They are able to fly under the radar a little more.”