AdvertisementSupported byBy Hari KumarNEW DELHI — Two concerts by a veteran Pakistani singer scheduled for this week in the Indian state of Maharashtra were canceled by the organizers after a regional Hindu right-wing party took exception to the events.The singer, Ghulam Ali, said Thursday that he was “not angry, but hurt,” by the cancellations.“We came here to share love,” Mr. Ali, 75, said in an interview with the Indian television news channel NDTV in New Delhi. The concerts were scheduled for Friday and Saturday in the cities of Mumbai and Pune.The Shiv Sena, a Hindu nationalist party that is part of the coalition government in Maharashtra State, asked the organizers to cancel the concerts after the killing of four Indian soldiers Monday in the Indian-administered part of Kashmir. The Indian Army has called the killings, near the line of control with Pakistan, a terrorist attack.At a news conference in Mumbai on Thursday, Aditya Thackeray, the leader of the Shiv Sena, made it clear that the party objected to the events simply because of Mr. Ali’s nationality.“Terrorism and cultural ties cannot go hand in hand,” Mr. Thackeray said.With its muscular brand of hard-line politics and the sometimes violent protests by its followers, the Shiv Sena has long been a powerful, and feared, presence in Mumbai, the Maharashtra state capital. Fearing a disruption of Mr. Ali’s concert, Leo Fernandis, the manager of the venue in Mumbai, Shanmukhananda Hall, said he had asked the organizers to contact the Shiv Sena to reach an agreement, or else the show would be canceled.India and Pakistan have long clashed at the Kashmir border, with each side blaming the other for cease-fire violations. They have fought three wars over the Kashmir region since independence from Britain in 1947, and each nation has accused the other of supporting terrorism across the boundary.This summer, the two nations canceled diplomatic talks scheduled for August over disagreements on the agenda and Pakistan’s attempts to consult with Kashmiri separatist leaders in the Indian-controlled territory.The migration of political hostilities to the cultural arena is not an entirely new phenomenon — cricket tournaments between the two have been called off several times because of tensions.But the cancellation of Mr. Ali’s events on Wednesday was notable because he has held many concerts in India over the decades, and he remains very popular here. Last year, Mr. Ali, a singer of Urdu poems known as ghazals, performed without incident in Mumbai to an almost full house at Shanmukhananda Hall, which has a capacity of just under 3,000.In April, Mr. Ali performed at a music festival at a famous Hindu temple in the holy city of Varanasi, in Uttar Pradesh State, and paid tribute to a celebrated Indian musician, Bismillah Khan.The Maharashtra government had promised security for the concerts this week but that assurance was not enough for the organizers or venue owners. “You know the Shiv Sena people,” said Mr. Fernandis, the manager of Shanmukhananda Hall, “they may throw stones, create other troubles for the show.”Representatives of Panache Media, the Indian company that had organized the events, decided to call off the performances after meeting with Shiv Sena officials.“You can enjoy the music only in relaxed atmosphere,” said Randhir Ranjan Roy, Panache Media’s business development manager. Regarding Shiv Sena, he said: “They are not against Ghulam Ali, but they are against Pakistan.”Pakistan’s envoy to India, Abdul Basit, registered disappointment over the cancellations in a statement issued late Wednesday, noting that “Indian artists when they go to Pakistan, they do not face such opposition.”Indians on social media expressed shock and dismay over the cancellation.One Twitter user, Akhilesh Sharma, commented: “What a shame! Ghulam Ali’s concert canceled after Shiv Sena threats!! Such intolerance doesn’t show us in good light!!”Another, Chandrika Parmar, said: “Ghulam Ali Saheb, Thank you for your graciousness and generosity. I am ashamed that you had to face this in my country.”Advertisement