By DHARISHA BASTIANSJAN. 7, 2015
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka — The Sri Lankan election authorities are investigating reports that the military has troops standing by, ready to deploy during the presidential election Thursday, the country’s election commissioner said on Wednesday.The commissioner, Mahinda Deshapriya, told reporters at a news conference that he had received complaints about the deployment of troops in the former conflict zones in the north and east of the country. A heavy army presence there could discourage voter turnout in areas dominated by ethnic Tamils, who are less likely than members of the Sinhalese majority to support the incumbent, President Mahinda Rajapaksa.“I know about it, and I am investigating,” Mr. Deshapriya said of the situation. If a situation arises on Election Day that the police cannot handle, he said, it will be the election commissioner’s job to decide whether to call for a military deployment.Tensions are high in Sri Lanka going into the election, in which Mr. Rajapaksa hopes to win a third six-year term. He has faced an unexpected challenge from one of his top lieutenants, the former health minister Maithripala Sirisena. There have been scattered reports of violence during the campaign.AdvertisementOne of Mr. Sirisena’s supporters died in a hospital Wednesday after being shot the day before while helping to erect a stage for a rally. Three other people were also wounded in that attack.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rajapaksa enjoys considerable popularity among ethnic Sinhalese Buddhists, who make up 70 percent of Sri Lanka’s electorate and credit him with ending the 26-year war against Tamil separatist rebels in the north. But he is unpopular with minority groups, including Tamils and Muslims, and high turnout among those groups could conceivably swing the election.Mr. Deshapriya, the election commissioner, said he had discussed reports of a planned military deployment with the army’s top commander “and he denied knowledge of it.”AdvertisementThe army released a statement “categorically denying distorted and factually incorrect media reports” suggesting plans for a deployment meant to influence the election. It said troops were deployed “in order to assist maintenance of law and order of the country only at the request of the police.” The statement added that “the army, well conscious of its legitimate and well-defined roles, flatly rejects irrational claims that it was trying to disrupt the peaceful conduct of the presidential election.”Ellen Barry contributed reporting from New Delhi.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Sri Lanka: Officials Investigating Reports on Troops Before Election.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.