By RICK GLADSTONEJAN. 7, 2015
The assault on the Paris offices of Charlie Hebdo, a French newspaper that has repeatedly satirized religion, was one of the deadliest in a history of violent responses and threats against the news media over the mockery of Islam.The responses have included the assassinations of journalists and writers and attacks on the institutions that published their work. The responses also have broadened in recent years to include bloggers and the makers of Internet videos.People of many faiths have committed violent acts in the name of religion and issued threats over insults. In Islam, though, there are strict prohibitions on the rendering of images of the Prophet Muhammad and other religious depictions.In a number of countries where Islam is the prevailing religion, such insults are crimes. Some are punishable by death.AdvertisementHere are some of the notable attacks over the past few decades:FEBRUARY 1989 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, then the supreme leader of Iran, issues a death sentence against Salman Rushdie, author of “The Satanic Verses,” for blaspheming Islam, forcing Mr. Rushdie into hiding. Others are also targeted for roles in publishing translations of the book, including Japanese and Italian translators who are stabbed, one fatally.AdvertisementJUNE 1992 Farag Fouda, a columnist for the Egyptian weekly magazine October, is fatally wounded by an assassin from a Muslim extremist group over Mr. Fouda’s outspoken opposition to religious fundamentalism.NOVEMBER 2004 Theo van Gogh, a Dutch filmmaker and television host, is killed on an Amsterdam street by a Moroccan Dutchman to avenge what the killer regarded as Mr. Van Gogh’s anti-Islamic work. Mr. Van Gogh had collaborated with Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a Somali refugee-turned-Dutch politician, on “Submission: Part 1,” a short film in which verses of the Quran were written on the bodies of naked women to protest their treatment by men. Ms. Hirsi Ali received police protection after the film was shown on Dutch television; Mr. Van Gogh had refused such protection.SEPTEMBER 2005 The publication of cartoons lampooning the Prophet Muhammad in Jyllands-Posten, a Danish newspaper, inspire a wave of other newspapers — including Charlie Hebdo — to reprint the cartoons, provoking more death threats against the cartoonists and others deemed responsible.SEPTEMBER 2006 Masked gunmen abduct and behead Mohammed Taha Mohammed Ahmed, the editor in chief of Al Wifaq, a Sudanese newspaper, after he angered Islamists by publishing an article about the Prophet Muhammad.SEPTEMBER 2012 “Innocence of Muslims,” a vulgar American-made video about Muhammad that was spread via the Internet, leads to waves of violent protests against United States embassies around the world, and is considered a contributing factor in the attack on the diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, that killed four Americans, including the ambassador.Shreeya Sinha contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Timeline of Threats and Acts of Violence Over Blasphemy and Insults to Islam .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.