By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 7, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  A former Korean Air executive who flew into a rage over the way she was served nuts in a first-class cabin, forcing a plane back to the gate at Kennedy Airport to kick out a flight attendant, was indicted on Wednesday on criminal charges of violating aviation safety regulations and conspiring to hush up the episode.The executive, Cho Hyun-ah, the eldest child of Korean Air’s chairman, Cho Yang-ho, was fired from her position as a vice president of the airline and jailed last month after her actions on Dec. 5 set off a national uproar and turned her family and Korean Air into objects of international ridicule. Her fall from grace was the latest blow to South Korea’s powerful family-controlled business empires, known as chaebol, which have been plagued by corruption scandals, tax evasion charges and sibling feuds over assets.Prosecutors said Wednesday that Ms. Cho, 40, verbally and physically abused first-class flight attendants on a Korean Air flight bound for South Korea from New York after one of them served her macadamia nuts in an unopened bag, instead of on a plate. During a 20-minute harangue, she ordered the plane to return to the gate to kick out Park Chang-jin, the head of the cabin crew, they said.“The unprecedented turnaround of the plane undermined the credibility of Korean Air and the national image of South Korea,” the prosecutors said in a statement.AdvertisementThe “nut rage” incident, as Ms. Cho’s case became known, drew extensive attention in South Korea, where many people considered it to be far more than a tantrum by the spoiled daughter of a tycoon. They believed that the way Korean Air and the Transport Ministry had handled the episode confirmed some of their worst misgivings about the chaebol and their relations with government regulators.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since the Korean War, a handful of chaebol families have built conglomerates like Samsung and Hyundai that dominate the South Korean economy. But they have also developed a reputation for running their corporate empires like dictators and for maintaining collusive ties with regulators.AdvertisementIndicted along with Ms. Cho on Wednesday was a Korean Air executive, identified by the family name Yeo, who was accused of coercing airline officials to delete an email on what had happened on Dec. 5 and lie to government investigators to protect Ms. Cho. Prosecutors also indicted a Transport Ministry official on charges of illegally briefing Mr. Yeo on the confidential details of the official inquiry.Mr. Park, the attendant who was kicked off the plane, said in news interviews that Ms. Cho had made him and a junior flight attendant who had served the nuts apologize on their knees. He also said that Korean Air officials had pressured him to give Transport Ministry investigators a less incriminating version of what had happened.The ministry later said that its inquiry had been faulty and unfair, and it disciplined eight investigators. Ms. Cho, for her part, has repeatedly apologized for her actions.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Ex-Korean Air Executive Is Indicted in ‘Nut Rage’ Episode.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.