By CEYLAN YEGINSUJAN. 7, 2015
ISTANBUL —  A Marxist extremist group has claimed responsibility for a suicide attack on Tuesday in the heart of Istanbul’s tourist district that left the assailant and a police officer dead.A female suicide bomber entered a police station late Tuesday in the tourist district, Sultanahmet, and told officers that she had lost her wallet before blowing herself up, according to the governor of Istanbul, Vasip Sahin.It was the second time in less than a week that the group, the outlawed Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-Front, had carried out an attack against the Turkish police in a show of protest against the governing Justice and Development Party. The group was also behind a 2013 suicide bombing at the United States Embassy in Ankara, the capital, that killed the bomber and a security guard.In a statement on its website published early Wednesday, the group identified the suicide bomber as Elif Sultan Kalsen.AdvertisementMs. Kalsen’s family, who had not been in contact with her for years, was called to the Forensic Medicine Institute to identify the body on Wednesday. After viewing it, family members said it was not Ms. Kalsen, the semiofficial Anadolu News Agency reported.AdvertisementIn its statement, the group said, “Our sacrifice fighter was martyred, a policeman who is the guardian of the thieving, murdering fascist state was punished by death.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is the same state which shot Berkin Elvan and which protects its thief ministers,” the statement continued, referring to a 15-year-old boy who died after being wounded by the police during antigovernment demonstrations two years ago, and a decision on Monday by a Turkish parliamentary commission not to pursue a corruption trial against four former ministers.The ministers were implicated in a sweeping corruption inquiry in December 2013, but the committee, predominantly made up of Justice and Development Party members, cleared them of all charges.The Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-Front was founded in the 1970s as a Marxist-Leninist party and has strongly opposed American influence in Turkey. Over the decades, that has led to a series of attacks on Western targets, including embassies, officials and businessmen. Turkey, the European Union and the United States consider the group a terrorist organization.Although the organization’s influence has waned over the years and the attacks have become more sporadic, last Thursday, the same extremist group claimed responsibility after a man threw two hand grenades at police officers stationed near the prime minister’s office in Istanbul. The bombs failed to detonate, and the police arrested the man and seized his weapons. No injuries were reported.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Extremist Group Claims Responsibility for Suicide Attack at Istanbul Police Station.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.