By SHUAIB ALMOSAWA and KAREEM FAHIMJAN. 7, 2015
SANA, Yemen —  A large car bomb exploded outside a police academy in Yemen’s capital, Sana, early Wednesday, killing or wounding dozens of applicants who were lined up at the building’s gate, according to security officials.An Interior Ministry official said that at least 38 people had been killed and that more than 90 had been wounded.Investigators said there was no immediate claim of responsibility for the bombing. The attack was the deadliest in the capital since October, when a suicide bomber killed nearly 50 people at a protest.Video of the aftermath of Wednesday’s bombing showed bodies in heaps outside the walls of the academy and police officers removing the mangled wreckage of cars.AdvertisementViolence has surged in Yemen over the last few months, reflecting growing instability and tension since the Houthis, a former rebel group, took control of Sana in late September. The Houthis have expanded their reach across the country, galvanizing their opponents, including Sunni extremists belonging to Al Qaeda’s local affiliate, who have responded with an intensifying campaign of bombings and assassinations.AdvertisementScenes of carnage like that on Wednesday are becoming disturbingly routine in Yemen, an impoverished country bedeviled by the persistent strength of the militants of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the local branch of the extremist group and a frequent target of United States missile strikes.Al Qaeda regards the Houthis as heretics because their leadership is drawn from the minority Zaydi sect, an offshoot of Shiism.The American missile strikes, combined with the Houthi advance, appear to be transforming Al Qaeda into a more potent foe, according to analysts. Attacks by the militants, which had largely focused on the military and security personnel, are increasingly killing civilians.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, Qaeda bombings killed at least three dozen people, including schoolgirls and people celebrating the Prophet Muhammad’s birthday at a cultural center.Muathe al-Sharaei, who witnessed Wednesday’s bombing, said that hundreds of people had been lined up outside the police academy, including many who had camped out for days in search of coveted work. The police had used water cannons several days earlier in an effort to disperse the applicants, fearing that, after another bombing elsewhere in the capital, the applicants were an easy target, Mr. Sharaei said.Many of the victims of the bombing were taken to Al-Thawra Hospital, where relatives had difficulty identifying bodies that were badly disfigured by the blast. Some found clues like identification cards in the pockets of charred clothing.In an office at the hospital, Ahmed al-Subaei, an investigator, held a list of the victims as he answered telephone calls and delivered grim news. “Muthana is dead,” he told one caller. “Yes, he’s dead,” he said to the next.“What about Shihab?” asked one man who went to the hospital looking for his nephew, Shihab Mohamed Muslih. After a few minutes, Mr. Subaei told the man that his nephew had been killed.“Are you sure?” the man asked, cradling his head in his hands. “I was told otherwise.”Shuaib Almosawa reported from Sana, Yemen, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Car Bombing Kills Dozens at Yemeni Police Academy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.