The 32-year-old son of the film star Jackie Chan pleaded guilty to a drug charge in a Beijing courtroom on Friday and was sentenced to six months in prison. The son, Jaycee Chan, was one of the most prominent targets in a crackdown on illegal drug use in the Chinese capital last year, and his case has been closely covered by the Chinese news media.He was arrested along with an actor from Taiwan, Ko Chen-tung, in an August raid on a foot massage parlor in Beijing. The police said that both men tested positive for marijuana and that investigators found more than 100 grams, or more than 3.5 ounces, of the drug in the younger Mr. Chan’s Beijing home.
Jaycee Chan was convicted of “accommodating drug users” and given a six-month sentence and a fine of 2,000 renminbi, or about $325, the Beijing Dongcheng Court said on its microblog. He had faced a maximum penalty of three years in prison.“I have broken the law and should be punished,” the court’s microblog paraphrased Mr. Chan as telling the judge. “After I return to society, I won’t offend again, because I would disappoint my family and friends once again.”Mr. Chan’s attorney had argued that he should receive a light sentence because he had admitted his guilt and had no previous criminal record and because marijuana is less harmful than other illegal drugs, the court said.Jackie Chan, who previously served as a spokesman for an official Chinese antidrug campaign, said last year that he was shocked and angered by his son’s actions and asked that he receive no preferential treatment. “As a public figure, I feel very ashamed; as his dad, I’m very sad and disappointed,” he wrote on his website.Jaycee Chan, who has appeared in about two dozen Chinese films and released a handful of Mandarin pop albums, was one of several actors, musicians and other entertainment industry personalities arrested last year in Beijing on suspicion of drug crimes. The Chinese capital saw a dramatic increase in drug-related arrests, including high-profile raids on bars and nightclubs in which patrons were forced to submit to tests for illegal drug use. As of mid-November, the Beijing police had arrested 11,400 people on drug charges, an increase of 82 percent over the previous year, the state-run China News Service reported.Mr. Ko, the actor who was arrested with Mr. Chan last year, served 14 days of administrative detention last year and tearfully apologized at a Beijing news conference before returning to Taiwan.