AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenKevin Vickers, the sergeant-at-arms of Canada’s House of Commons who became a national hero in October after an armed attack on Parliament, was appointed the ambassador to Ireland on Thursday.Mr. Vickers’s experience in diplomacy is mainly limited to protecting visiting dignitaries, including members of the British royal family. But Mr. Vickers, formerly a senior member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, rose from relative obscurity just after the attack when it emerged that he had spun backward, dived to the ground and set off a volley of bullets that killed a gunman who had invaded Parliament after killing a soldier at the nearby National War Memorial.After firing the shots, Mr. Vickers entered a nearby room where Prime Minister Stephen Harper and his Conservative caucus were meeting and announced, “I engaged the suspect, and the suspect is deceased.”Citing his “tremendous acts of heroism,” Mr. Harper said Thursday during a speech in British Columbia that Mr. Vickers would do “a tremendous job as ambassador.” The post in Ireland is now vacant.Since the shootings in Ottawa in October, Mr. Vickers has done little to encourage the praise for his role. He has spoken about that day only briefly, while in Israel for a conference, where members of Parliament recognized his actions.“As a Canadian with family on both sides hailing from Ireland, there could be no greater honor,” Mr. Vickers said Thursday of his appointment. “I am humbled by the invitation to serve my country in this way.”Until the attack on Parliament, Mr. Vickers’s public profile was largely limited to carrying the large ceremonial mace into the House of Commons to open sittings. But his weapons also included a 9-millimeter pistol, as his main task was overseeing security for the chamber.Those security arrangements came under greater scrutiny after the attack by Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, an Islamic radical who left behind a video that, according to the Mounted Police, showed that he was driven by “ideological and political motives.” That video may never be made public.The attack revealed several shortcomings, some obvious, in Parliament’s security setup. Different portions of the Parliament Buildings were protected by separate House of Commons and Senate security forces. A month after the attack, it was announced that the forces would be merged, although the Royal Canadian Mounted Police still retains separate control over Parliament’s grounds.While an investigation continues by the Ontario Provincial Police, which was not involved in responding to the attack, The Globe and Mail reported that Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau was shot at least one time as he ran up Parliament’s Hall of Honor with security and police officers in pursuit. When the gunman slipped into an alcove, Mr. Vickers initially sheltered behind a pillar before dropping to the floor and firing. The other officers immediately joined in, and Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau was killed.Mr. Harper said Thursday that when Parliament reconvened later this month, his government planned to introduce antiterrorism legislation beyond measures it introduced in October after the Parliamentary shooting.“The fact of the matter is this, ladies and gentleman: The international jihadist movement has declared war,” he said. “They have declared war and are already executing it on a massive scale on a whole range of countries with which they are in contact.” Advertisement