By JOE COCHRANEJAN. 9, 2015
Supriyadi, operational officer at Indonesia’s National Search and Rescue Agency, said his team detected pings in their efforts to find the black box flight recorders from AirAsia Flight 8501.JAKARTA, Indonesia —  Search and rescue teams have detected pinging from the so-called black boxes of the AirAsia plane that crashed into the Java Sea, Indonesian officials said on Friday as divers resumed attempts to reach the doomed aircraft’s tail section in hopes of finding the devices inside or nearby.Tatang Zainuddin, deputy chief of operations for the National Search and Rescue Agency, said a research ship from Indonesia’s Agency for Assessment and Application of Technology had picked up pinging from the plane’s flight data and cockpit voice recorders on Thursday afternoon.He said the Sampson, an American destroyer taking part in the hunt for the devices, had also detected pinging.Mr. Tatang said the authorities had not yet determined the exact coordinates of the black boxes.The jet, flying as Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501, crashed into the Java Sea on Dec. 28 with 162 people aboard, less than an hour after taking off from the Indonesian city of Surabaya, bound for Singapore. Search teams had recovered the bodies of 45 victims as of Thursday night, 25 of which have been identified.AdvertisementThe cause of the crash remains unclear, although weather has been cited as a probable factor.On Wednesday, the Indonesian authorities announced a breakthrough in the search with the discovery of the tail section of the Airbus A320-200, where the flight data and cockpit voice recorders are housed. Officials have said they hope that recovering the black boxes will help explain what happened to the plane, which disappeared and crashed amid inclement weather.On Friday, Indonesian divers resumed an attempt to bring the aircraft’s tail section up from beneath more than 100 feet of water using special lifting balloons. They were forced to suspend the mission on Thursday because of severe underwater currents, according to officials from the search and rescue agency.AdvertisementSantoso Sayogo, an investigator with Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee, said on Friday that it appeared that the black boxes were no longer inside the tail section of the aircraft and that search and rescue divers were trying to pinpoint their location, Reuters reported.Muhammad Rusmadi contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Signals Are Detected From AirAsia Jet’s Black Boxes.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.