
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 10, 2015
As the authorities in France worked on Saturday to piece together the sequence of events at a kosher supermarket in Paris where a gunman and four hostages were killed on Friday, there was an outpouring of praise online for a young employee credited with saving the lives of some customers by hiding them in a cold-storage room.The employee, Lassana Bathily, 24, was identified in the French news as a Muslim from Mali who worked at the supermarket, Hyper Cacher, near the Porte de Vincennes in eastern Paris.In an interview with the French channel BFMTV, Mr. Bathily said he ushered about 15 people into the basement room after the gunman burst into the shop. He then turned off the power and the lights.“We were locked in there,” he said. “I told them to calm down, not make any noise, or else if he hears that we’re there, he can come down and kill us.”Later in the four-hour siege, Mr. Bathily decided to leave the room and try to escape through a freight elevator leading to the attic. He encouraged others to join him, he said, but they were worried that the gunman, identified by the police as Amedy Coulibaly, would be able to hear them if they used that escape route and decided to remain hidden.AdvertisementWhen Mr. Bathily escaped and emerged from the market while Mr. Coulibaly was still inside, he was ordered by the police to lie down and put his hands on his head. “I was a bit confused,” he told BFMTV, perhaps not having considered that he could have been mistaken for a militant.AdvertisementVideo that appeared to show that scene unfolding was recorded by a witness from a service station near the market and posted on the website of the French broadcaster Europe 1.Mr. Bathily was then placed in handcuffs “for an hour and a half,” he said, but eventually was able to help the authorities plan their operation to liberate the hostages by describing the layout of the shop and assuring the police that they could safely break down the market’s front door without endangering the civilians inside.The customers hiding in the basement were also in contact with the police by telephone, Mr. Bathily said.When the people he had hidden came out at the end of the siege, Mr. Bathily said, “they congratulated me.”“They said, ‘Really, thanks for thinking of all these ideas.’ I said, ‘It’s nothing, it’s life.' ”As news of his heroics spread on Saturday, there were numerous calls on social networks to reward him for his bravery with either the Legion of Honor, France’s highest award, or French citizenship.
            Immense hommage à Lassana Bathily, salarié musulman de l'HyperCacher, grâce à qui des otages ont été sauvés. RT ! http://t.co/Ekev3OoPjx 
            lassana bathily mérite la légion d'honneur pour ce qu'il a fait grand respect à lui !        
            Tellement honorée d'être avec Lassana Bathily qui mérite en urgence la nationalité française pour faits de bravoure. pic.twitter.com/LqlQ6LuRY6 
            Le héros de la prise d'otages porte de Vincennes est malien et musulman : Lassana Bathily #UneMedaillePourLassana http://t.co/uTVepnM96m 
            Respect à Lassana Bathily, gros respect.        
            If Muslims worldwide have to apologise for #CharlieHebdo, do Muslims worldwide have to be congratulated for #LassanaBathily? Just checking.        
            Lassana, héros lors de la prise d'otage à Paris: "Je leur ai ouvert la porte du congélateur" - RTL Info http://t.co/9i2gYlgRM0 via @rtlinfo Some observers also connected his actions to the hashtag used to praise Ahmed Merabet, a Muslim police officer killed on Wednesday by the gunmen who launched the deadly attack on the offices of Charlie Hebdo, a satirical weekly.
            Jan. 10 :. Lassana Bathily, employé (musulman pratiquant d'origine malienne) de l'#HyperCacher a éte menotté pendant 1h30. #JeSuisAhmed 
            Meet Lassana Bathily, another Muslim hero in the ongoing French tragedy: http://t.co/td6a44Dyy2 #JeSuisAhmed Palko Karasz contributed reporting from Paris.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »