By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 10, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  A South Korean-born American citizen who has spoken warmly about her trips to North Korea in public appearances and articles was deported from South Korea on Saturday, after an outcry from conservatives who accused her of sympathizing with the North Korean government.The woman, Shin Eun-mi, 54, said she would not challenge the immigration authorities’ decision to deport her, and she boarded a plane to Los Angeles on Saturday evening. But she said she was deeply disappointed with the South Korean government.“I feel as if I am betrayed by someone I have loved,” she said before Justice Ministry officials escorted her from the immigration office in Seoul to Incheon International Airport. “My body is leaving my home country, South Korea, today, but they can never deport my soul, too, from the mother country that I love.”By law, she cannot return to South Korea for five years.The move to deport Ms. Shin has drawn criticism from Washington, where the State Department on Friday reiterated long-held misgivings about South Korea’s National Security Law, which bans praise or support for the North and which officials here invoked to expel Ms. Shin.Advertisement“We’re concerned that the National Security Law, as interpreted and implied in some cases, limits freedom of expression and restricts access to the Internet,” a State Department spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said Friday when asked about Ms. Shin’s case.AdvertisementProsecutors here said last week that Ms. Shin had made supportive comments about North Korea during a series of talks in South Korea late last year, describing three trips she made to the country between 2011 and 2013. They accused her of violating the National Security Law but apparently did not consider her offense serious enough for a formal indictment, instead asking the Justice Ministry to deport her.Ms. Shin denied violating the security law, saying that her lectures were not aimed at praising the North Korean government but at promoting reconciliation between the Koreas. She said she was a victim of a witch hunt by conservative South Korean news media outlets, bloggers and activists campaigning against what they call jongbuk, or followers of North Korea.Six decades after the Korean War ended in a truce, the Korean Peninsula remains technically at war, and how much one is allowed to say about North Korea remains a delicate issue. Under the National Security Law, South Korea blocks access to North Korean websites and jails people for circulating pro-North propaganda on the Internet.For years, international human rights groups have recommended that South Korea repeal or amend the law, saying that it hinders freedom of expression and political association. But mainstream conservative parties have blocked any attempt to change it, saying that it protects the South against real threats from the North.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Critics said the law’s loosely worded definition of illegal “activities benefiting the enemy” leaves it open to abuse. Such fears increased after President Park Geun-hye — daughter of the former military dictator Park Chung-hee, who used the law to arrest many political dissidents — took office two years ago. Last month, her government won a Constitutional Court ruling that disbanded a small leftist party accused of following North Korean ideology.Ms. Shin, whose American passport gives her name as Amy Chung but who has used her Korean name here, emigrated to the United States after graduating from college in Seoul. In a series of articles online about her North Korea trips, she described the people there as warmhearted and called for Korean reunification.She has appeared in a documentary on the North that was sponsored by the South Korean government, and in 2013, a book she wrote on her North Korea trips was included on a Culture Ministry recommended-reading list. But the ministry withdrew its recommendation after the current controversy erupted.The denunciations of Ms. Shin began after she gave a series of joint lectures with a leftist activist, Hwang Sun, last year. Ms. Hwang, who is notorious among conservatives for having given birth to her daughter in Pyongyang while on a visit in 2005, was once convicted and imprisoned on charges of aiding the North. Prosecutors recently accused her of violating the National Security Law and asked a court to issue a warrant for her arrest.AdvertisementDuring the joint lectures, Ms. Shin, a trained singer, sang a North Korean song that officials here said praised the North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, who died in 2011. She was also quoted by the South Korean news media as saying that North Koreans appeared to be happy under the rule of the current leader, Kim Jong-un, one of Kim Jong-il’s sons.Ms. Shin also said that she liked North Korean beer, and that North Korean defectors living in the South had told her that they wanted to go home. Such comments infuriated conservative critics, including defectors from the North, who accused her of creating a distorted and naïve picture of the country and ignoring its dire human rights conditions.Last month, a high school student threw a homemade explosive device toward a podium where Ms. Shin was speaking. She was unhurt, and the student was arrested.Ms. Shin has accused her conservative critics of taking her remarks out of context. In her online articles and talks, she has often quoted her husband, who traveled to North Korea with her, as asking pointed questions of North Korean officials that indirectly pointed out some of the absurdities of the totalitarian government.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea Deports American Over Warm Words for Trips to North.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.