By JOE COCHRANEJAN. 10, 2015
JAKARTA, Indonesia —  An Indonesian search team on Saturday pulled the tail section of the AirAsia plane that crashed last month from the Java Sea, but the aircraft’s data recorders were not inside, officials said.Ships taking part in the search for the plane, an Airbus A320-200 that crashed on Dec. 28 with 162 people aboard, began to detect signals from the plane’s flight data and cockpit voice and recorders on Thursday. But officials have since said they believe that the crash’s impact dislodged the recorders from their original housing in the tail section.“The search for black boxes is continuing,” Indonesia’s transportation minister, Ignasius Jonan, said at a news conference on Saturday.“We are worried that in 30 days the signal will be lost,” he said. “But the main focus remains the recovery of passengers, not the black boxes.”The transportation minister was referring to the 30-day period after the crash during which the data recorders, or so-called black boxes, were expected to keep transmitting signals.AdvertisementAfter being thwarted for days by severe underwater currents and near-zero visibility, Indonesian Navy divers were finally able to tie special lifting balloons to the tail section on Saturday and attach them to the hook of a crane aboard one of the search ships, the Crest Onyx.AdvertisementS. B. Supriyadi, the director of operations for the National Search and Rescue Agency, said on Saturday that a survey ship had detected pings, apparently from the data recorders, about half a mile from where the tail wreckage was found, and at roughly the same depth, about 115 feet.The plane, flying as Flight 8501, crashed less than an hour after taking off from the Indonesian city of Surabaya, bound for Singapore. As of Saturday afternoon, search teams had recovered 48 bodies, 29 of which had been identified.The cause of the crash remains unclear, although weather has been cited as a probable factor. Officials have said they hoped the data recorders would help explain why the Airbus, which lost contact with ground control after requesting permission to increase altitude, ultimately crashed into the Java Sea.A version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: AirAsia Jet’s Tail Retrieved; Data Recorders Still Missing .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.