Jimmy Lai, profiled in Monday’s New York Times, is the founder and owner and was until recently the chairman of Next Media, which publishes the Apple Daily newspaper and Next Magazine in Hong Kong and Taiwan. He was a central figure in the pro-democracy Occupy Central protests, in which demonstrators closed major streets in three sections of Hong Kong between late September and mid-December. Now, officials in Hong Kong are weighing bringing formal charges against scores of people they have identified as key members of the protests. On Friday, Mr. Lai, 66, was instructed to report to police headquarters on Jan. 21.For his anti-Communist views, and the muckraking and sometimes paparazzi style of journalism he endorses, Mr. Lai has come under frequent attack in Hong Kong — verbally, politically, online and physically. That includes the firebombing early Monday morning of the entrances to his home and to Next Media’s offices, carried out by unidentified assailants who appeared to have thrown Molotov cocktails.In an interview at his home last week, a 1930s villa on a leafy, quiet street in Kowloon, Mr. Lai spoke about his role in the democracy movement in Hong Kong, why he is distancing himself from his media company and the challenges that lie ahead. Excerpts follow:  You’ve always been pro-democracy, but did your publications become more extreme in their coverage over the past few months?I think we did so during the Umbrella Revolution. Because we were being attacked — hacking, people coming to our place and demonstrating. That definitely pushes our people to be more extreme just by the defensiveness of it. But after that, you see that Hong Kong is now torn apart by two extremes, the blue and the yellow [the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps, respectively]. Naturally I think it is necessary for people like us, media like us, to be getting closer to the center and less to the extreme. Because you don’t want to tear society apart so much by going further to the extreme.I think the tension has moderated a bit. People looking back to the movement are more clear and rational about it, because there’s much less emotional tension there.What did Occupy Central or the Umbrella Movement accomplish?What the movement has done is to simplify the exercise of fighting for universal suffrage. This is civil disobedience as exercised by the young people. Obviously the government sees long-term turbulence if they don’t solve the problem. I think the movement was a wake-up call. We put the problem on the table with the Occupy movement, and they will have to solve it.What about more radical democracy protesters who say you and the Occupy movement didn’t go far enough?What’s the alternative? We may not accomplish anything, but this is the only power we have, the moral power. What else do we have? Nothing. We can’t go out and destroy cars, burn offices, crash the police station, set fire to government buildings. We can’t do this; it would be ridiculous. If we do any of this, we are finished. We won’t have the sympathy of the people, and we won’t have the sympathy of the world. We will lose the moral ground we are standing on.When the protests broke out, you got tear-gassed, on Sept. 28.I was at the front of the mass protesting against police with Martin Lee [the founder of Hong Kong’s Democratic Party, age 76]. This was in front of Admiralty and the KFC. We were standing there, and we saw people rush into the road and occupy it, and in that moment I said, ‘Oh my God, this is wonderful.’The next thing we feared was if things turned violent, that it would be uncontrollable. Martin and I went out to appease the people and tell them that our most basic movement is peace and love. We stood on a concrete road divider, talking to the people. While Martin was talking, the tear gas came.I was a bit fearful because the rumor was they would use plastic bullets. I was hit with something, and I thought, ‘Wow, maybe this is the plastic bullet.’ But then it was just a tear gas canister. I got a wet towel and went back. Everybody went back. Once you have a wet towel to cover your mouth, tear gas is nothing. That was the beginning.You were at the protests nearly every day for 11 weeks. But after the first few weeks, you were saying that the protesters, the students, should retreat from the streets. Was that frustrating?I was thinking, ‘You guys have to retreat,’ but if they don’t retreat I have to be there. I was a bit frustrated, but I was also very understanding about the young kids. It’s like you take them to a candy store — if they don’t have that candy in their hand they won’t leave the store. It’s like the same thing. I understood it, but I was a bit frustrated because the more we went on, the more exhausting we were of people’s good will, and the more damaging it was to the future of the movement. It’s going to be a very long fight for democracy. You can’t expect that one sit-in will get you democracy.Some people have said that because the Occupy movement so clearly angered Beijing, things will be much worse for Hong Kong going forward.I don’t agree. Of course it would’ve been better if the occupation ended after two weeks, and then we kept coming back. But we haven’t had any action that enraged Beijing before over the last 30 years, and what did we get? This is an attempt to confront Beijing, to confront the government. It’s a resistance.You are currently being investigated by anticorruption officials over your donations to politicians.Since the case is on, I better keep my mouth shut. But I think whatever comes, I will take it. I’m not worried about this because I don’t think I’ve done anything wrong.Although you still own it, you stepped down as chairman of Next Media last month. Why?I think it’s proper that I did this. The more I’m in the front of the movement, the less appropriate that I should be so closely connected with our media. You cannot have the media so close to you that it becomes your voice. This is no good, because it becomes too extreme and people will resent it. Also, it gives me more freedom to do what I like. I don’t worry those guys will change and support the blue. Everybody knows what I want; I don’t have to be bossing them around.What is the most important thing for you in business?Dedication and creativity. That helps me to really slug through a lot of problems and get ahead of other people. Even when I was a manufacturer, I created something different. In Giordano, I created fast retailing. I’m not a good manager. And I think I’m a bit crazy because I’m not very disciplined. And if I don’t like it I don’t do it, so sometimes people think I’m not very reliable. So with all these handicaps and I still could get ahead, I’m sure I’ve got something that is a saving grace. You know, when I got a little bit of money I wanted to make a revolution. In a way I’m a bit crazy. If not for this, I don’t think I would have made so much money in my life.Isn’t being pro-democracy and anti-Communist part of your business strategy too?Well if this is a business strategy, I would have a possibility of selling out. I never thought about this as a strategy. It’s just natural for me to do this. I’m a rebel; I like to make trouble. But it has to be from conviction; it’s not some strategy.You have said you won’t sell your publishing business. Do you plan to have your kids take it over?No. I don’t think it’s fair for them to go into the media business. You’ve got to be somebody like me, who can stand the pressure and really have the conviction to be in the media business. I’ve been followed by the journalists outside for two and a half years, 24 hours a day. Do I want this to be imposed on my kids? No. I don’t think I should ask my kids to inherit my business because they can’t start where I did. I was from the street. I’m a very different make of person. I’ve been a fighter all my life.