By JOANNA BERENDT and JOSEPH OROVICJAN. 11, 2015
WARSAW —  In an unexpectedly tight runoff, Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic, a conservative challenger, won Croatia’s election on Sunday and is set to become the country’s first female president.With more than 99 percent of the ballots counted, Ms. Grabar-Kitarovic, 46, won 50.4 percent of the votes, compared with 49.6 percent for President Ivo Josipovic, the center-left incumbent, the electoral commission said.The election took place in a climate of deep pessimism about Croatia’s economy. The newest member of the European Union, Croatia has one of the weakest economies in the bloc, with an unemployment rate of nearly 20 percent and youth unemployment running at 41.5 percent.“Let’s go together,” Ms. Grabar-Kitarovic of the opposition Croatian Democratic Union said late Sunday in a speech laced with patriotic wording and interrupted by nationalist soccer chants. “A difficult job awaits us. Let’s unite. Let’s unite our patriotism, love and faith in our Croatian homeland.”Her speech suggested a return to the nationalistic politics that dominated Croatia in the postwar dissolution of Yugoslavia.A shift inward is common for fledgling European Union member states, according to Dejan Jovic, a political-science professor at the University of Zagreb and former political adviser to Mr. Josipovic. “Enlargement and joining the E.U. opens up a nation, and a lot of nationalist sentiment sweeps in afterward,” Mr. Jovic said by telephone.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Grabar-Kitarovic is a former assistant secretary general at NATO and former Croatian ambassador to the United States. She also served as the minister of foreign and European affairs from 2005 to 2008, when her main priority was to guide Croatia into the European Union and NATO.Croatia’s presidency is largely ceremonial, but the president has a say in foreign policy and is head of the army.The voting was considered an important test for political parties ahead of the next year’s parliamentary elections. The increasingly unpopular Social Democratic Party, a dominant group in the center-left government that backed Mr. Josipovic, may take an even bigger hit in the polls after his loss.The turnout in the election was 58.5 percent, an increase over the first round on Dec. 28, which Mr. Josipovic, 57, narrowly won. Ms. Grabar-Kitarovic will become the fourth president of the former Yugoslav republic next month.Joanna Berendt reported from Warsaw, and Joseph Orovic from Zadar, Croatia.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Croatians Elect Their First Female President.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.