By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 11, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  It is never easy to know what people in North Korea are thinking, given the police state’s tight restrictions on access.But defectors have been able to crack the information barrier just a little, and if what they are hearing is any guide, it appears that “The Interview,” the Sony Pictures comedy about a fictional C.I.A. plot to assassinate Kim Jong-un, is not going over well with North Korean viewers, even among people who oppose the country’s dictatorship.Several democracy activists with contacts in the North said the North Koreans they spoke with reacted to the film first with fear of punishment for watching it but also with derision and wounded feelings over the depiction of their country.To put it simply, national pride trumped their dislike for Kim Jong-un, their country’s young and often ruthless leader.Advertisement“They cursed at the movie,” said Chung Kwang-il, a North Korean defector and democracy activist in South Korea who said that his associates in China had smuggled digital copies of the movie into the North and that he had since spoken by cellphone with eight people who surreptitiously watched it.Advertisement“They were angry it depicted North Koreans as a bunch of idiots,” he said. “Now, these are not people worshiping Kim Jong-un; they are ones who wish he were gone.”Pirated copies of “The Interview,” with Korean subtitles, are easily accessible online for smugglers who are trying to cash in on a growing black market for outside entertainment inside North Korea. But even some of the activists sending the film in said it was unlikely that many people would risk watching it.Some North Koreans do take chances, though, like speaking to defectors on the many Chinese cellphones spirited into the country in recent years. But watching any smuggled videos can land North Koreans in one of Mr. Kim’s gulags, or worse. Currently, “The Interview” is the most dangerous outside entertainment to bring into the North. Besides its plot involving Mr. Kim’s assassination, the film contains sexual content, which the North Korean authorities try to suppress with long prison terms for those who watch such films.The United States-funded Radio Free Asia as well as Daily NK, a Seoul-based website that says it has informants inside North Korea, reported that the North’s State Security Department recently tightened surveillance along its border with China, warning of severe punishment for anyone smuggling or watching the “reactionary movie the external hostile forces are spreading to insult the country’s supreme dignity,” a common reference to Mr. Kim.“It’s certain death if they were caught with this film,” said Kim Heung-kwang, another North Korean defector living in the South.Still, he said, a small number of his contacts did watch the comedy.Based on feedback from three of them, he said that most of the jokes appeared to be lost in translation, like a scene in which fruit in a supermarket in Pyongyang, the capital, were fakes made of plaster that were put on display to fool visitors.“That doesn’t happen in Pyongyang, and people who were not used to American-style comedy would find it insulting,” he said. “But it’s largely fear of punishment, rather than such faults, that keeps people from watching the movie. So I think it may spread once the crackdown subsides in a month or two.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Chung said the North Koreans also heaped criticism on the film for the actors’ bad North Korean accents and for using clunky imitations of Workers’ Party slogans ubiquitous in the totalitarian state.AdvertisementKim Sung-min, a North Korean defector who runs Free North Korea Radio, a Seoul-based website, wrote there that he spoke to two North Korean viewers and one of them said that he was thrilled by the scene in which an American talk-show host visiting Pyongyang asked the Kim Jong-un character why he was starving his people. (Hunger attributed to failed economic policies is widespread in North Korea.)Nonetheless, Mr. Kim quoted the viewer as saying that “the movie will only increase animosity among us because it not only failed to understand our feelings, but didn’t even try to.” He said the North Korean added: “It humiliates Kim Jong-un, treating him like a child. To us, who have been educated on his greatness, this is a public insult.”It is not the first time Hollywood has managed to rile people in other countries with humor they feel is demeaning. Remember “Borat”? But even that film, which caused the government of Kazakhstan to threaten to sue over the parody of the country, did not result in the same damage “The Interview” has.The United States continues to insist that North Korea hacked Sony’s computers, releasing confidential information. The North continues to deny it and blames the United States for a recent apparent attack on its own computer systems.In South Korea, where the movie was not expected to have wide viewership, opinions of those who have seen it so far were mixed.Although some conservative bloggers and activists supported the film, others were offended.“Even if the movie is somehow smuggled into North Korea and North Koreans see it, there’s nothing for North Korean authorities to worry about,” Bae Myung-bok, a well-known editorial writer for the South Korean daily newspaper JoongAng Ilbo, wrote in a column about the movie, which he called “Hollywood trash.” “Instead, some may be disappointed by the low quality of the Hollywood movie and feel offended that the United States derided North Korea.”Some analysts in South Korea feared that the worsening relations between the United States and North Korea over “The Interview” might derail cautious attempts for a warming of ties on the divided Korean Peninsula.Amid the hubbub, Park Sang-hak, a Seoul-based North Korean defector and activist opposed to the North’s government, said he still planned — with the help of donations from the Human Rights Foundation in New York — to launch balloons carrying DVDs and USB memory sticks containing the film into North Korea later this month.“North Korea will collapse if we send in one million copies,” he said.On Wednesday, North Korea threatened to kill Mr. Park.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Disliking Kim Jong-un, and Film Even More.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.