AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — Egyptian authorities on Sunday released, for the first time, one of the advisers to ousted President Mohamed Morsi who were detained with him at the time of the military takeover on July 3, 2013.The reasons for the release or its timing were not immediately clear; there is little sign of any easing in the broader crackdown on Mr. Morsi’s supporters. The adviser, Khaled al-Qazzaz, was the foreign relations secretary under Mr. Morsi, a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood. The authorities had held Mr. Qazzaz without charges for 558 days.An engineer and educator before joining the Morsi government, Mr. Qazzaz is a permanent resident of Canada, with a wife and four children who are Canadian citizens. His family says he is expected to return to Canada as soon as possible for treatment of medical problems resulting from his incarceration, which included long periods in solitary.Mr. Morsi and most of his senior advisers and allies have been charged with various crimes, typically including incitement to violence. All dispute the charges.Two other aides, who were not as close to Mr. Morsi at the time of the takeover, have also been released. One was former Prime Minister Hesham Qandil, who was not a member of the Brotherhood or of Mr. Morsi’s political party and had formally offered his resignation months before the takeover. The other was Mr. Morsi’s former spokesman, Yasser Ali, who had also left that position at the time of the takeover. Both have remained quiet since their release.Mr. Qazzaz was one of nine Morsi advisers who chose to remain with him on the afternoon of July 3, 2013, even after it became clear that his presidential guard was preparing to arrest them. Security forces detained many thousands of other Morsi supporters in the crackdown that followed.In an opinion column smuggled from prison and published in The New York Times last summer, Mr. Qazzaz said he was confused by the silence about his incarceration from the international leaders he and Mr. Morsi had worked with as partners. He noted that in 2012, Mr. Morsi had worked closely with President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to broker a truce in Gaza, and said Mr. Morsi had also worked with them and other international leaders in attempts to bring peace to Syria and Mali.“The silence was so thorough that I joked with my colleagues, ‘Do we really exist, or were we Photoshopped in?’ ” Mr. Qazzaz wrote.“My brothers and sisters in humanity, I know why the Egyptian military government demands my complete silence, but please answer me this: Why are you so silent about me?”Advertisement