By ZIA ur-REHMANJAN. 11, 2015
KARACHI, Pakistan — At least 62 people were killed on Sunday when a passenger bus crashed into an oil tanker on the outskirts of Karachi.The bus was carrying 62 passengers inside and 10 on the roof, according to rescue workers at the scene. It hit the oil tanker early Sunday morning, while en route to the city of Shikarpur, in Sindh Province, said Rao Anwaar, a senior police official from Malir Town in the Karachi area.Dr. Seemi Jamali, who is in charge of the emergency department at the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center in Karachi, said that 62 bodies had been brought to the hospital.“Most of the bodies are not recognizable as they were burned severely,” she said, adding that the bodies would be identified through their DNA.AdvertisementThe chief minister of Sindh, Syed Qaim Ali Shah, ordered an investigation into the crash and directed local officials to make arrangements to transfer the victims’ bodies to their hometowns.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rescue workers and officials said that it was one of the worst traffic accidents in the country in recent years.Advertisement“The majority of the passengers were sleeping in the bus at the time of the accident, and only a few passengers could jump out of the bus windows, escaping unhurt,” Mr. Anwaar said.The crash was the third major traffic accident in Sindh Province in the past year, said Zahid Farooq, an official at the Urban Resource Center, a nongovernmental organization based in Karachi. “It is mainly because of the terrible conditions of road infrastructure,” he said.In November, a bus bound for Karachi carrying passengers from the Swat Valley collided with a truck in the Khairpur District, killing 58 people, including 18 children. In another accident in April, 42 people were killed after a bus slammed into a tractor-trailer.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Pakistan: Dozens Die as Bus Collides With Truck.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.