A cover story in the latest issue of Caixin New Century Weekly, a Chinese business magazine, includes important details about the deadly stampede in Shanghai on Dec. 31: how few police officers were on duty, what preceded the sudden crush that killed 36 people and how emergency vehicles were slowed by the huge crowds that had gathered along the city’s famous riverfront to celebrate.No detail was more revelatory, though, than where local leaders dined that night. The magazine reported that, shortly before the deadly stampede, officials from the Huangpu district government ate at an expensive Japanese restaurant, where the price of a meal that night began at 1,888 renminbi, or about $300.Had the officials eaten at McDonald’s that evening, the deadly outcome would still have been the same. But for the unidentified officials involved, the perception could hardly be worse: eating expensive sushi and sake, possibly at public expense, while the prologue to a disaster was slowly unfolding nearby. To compound matters, the dinner came amid a widespread corruption crackdown and calls by President Xi Jinping for cadres to cut down on lavish meal expenses.Shanghai Officials had dinner at a high-end restaurant near a deadly stampede on New Year’s Eve //t.co/oJx8vFld8X //t.co/iWE9kPnJAY— People’s Daily,China (@PDChina) 13 Jan 15The story was picked up by other Chinese news outlets on Tuesday, and the details of the meal helped stoke anger toward the local government.“What can average people do but get angry?” read one comment on a Tianya message board. “If the central government doesn’t punish the officials responsible for the Shanghai stampede, how can it face those dead children and their families? How can people have faith in the government?”The authorities showed some signs of trying to reduce the danger from large crowds that had previously turned out for New Year events on the waterfront. But their actions were not fully carried out, which possibly contributed to the disaster.After the authorities were surprised by the estimated 300,000 people who turned out for a New Year’s Eve laser light show on the riverfront Bund area the previous year, the local authorities canceled the public event last month. Instead, a smaller event, with just 2,000 tickets issued, was staged in an area called the Bund Origin Cultural Square.Because the larger event was canceled, the number of police officers was reduced to about 500 from 6,000 the year before, Caixin reported. But news of the scaling back of the light show plans did not reach the public, and the turnout was comparable to previous years.The shortage of police officers was noticeable as people tried to make their way to the riverside, according to witnesses cited by Caixin. As the viewing stand in Chen Yi Square became packed, and a few people fainted, large numbers of people tried to make their way down. The police had tried to make the stairwell one-way, so that visitors could use it only to leave the viewing stand. But the officers were not able to keep order as masses of new arrivals tried to push against the flow and climb up to the viewing stand.The Caixin article noted that an official investigation was still in progress. But its headline — “Who Will Take Responsibility for the Shanghai Stampede?”— suggests severe punishments once the investigation concludes.