By RICK GLADSTONEJAN. 12, 2015
Women own or manage more than 30 percent of all businesses but 5 percent or less of the biggest enterprises, the United Nations said in a report published Monday.The report, by the International Labor Organization, a United Nations agency based in Geneva, also estimated that without new actions to promote women’s equality in management, it would take 100 to 200 years to achieve gender parity in business leadership positions.Posted on the I.L.O.’s website, the report was done by the organization’s Bureau for Employers’ Activities. It was based on information from 108 countries where I.L.O. data is available, as well as the findings of the organization’s survey of more than 1,200 companies in Africa, the Asia-Pacific region, Eastern and Central Europe and the Latin America-Caribbean regions.Deborah France-Massin, the bureau’s director, said in the report that although the participation of women in the labor force had been an engine for global growth, “there is a long way to go before we achieve true gender equality in the workplace, especially when it comes to top management positions.”AdvertisementThe report acknowledged significant gaps in the information used to derive its conclusions. It noted, for example that the data had combined private and public sectors, “making it difficult to track trends in the private sector.” It also said information from developing regions on women in business and management was hard to quantify, and in the private sector “was practically inexistent.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Nonetheless, the report concluded, the vast disparity between the total number of businesses owned or managed by women, and the near-total male domination in the largest businesses, shows that “the larger the company, the less likely the head will be a woman.”According to the report, Jamaica has the highest proportion of women who are managers, at 59.3 percent, while Yemen has the least, at 2.1 percent. The United States is ranked 15th, at 42.7 percent, well behind some countries in less developed areas.AdvertisementIn Asia, the highest-ranking country is the Philippines, at 47.6 percent, making it ranked fourth globally. In Latin America, Colombia is the highest, at 53.1 percent, making it ranked second globally.A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Inequality Lingers at Work, Report Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.