By STEPHEN CASTLE and ROBERT MACKEYJAN. 12, 2015
LONDON — First, the owner of the Fox News Channel incited an outpouring of ridicule for suggesting that all followers of Islam must take responsibility for the Paris attacks. Then the Fox pundit who is a self-described terrorism expert caused a second wave of stunned disbelief, asserting that some parts of Europe — including Britain’s city of Birmingham — have become so Islamic they are off limits to non-Muslims.By the time the weekend was over, Rupert Murdoch, the chief executive of 21st Century Fox, the owner of Fox News, and the channel’s pundit, Steven Emerson, had retreated. Mr. Emerson went further, issuing an apology to the people of Birmingham, where residents had posted hundreds of jokes via Twitter about his false claims.Using the hashtag #foxnewsfacts, Twitter users poked fun at the network by suggesting other things it might also have said: that the name of the city had been shortened to Birming because Muslims do not eat ham; that the nearby town of Alcester “used to be known simply as Cester until all the Muslims conquered Birmingham”; that photos of Queen Elizabeth II and Margaret Thatcher in scarves meant they were observing Muslim law; that the checkered cloth coverings of jam jars showed that even homemade preserves “have to wear hijab.”
            Jam jars across the Britain have to wear hijab in order to be halal. #foxnewsfacts pic.twitter.com/7HD1VnG1Zn A user named Rabeb Othmani wrote, “If you are a non-Muslim and would like to visit Birmingham #illridewithyou.”AdvertisementIn the interview with Jeanine Pirro of Fox News, broadcast on Sunday, Mr. Emerson said that in Britain, “there are actual cities like Birmingham that are totally Muslim, where non-Muslims just simply don’t go in.”AdvertisementMr. Emerson also said, “In parts of London, there are actually Muslim religious police that actually beat and actually wound, seriously, anyone who doesn’t dress according to Muslim, religious Muslim attire.”In his mea culpa, Mr. Emerson promised to make a donation to the Birmingham Children’s Hospital.“There was no excuse for making this mistake, and I owe an apology to every resident of Birmingham,” he said. “I am not going to make any excuses. I made an inexcusable error. And I am obligated to openly acknowledge that mistake. I wish to apologize for all residents of that great city of Birmingham.”The Birmingham City Council responded with a statement in which James McKay, a prominent city councilor, described the comments as “curious,” and said they “clearly have no foundation.”“Birmingham’s an incredible place, rightly held up as an example of how communities can and do live and thrive together,” Mr. McKay said.David Cameron, the British prime minister, reacted less diplomatically to the Fox News broadcast, telling ITV News that Mr. Emerson was “clearly a complete idiot.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Birmingham’s large and diverse population includes a number of ethnic minorities. As a local newspaper pointed out, the population is 21.8 percent Muslim, less than half the Christian population. Birmingham was once at the heart of British industry, but it suffered as manufacturing declined in the 1970s and ’80s. More recently, it has remade itself as a center of the service economy, with prominent educational and research institutions and a vibrant cultural life.Birmingham’s growing self-confidence was underlined by one post on Twitter on Monday saying that only Brummies — a nickname for the city’s residents — could “react with such humor in the face of ineptitude. ... That is why you will never find better people anywhere.”The reactions to Mr. Murdoch’s assertions about Muslims were less charitable.He posted a message Friday on Twitter that appeared to assign collective blame to all Muslims for the deadly assaults in Paris, asserting that they must be held responsible “until they recognize and destroy their growing jihadist cancer.” Members of other religious faiths responded with a mix of rage and ridicule.“I was born Christian,” wrote J.K. Rowling, the author, on her Twitter account. “If that makes Rupert Murdoch my responsibility, I’ll auto-excommunicate.” Another prominent author, Matt Haig, wrote on his Twitter account: “On behalf of white people I’d like to apologize for Rupert Murdoch.”AdvertisementOn Sunday, Mr. Murdoch appeared to show some measure of repentance by joining those who had praised Ahmed Merabet, the French police officer killed on camera by an Islamic militant who had helped carry out the deadly assault on the offices of Charlie Hebdo, the satirical newspaper. In a Twitter message, Mr. Murdoch wrote: “Extraordinary scenes in Paris today, but do not forget the heroic sacrifice of Ahmed Merabet, the Muslim police officer whose funeral was today.”Stephen Castle reported from London, and Robert Mackey from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox News Beats a Retreat After Gaffes About Islam.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.