By JOSEPH GOLDSTEINJAN. 12, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan —  A three-month deadlock that paralyzed Afghanistan’s new government appeared to dissipate on Monday, as a palace official announced 25 nominees to lead cabinet ministries.Choosing a cabinet proved surprisingly difficult for President Ashraf Ghani and his political rival, Abdullah Abdullah, who holds the loosely defined post of government chief executive. Both were inaugurated in September in a power-sharing agreement brokered by the United States after a bitterly disputed election.Optimism over the joint government quickly turned to disenchantment as Afghans watched the two leaders and their camps squabble over how to divide up the cabinet appointments. While Mr. Ghani and his close aides ran the country by fiat, Afghan and international officials pressed for decisions on at least the most important security positions. On Monday, those appointments — for 25 ministries, plus the heads of the national intelligence agency and central bank — finally came into focus, and officials said the Parliament could begin voting on them as early as this week.They include Sher Mohammad Karimi, the army chief of staff, whom Mr. Ghani nominated for minister of defense. For the interior ministry, which controls the national police, Mr. Abdullah’s camp put forward something of a surprise choice: Nur ul-Haq Ulumi, a general in the country’s Communist-era military.AdvertisementAfghan and international officials hailed the nominations as an important step for the government, focusing less on who had been chosen than on the fact that the process was moving forward.AdvertisementIn a statement, the senior civilian representative for NATO, Ismail Aramaz, said that the coalition “and its partners welcome this important step and look forward to their prompt parliamentary confirmation.”Still, the sheer length of the deadlock, and the difficulty in taking the first steps out of it, raised questions about whether every compromise between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, and their attendant political bases, would carry similar difficulties.In some ways, the disagreements behind the selection of a cabinet occurred less between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah than between the ethnic and regional factions that backed each of them during the election. With the two men sharing power, each had fewer appointments to dole out to his supporters, leaving every faction dissatisfied.That is especially true in Mr. Abdullah’s camp, because he has the weaker position in the power-sharing agreement. His chief executive position does not exist in the Afghan Constitution; it was created during the American-led negotiations over how the men would govern together.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Abdullah’s base is a diverse alliance of Tajiks and Hazaras, as well as a few breakaway Pashtun figures in the south. He received an increase in support when a highly regarded Pashtun politician, Zalmay Rassoul, backed him against Mr. Ghani, who is Pashtun.But some of Mr. Abdullah’s supporters did not receive nominations that they might have anticipated — including Mr. Rassoul, a former national security adviser and foreign minister under President Hamid Karzai who was not named to any post. Instead, Mr. Abdullah turned to his base of Tajik supporters, choosing Salahuddin Rabbani, a prominent Tajik politician and the son of a former president, as the foreign minister.“Even the new faces, their names were recommended by the power brokers,” said Daud Muradian, a political analyst in Kabul. “I think that is the continuation of the old politics of Afghanistan.”After a season of Taliban offensives that badly bloodied Afghan security forces, and with the next fighting season expected to begin in a couple of months, attention is falling most heavily on the security posts.AdvertisementIn addition to Mr. Karimi for defense minister, and Mr. Ulumi for interior minister, the government factions agreed to retain the acting head of the National Directorate of Security, Rahmatullah Nabil. Mr. Nabil, 46, a former United Nations official, has tried to modernize the directorate, which is the main spy agency, while addressing its reputation for human rights abuses.Mr. Ghani nominated a close supporter from eastern Afghanistan, Qamaruddin Shinwari, for the ministry of border and tribal affairs, a crucial post that includes counternarcotics efforts. Mr. Shinwari served as an official in the Taliban government before the American-led invasion in 2001.Some of the drama and postponements of the selection process were repeated on Monday. The announcement was scheduled for 2:30 p.m. on the main state-run television channel, Radio Television Afghanistan.But much of the first 30 minutes of the broadcast was filled with recordings of folkloric songs and love poems, which are often used to fill dead time, raising questions about whether a cabinet would be named after all.Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Strains Show as Afghan Leaders Announce Long-Awaited Cabinet Nominees.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.