AdvertisementSupported byBy Elisabeth Malkin and Victoria BurnettMEXICO CITY — The Cuban government has released 53 dissidents it had promised to free under the accord with Washington to restore diplomatic relations and step up economic exchanges, United States officials said Monday.The release of the last prisoners on the list was seen as an important indicator of the Cuban government’s commitment to carrying out the agreement, which was announced by President Obama and the Cuban president, Raúl Castro, on Dec. 17.Yet it was received with skepticism by Cuban opposition figures, who said the government had released fewer prisoners than the numbers suggested.It came less than two weeks before Roberta S. Jacobson, the assistant secretary of state for Western Hemisphere affairs, is to arrive in Cuba for talks on Jan. 21 and 22. The discussions are to focus on migration issues but will also be used to discuss the restoration of full diplomatic relations.Secretary of State John Kerry sent the list of freed prisoners — which had been a closely guarded secret — to members of Congress on Monday. He warned, however, that Cubans still faced many obstacles to free speech.“We will continue to make clear to the Cuban government that neither those 53 individuals released, nor any Cuban exercising their universal right to have their voices heard, be subject to harassment, arrest or beatings,” he wrote.The 53 prisoners were on a list that American officials presented to the Cuban government last summer during the secret negotiations that led to the Dec. 17 agreement.But dissidents and human rights activists said the numbers were misleading. More than a dozen of the 53 prisoners were released before Dec. 17, and many had already served their sentences, said Elizardo Sánchez, head of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation, an independent group. “It’s a fraud,” he said by telephone from Havana. “They just completed the number by including people they had already released.”Juan Carlos Vásquez Osoria, a member of the Patriotic Union of Cuba, another opposition group, said he was released on Dec. 10 after he finished a two-year sentence.“I don’t get why they included me on the list if I had already served my sentence,” he said by telephone from Santiago de Cuba. “They should have included other brothers who are still in jail.”Human rights activists both inside and outside Cuba warned that the prisoner release was no guarantee that the government had become more tolerant of open protest.“For that, we need reforms to our legal system and for the Cuban government to stop criminalizing human rights activities,” Mr. Sánchez said.His records show that short-term detentions increased in 2014 to 8,899, some 30 percent more than in 2013. At the same time as the Cuban government has been releasing the prisoners, the authorities have continued to detain opponents of the Castro government.A performance artist, Tania Bruguera, was arrested three times in connection with her plans to set up an open microphone in Havana’s Revolution Square on Dec. 30 and allow Cubans to speak their minds for a minute. She was later released.Danilo Maldonado Machado, a graffiti artist known as El Sexto, was arrested on Christmas Day as he transported pigs painted with the names Fidel and Raúl — referring to the president and his elder brother, the former president — according to independent media. He remains in jail, Mr. Sánchez said.Most of those released were fairly new to opposition activities and not well known, said José Daniel Ferrer, founder of the Patriotic Union of Cuba. Some 30 members of the group were released, he said, but more remained in jail.“The United States needs to keep up the pressure to get all the political prisoners out,” he said.Among those released over the past few days were Alexeis, Vianco and Django Vargas Martín, brothers who were detained in December 2012 and imprisoned for “public disorder,” according to Amnesty International.Vianco and Django, who are twins, were just 16 when they went to protest the detention of their elder brother Alexeis, who had been arrested outside the family home during a government-supported demonstration.List of Prisoners Recently Released by Cuba1. Emilio Planas Robert2. Alexeis Vargas Martín3. Django Vargas Martín4. Vianco Vargas Martín5. Iván Fernández Depestre6. Sonia Garro Alfonso7. Ramón Alejandro Muñoz8. Eugenio Hernández Hernández9. Juliet Michelena Díaz10. Ángel Yunier Remón Arzuaga11. Vladimir Morera Bacallao12. Jorge Ramírez Calderón13. Marcelino Abreu Bonora14. Wilberto Parada Milán15. Alcibiades Guerra Marín16. Jose Leiva Díaz17. Eider Frometa Allen18. Alexander Roberto Fernández Rico19. Aracelio Riviaux Noa20. David Piloto Barceló21. Enrique Figuerola Miranda22. José Manuel Rodríguez Navarro23. Lázaro Romero Hurtado24. Luis Enrique Labrador Díaz25. Madeline Lázara Caraballo Betancourt26. Miguel Alberto Ulloa Ginard27. Reiner Mulet Levis28. Roberto Hernández Barrio29. Alexander Otero Rodríguez30. Ángel Figueredo Castellón31. Anoy Almeida Pérez32. Carlos Manuel Figueroa Álvarez33. César Andrés Sánchez Pérez34. Daniel Enrique Qezada Chaveco35. David Bustamante Rodríguez36. Elisa Castillo González37. Ernesto Roberto Rivery Gascón38. Ernesto Tamayo Guerra39. Haydee Gallardo Salazar40. Jorge Cervantes García41. José Lino Ascencio López42. Juan Carlos Vásquez Osoria43. Julio César Vega Santiesteban44. Leonardo Paumier Ramírez45. Miguel Tamayo Frías46. Miguel Guerra Hastie47. Niorvis Rivera Guerra48. Rolando Reyes Rabanal49. Ruberlandis Mainet Villalón50. Sandalio Mejías Zulueta51. Vladimir Ortiz Suárez52. Yojarnes Arce Sarmiento53. Yordenis Mendoza CobasMichael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.slide showAdvertisement