By MICHAEL R. GORDONJAN. 12, 2015
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —  The United States plans to provide $250 million in emergency aid to help resettle and sustain civilians displaced by the Pakistani military’s campaign against militant groups, senior American officials said Monday night after the first day of a visit by Secretary of State John Kerry.The announcement came after a day of meetings and talks with senior Pakistani officials, including a lengthy dinner with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.Mr. Kerry’s visit here comes almost one month after the Pakistani Taliban carried out an attack on an army-run school in the northern city of Peshawar that left scores of schoolchildren and teachers dead. Pakistan responded by intensifying its military offensive against the militant group in the North Waziristan tribal region and by announcing a “national action plan” that, among other moves, established military tribunals to try militant suspects.A senior State Department official said before the meetings here that Mr. Kerry would emphasize that Pakistan’s crackdown against militants should be extended to the Haqqani network, which has organized attacks in Afghanistan against American and local forces; to Afghan Taliban fighters who have sought refuge in Pakistan; and to Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistani group that is widely believed to be responsible for the 2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai, India.Advertisement“Part of the secretary’s core message will be to ensure that actions are met with a real and sustained effort to constrain the ability of the Haqqani network, Lashkar-e-Taiba, the Afghan Taliban, and other militants who pose a threat to regional stability and to direct U.S. interests,” said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity in accordance with the agency’s procedure for briefing reporters.AdvertisementAnother focus of Mr. Kerry’s trip, the official said, was to encourage more cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan, where a unity government, led by President Ashraf Ghani and the nation’s chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah, has taken over from Hamid Karzai.The Pakistani Army chief, Gen. Raheel Sharif, said during a recent visit to Washington that his country intended to crack down on all militant groups, an assurance the Pakistani officials repeated in the meetings here.“The Pakistani delegation told us several times today they won’t differentiate between ‘good’ and ‘bad’ Taliban,” said one American official, who declined to be named because he was discussing a closed-door meeting.American officials asserted that the Pakistani military campaign has disrupted the Haqqani network’s operations. But Pakistan has a long history of tolerating militant activities by the Haqqani network and Lashkar-e-Taiba, even while fighting the Pakistani Taliban.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Given the Pakistani military’s persistent skepticism about the stability of the new Afghan state, there are few reasons to believe that it will now, after over a decade of resisting Washington’s pleas, turn completely against groups like the Afghan Taliban and Haqqani network,” Daniel S. Markey, an expert on Pakistan at the Council on Foreign Relations, said last month. “Conceivable, desirable, but not likely.”Pakistani officials told their American counterparts on Monday that the Pakistan military is approaching the end of the “clearing phase” in the North Waziristan tribal area but that it still faced the challenge of holding the territory and reconstructing the damaged infrastructure there, American officials said.The $250 million in American assistance is to be used to provide food, shelter, medical support, and to restore basic services in Waziristan and the other Federally Administered Tribal Areas, so that the more than 700,000 people who have fled the fighting can return, American officials said. The aid would be redirected from assistance that had already been appropriated for Pakistan.Sartaj Aziz, the prime minister’s national security adviser, said that Mr. Kerry would also demonstrate his support by traveling to Peshawar, the city where the Pakistani Taliban attack against the school took place.Advertisement“It is a very good gesture,” Mr. Aziz said.Mr. Kerry’s visit here, along with Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, the head of the United States Central Command, was not announced in advance for security reasons.Mr. Kerry’s last visited Pakistan in August 2013. At the time, he said that the United States had achieved so much in its drone campaign in Pakistan that he hoped that American strikes could end “very, very soon.”The American drone strikes have continued as the Pakistani military offensive has kept up its offensive.Salman Masood contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 13, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Kerry Vows Aid for Displaced Pakistanis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.