
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 14, 2015
Video recorded by a witness minutes after the deadly attack on the offices of the satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo last Wednesday in Paris offers the clearest images of the gunmen claiming responsibility, and linking the killings to cartoons mocking the Prophet Muhammad.In the footage, recorded by an unidentified witness and distributed by Reuters on Tuesday, one of the two masked gunmen can be clearly heard shouting, “We avenged the Prophet Muhammad!,” before getting in a black car and speeding away from the corner of Rue Nicolas-Appert and Allée Verte, where their way was blocked by a police car.New witness video has been obtained by Reuters showing the gunmen firing at the police after the Charlie Hebdo attack last Wednesday.Glimpses of the same scene were captured by two other witnesses and shared on social networks last week. The French journalist Martin Boudot shot video from a nearby rooftop of a burst of gunfire that immediately preceded the same shouted claim of responsibility.Elise Barthet, a journalist for Le Monde, obtained a photograph from a textile designer whose studio is close to the office of the newspaper that showed the Islamist attackers moments later, firing at the police car that blocked their way.
            Les tireurs de #ChalieHebdo face à une voiture de police. Ils ont fait feu, les policiers ont répliqué puis reculé pic.twitter.com/Ld1sxkRLvW A short time after they forced that police car to retreat with a barrage of gunfire, the police say, the militant brothers Chérif and Saïd Kouachi drove to the nearby Boulevard Richard Lenoir, where they shot and killed their 12th victim, Ahmed Merabet, a police officer and a practicing Muslim. The killing of Mr. Merabet — who was posthumously awarded France’s highest honor, the Legion of Honor, along with two other officers killed last week — was captured on video by another witness, an engineer named Jordi Mir. Mr. Mir quickly posted the images on Facebook, before regretting the decision and removing them a short time later.AdvertisementMr. Mir told The Associated Press this week that he wanted Mr. Merabet’s family to know that he was “very sorry” for having shared the video, which showed the officer’s killing at close range by one of the gunmen, and asked that news organizations edit out the scene of the officer’s death when they broadcast the footage.While he attributed his initial sharing of the video to an instinctive use of the social network that he called “a stupid reflex,” Mr. Mir did suggest that the images of the deadly violence seemed newsworthy.Advertisement“For me, the policeman killed, it’s like a war photo,” Mr. Mir told The Associated Press, comparing it to a famous image of a soldier’s death during the Spanish Civil War captured by the photographer Robert Capa.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »