The Beijing municipal government has shut down a private club located in the Songzhu and Zhizhu temples near the Forbidden City, the state news agency Xinhua has reported.Because the temples are classified as protected historical sites, the club has been accused of “seriously violating relevant regulations by central authorities that prohibit the construction of private clubs in historic buildings, parks and other public places,” Xinhua reported on Tuesday.  Such clubs have become a target in President Xi Jinping’s campaign against official corruption as places where the powerful and rich can meet shielded from scrutiny.  The news agency called the club’s effect on society “abominable.” Although the report did not name the private club, neighbors identified it as the Songzhu Famous Courtyard. The Songzhu Famous Courtyard occupies the Songzhu temple as well as the northern part of the Zhizhu Temple, while a separate business, the Temple Restaurant Beijing, operates in parts of the Zhizhu Temple.
Lin Fan, an investor in Temple Republic, a Hong Kong-registered company whose Beijing subsidiary, Dong Jing Yuan, rents the Zhizhu Temple and has a contractual agreement with Temple Restaurant Beijing, has said that the Songzhu Famous Courtyard and the Temple Restaurant Beijing are the only two businesses currently operating inside the two temples, but that Temple Restaurant Beijing is not a private club. He said it is open to the public and has a proper business license.According to Mr. Lin, Temple Restaurant Beijing has operated as usual in recent days. Following a Chinese news report in December that confused which of the two temple establishments was illegal, Mr. Lin said the Temple Restaurant Beijing is  ”dealing with some misunderstanding in the public opinion, and we are working hard to resolve this.” A visit to the restaurant on Tuesday found that Temple Restaurant Beijing was open, with clients both in the restaurant and bar.  Temple Restaurant Beijing intends to remain open, except for a brief period to observe the Chinese New Year holiday, the restaurant’s manager, Joce Liang, said on Tuesday. Ms. Liang added that the restaurant was closed for a couple of days earlier this month because of problems in the kitchen.  Someone who answered the phone at the Songzhu Famous Courtyard hung up when asked for comment. A knock on its front gate on Tuesday also went unanswered. According to Xinhua, the Beijing government recently sent a team of people from the city’s disciplinary inspection commission, industry and commerce bureau and land tax bureau, among other departments, to conduct an investigation and “collect evidence” at the site.  After the visit, the government determined that a private club occupying areas in the two temples was an “unlicensed business,” and discovered serious lapses by the Beijing government’s regulatory bodies.On Dec. 18, a resident living in the vicinity of the two temples said that over the years he had seen cars with military license plates go in and out of the gated Songzhu Famous Courtyard, which rarely admitted members of the public. Xinhua said the Beijing government has said it will deal severely with the individuals and regulatory bodies that allowed the illegal business to operate in the temples.