AdvertisementSupported byBy Choe Sang-HunSEOUL, South Korea — South Korean prosecutors said on Wednesday that they had arrested a former member of a left-wing political party, now defunct, on charges of breaking the country’s anti-communist National Security Law over comments she made about North Korea.The case against the longtime activist, Hwang Sun, 41, comes amid deepening fears among government critics that the administration of President Park Geun-hye is abusing South Korea’s National Security Law and a criminal ban on defamation to suppress freedom of speech.Last year, Ms. Hwang helped organize a series of joint lectures during which she and Shin Eun-mi, a Korean-American woman, were accused of making comments supportive or complimentary of North Korea, which is forbidden under the National Security Law. South Korea deported Ms. Shin on Saturday. Her deportation prompted the American State Department to cite fears that the National Security Law is being used to quash free expression.Ms. Hwang, once jailed for violating the law, also upset South Korean conservatives in 2005, when she gave birth to a daughter while visiting the North. Before her recent arrest, she told reporters that she was a “victim of the hunt for jongbuk,” a derogatory term for progressives accused by their conservative enemies of following North Korean ideology.Ever since Ms. Park took office two years ago, her critics have charged her government with using legal channels to clamp down on free speech, especially about matters concerning Ms. Park and her family.Tatsuya Kato, the former bureau chief here for the Japanese daily Sankei Shimbun, which has often criticized Ms. Park, is on trial in a South Korean court on defamation charges. Mr. Kato was charged after reporting a rumor last October indicating that Ms. Park may have had a tryst with one of her former advisers while her government was struggling with the sinking of a ferry in April.And late last year, several of Ms. Park’s presidential aides filed a defamation lawsuit against the local daily Segye Ilbo after it reported internal documents leaked from her office. Some of the documents contained allegations that the aides — as well as Chung Yoon-hoi, the man Mr. Park was rumored to have met in secret in April — had conspired to promote people they favored in her government.Ms. Park’s government called the allegations “groundless rumors.” During her New Year’s news conference on Monday, she accused those spreading such rumors of causing national confusion.In another current trial, two journalists who are vocal critics of Ms. Park are facing charges of defaming her family. Choo Chin-woo, a reporter with the leading newsweekly SisaIN, and Kim Ou-joon, a podcast star, face an appeals court ruling on Friday on charges of reporting an unconfirmed suspicion that Ms. Park’s brother might have been involved in the murder of a relative.The two reporters were accused in late 2012 of “defaming” and “spreading false information” about the president’s brother, Park Ji-man, with “an aim of blocking her election.” They were acquitted in a lower court in October 2013, but the prosecutors appealed, seeking prison terms of several years for the two.South Korea portrays itself as one of Asia’s most vibrant democracies, a far cry from the dictatorship it was under military-backed authoritarian leaders like Ms. Park’s father, Park Chung-hee, who ruled with an iron fist from 1961 until his assassination in 1979.Yet state censors still routinely purge contents deemed defamatory, pro-North Korean or pornographic from the country’s Internet. Fears of government censorship deepened after prosecutors started a new task force in September, vowing “real-time monitoring” and “a constant crackdown” on those who spread “falsehoods or defamation in cyberspace.” The move came two days after Ms. Park warned that slandering her had gone “too far” and would hurt “the national prestige.”In Reporters Without Borders’ annual press freedom index in 2014, South Korea dropped by seven notches to 57th out of 180 countries. The group cited the case of Mr. Choo and Mr. Kim.“It’s as if we are living in a barbarian age where the government rules with threats, trying to make journalists cower in fear,” Mr. Choo said, accusing the government of using protracted lawsuits to exhaust and intimidate unfriendly reporters. “To them, the National Security and defamation laws are a magic wand.”Advertisement