By SUHASINI RAJ and NIDA NAJARJAN. 13, 2015
NEW DELHI —  The government of Goa, on India’s western coast, is setting up a program to get young gay people to lead “a normal life,” according to the state’s minister for sports and youth affairs.“We will tell them what to do and how to get over same-sex feelings,” the minister, Ramesh Tawadkar, said on Tuesday in a telephone interview. Mr. Tawadkar called homosexuality a “big problem” in Indian society, where same-sex relations are illegal.Mr. Tawadkar revealed the plans on Monday in Panjim, the state capital, as he announced Goa’s state youth policy for 2015. The new policy treats gay youths as a problem group to be addressed with government action, along with drug addicts, dropouts, migrants and others.Mr. Tawadkar confirmed in the interview Tuesday that the state government, run by the Bharatiya Janata Party, intended to set up “camps” to treat gay, bisexual and transgender young people. He gave few specifics, but said that the program would include counseling.Advertisement“They are that part of our society who have not yet experienced the true pleasures and bliss of life,” Mr. Tawadkar said. “What does a normal life feel like? Do they know? No.”AdvertisementThe first step, he said, would be to identify such young people through a statewide survey. But it was not clear how candidly people might respond, given that gay sex has been a crime in India since colonial times; the Supreme Court upheld the law in 2013.Mr. Tawadkar did not say whether any young people identified as gay would be prosecuted, but he did say, “We will definitely use law as a tool to teach them what is right and what is wrong.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations, on a visit to India on Monday, condemned the criminalization of homosexuality.“I speak out because laws criminalizing consensual, adult same-sex relationships violate basic rights to privacy and to freedom from discrimination,” he said at a United Nations event on Monday in New Delhi. “Even if they are not enforced, these laws breed intolerance.”Claims that homosexuality is a disease that can be “cured” or that people can be “reprogrammed” to change their sexual orientation have received no scientific support, and supposed methods for doing so, known as reparative therapy, have been widely discredited, especially in the West. Even so, taboos against homosexuality remain widespread in India, and conservative political and religious figures continue to call for government action against homosexuality.A prominent yoga guru, Baba Ramdev, will apparently be involved in the Goa state program. Baba Ramdev spoke out in 2013 in support of the Supreme Court decision, saying that homosexuality was a “bad habit,” and he invited gay people to his yoga institute, where “they will be free from this habit most definitely.”Mr. Tawadkar, the youth minister, said that Baba Ramdev’s “expertise” in yoga instruction would be used to counsel gay people and drug addicts. According to Indian news reports, Mr. Ramdev will also be involved in a government program announced last year to expand the teaching of yoga in schools in Goa.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: State in India Plans to Help Gay Youth ‘Get Over Same-Sex Feelings’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.