By JEFFREY GETTLEMANJAN. 13, 2015
NAIROBI, Kenya —  A recently captured Ugandan rebel commander who is accused of helping plan massacres and kidnap countless children will be handed over to the International Criminal Court, Ugandan and Western officials said on Tuesday.Dominic Ongwen, a commander in the Lord’s Resistance Army and one of the most notorious fugitives in Africa, was detained by American Special Forces last week in Central African Republic, the officials said.Uganda, which was terrorized by the Lord’s Resistance Army for years, initially indicated that it wanted to try Mr. Ongwen itself. The Ugandans said they had the capacity to hold a fair trial, and just last month Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, called on African nations to withdraw from the International Criminal Court, describing it as “a vessel for oppressing Africa.”“I’m done with that court,” Reuters quoted Mr. Museveni as saying in December. “I won’t work with them again.”AdvertisementBy Tuesday, Uganda seemed to have changed its mind.“Finally, it has been decided,” Uganda’s military spokesman, Paddy Ankunda, said on Twitter. “Ongwen will be tried at the ICC in The Hague.”Mr. Ongwen, believed to be around 35, was a top commander in the Lord’s Resistance Army, a brutal rebel group that originated in Uganda but in recent years slunk north into the Democratic Republic of Congo and Central African Republic, leaving a trail of burned villages and crushed skulls. The group is believed to have slaughtered thousands of civilians and kidnapped tens of thousands of children, forcing them to become soldiers and sex slaves.Early this month, Mr. Ongwen abruptly surrendered to the Seleka armed group in northern Central African Republic, officials said. The Seleka fighters, who overthrew the government in their own country in 2013, now want the $5 million reward the American government had offered for Mr. Ongwen’s capture. Some analysts believe Mr. Ongwen turned himself in because he feared that Joseph Kony, the mercurial leader of the Lord’s Resistance Army, wanted to kill him.In 2010, The Times’s Jeffrey Gettleman embedded with the Ugandan army as it searched for Joseph Kony, the leader of the brutal Lord’s Resistance Army and one of Africa’s most wanted men.Mr. Kony is arguably the most wanted man on the African continent, and is believed to be flamboyantly violent. Defectors have said that he speaks in tongues and often impersonates spirits, including one called Who Are You and another known as King Bruce. He has eluded capture for more than 20 years.American soldiers joined the hunt for Mr. Kony in 2012, and last week they were called to pick up a defector in northern Central African Republic who was calling himself Ali.AdvertisementAli ended up being Mr. Ongwen, Ugandan officials said, and he was flown by helicopter to a small American military base in the Central African Republic jungle.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Uganda is one of the Pentagon’s favorite allies in Africa, and American officials have been in close discussions with the Ugandans about where Mr. Ongwen should be tried.Over the next few days, Western diplomats said, Mr. Ongwen will be transferred to the custody of the Central African Republic government or the African Union, then sent by plane to the International Criminal Court in The Hague, where he has been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes.Western officials said Mr. Ongwen had been extensively interrogated since his surrender, but it was not clear if he had any recent information about Mr. Kony. One of the tactics of the Lord’s Resistance Army is to break into small bands of fighters, who then sneak into villages to slaughter civilians and kidnap children.Mr. Ongwen was abducted himself when he was 10, while walking to school. Ugandan officials said that he had been trained to club people to death and that he had gone on to plan brutal massacres. Some legal analysts expect his abduction to become a central part of his defense, if indeed he is put on trial at the International Criminal Court.A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Senior Rebel From Uganda to Be Moved to the Hague.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.