By DHARISHA BASTIANS and GARDINER HARRISJAN. 13, 2015
Pope Francis addressed an interfaith audience in Sri Lanka, calling for healing and unity after the country’s civil war.COLOMBO, Sri Lanka —  Pope Francis arrived in this capital city on Tuesday and said Sri Lanka must address the wounds from the civil war that convulsed it for more than 25 years.“The process of healing also needs to include the pursuit of truth, not for the sake of opening new wounds, but rather as a necessary means of promoting justice, healing and unity,” Francis said in a speech at the international airport.He said leaders of major religions had a role to play in the delicate process of reconciliation after the conflict with the separatist Tamil Tigers that ended in 2009, adding, “I have come to meet, encourage and pray with the Catholic people of this island.”The pope’s visit came five days after President Mahinda Rajapaksa suffered a surprising defeat in national elections that were seen in part as a referendum on Mr. Rajapaksa’s growing control over the island’s politics and his refusal to address international concerns about postwar reconciliation. Ethnic Tamils and Muslims in Sri Lanka’s once restive north and east voted overwhelmingly last Thursday for the new president, Maithripala Sirisena.Whether Mr. Sirisena will heed Francis’ calls for a robust reconciliation process is uncertain. In his inaugural address, Mr. Sirisena promised ethnic and religious reconciliation. But his background is similar to Mr. Rajapaksa’s, and he relies on the same core support group, ethnic Sinhalese Buddhists. That group has long been hostile to demands from northern Tamils for demilitarization of the north and restoration of power to elected Tamil leaders.AdvertisementGiven its timing, Francis’ tour has distinct political overtones. Political concerns during the election campaign led some prominent Roman Catholics to urge Francis to postpone his trip.AdvertisementHe was initially invited by Mr. Rajapaksa, whose campaign suggested that the pope’s acceptance of his invitation was akin to an endorsement. Posters and banners displayed in predominantly Catholic regions during the election season showed pictures of both the president and the pope. “With His Holiness’s blessings — you will be our president,” one poster read.On Tuesday, Mr. Rajapaksa’s triumphant political opponents were eager to bask in the glow of Francis’ visit. The pope was greeted at the airport by Mr. Sirisena, Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, Foreign Minister Mangala Samaraweera and former President Chandrika Kumaratunga. Schoolchildren from all faiths were also at the airport to receive him.The pope traveled from the airport to the city in an open motorcade, greeting thousands of devotees and well-wishers lining the streets. Cannons fired, and a ceremonial guard of honor greeted him. A youth choir, wearing flowing blue cassocks and flowers in their hair, sang songs of welcome in English and Latin.The pope’s tour of Sri Lanka is scheduled to include a visit to Our Lady of Madhu, a Catholic shrine deep in the heart of the former war zone, where he is to meet with Tamil devotees and priests affected by the island’s conflict.“The great work of rebuilding must embrace improving infrastructures and meeting material needs, but also, and even more important, promoting human dignity, respect for human rights, and the full inclusion of each member of society,” Francis said at the airport.In his own remarks, Mr. Sirisena said the pope’s visit was especially significant to him. “The visit of Your Holiness gives me an opportunity to receive your blessing as I commence my term of office,” he said.“My government is promoting peace and friendship after overcoming a cruel terrorist conflict,” the president declared. “We are a people who believe in religious tolerance and coexistence.”During his visit, Francis is scheduled to canonize Joseph Vaz, a Catholic missionary from the island, as Sri Lanka’s first saint. The pope will then visit the Philippines.Dharisha Bastians reported from Colombo, and Gardiner Harris from New Delhi.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 14, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pope Says Sri Lanka Must Confront Truth About Its War to Heal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.