A spate of passengers opening the emergency doors of taxiing airplanes in China has led to calls for tougher punishment of unruly fliers.On Monday, a man who was flying from Lhasa opened the emergency door of a plane that had landed in the southwestern city of Chongqing and was taxiing toward a gate at Jiangbei Airport. Images posted online showed an inflatable emergency slide draped over the left wing of the Airbus A319.The Chongqing Evening News reported that the man could be required to pay 100,000 renminbi, about $16,000, or more in compensation to the airline, West Air, to repair the door and to other passengers for causing delays.
25 passengers in Kunming were taken away by police after they quarreled with crew & opened plane emergency exits Sat //t.co/ozSPM75Liy— People’s Daily,China (@PDChina) 11 Jan 15On Saturday, passengers on a plane in the southwestern city of Kunming opened the door on a taxiing jet scheduled to fly to Beijing. The flight had been delayed by seven hours because of ice and fog, and the passengers had grown angry from the delay and because the air-conditioning was turned off while the Boeing 737-800 was being deiced, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported. The police said 25 passengers from the China Eastern Airlines flight were under investigation, Xinhua reported.Chinese airports have some of the world’s worst on-time performance records. And frustration over delays sometimes explodes into episodes of violence. Last year, passengers in Zhengzhou erupted in what one state news media outlet called a “riot” after lengthy delays.Recent cases of unruly travelers, and an incident in December in which an angry Chinese passenger threw hot water and instant noodles at a flight attendant during a flight to Nanjing, China, from Bangkok, have led to consideration of a national blacklist for badly behaved fliers, China Daily reported in December.Other policies may be exacerbating the problem. Chinese airlines’ willingness to pay compensation to angry passengers has created an incentive for unruly behavior, Xinhua said in a recent commentary. Some newspapers echoed Xinhua in calling for no tolerance of disruptive fliers.“In an era of rule of law, the key to protecting emergency exits is firmly enforcing the law and carrying out punishments,” said a commentary in Legal Daily, a newspaper published by the Ministry of Justice.Other editorials have said the current punishments are too weak, and suggested increasing the fines and possible jail terms for those who disrupt flights.In the United States, passengers who try to open emergency doors often face federal charges of damaging an aircraft and interfering with a flight crew, which can carry prison terms of up to 20 years. Such cases are often settled with probation and fines of as much as $60,000.