By RICK GLADSTONE and MICHAEL R. GORDONJAN. 14, 2015
The Washington Post’s correspondent in Iran, who has been imprisoned since July for unspecified reasons, has been formally charged and will be tried in a Revolutionary Court, the country’s official Islamic Republic News Agency said Wednesday. It did not describe the charges or say when the trial would begin.The announcement essentially confirmed what the family of the correspondent, Jason Rezaian, an American citizen of Iranian descent from California, had said more than a month ago. But the timing of the announcement was curious, coming the same day that Secretary of State John Kerry was meeting in Geneva with his Iranian counterpart, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, in a prelude to the next round of talks on Iran’s nuclear program.Mr. Kerry raised the issue of Mr. Rezaian and other Americans held in Iran during meetings with Mr. Zarif, a senior State Department official told reporters traveling with Mr. Kerry. Asked about the announcement, the official said, “We are not going to speculate on the timing and how that came about.”Earlier in the day, Mr. Zarif, who knows Mr. Rezaian personally and has described him as “a fair reporter,” gave no hint of any movement in the case. “This is a judicial matter, so we will have to wait for the judiciary to move forward,” Mr. Zarif said. He repeated Iran’s contention that it regards Mr. Rezaian, as well as another imprisoned American citizen of Iranian descent, Amir Hekmati, as Iranian citizens who are subject to Iranian laws. Neither has been granted the diplomatic access afforded to foreign prisoners, and in Mr. Rezaian’s case, he has not been given access to a lawyer since his arrest.The official news agency quoted Tehran’s chief prosecutor as saying that Mr. Rezaian “has been charged and his case has been forwarded to the Revolutionary Court,” which typically handles cases involving security or religious offenses.In a statement on its website, The Post’s executive editor, Martin Baron, said, “We still do not know what charges the Iranian authorities have brought against our correspondent Jason Rezaian, but we hope the referral of his case to a Revolutionary Court represents a step forward toward Jason’s prompt release.” Rick Gladstone reported from New York, and Michael R. Gordon from Geneva.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Iran Charges, and Will Try, Post Reporter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.