By RAPHAEL MINDERJAN. 14, 2015
MADRID —  The Spanish Supreme Court agreed Wednesday to examine a paternity suit against King Juan Carlos filed by a Belgian woman who claims he had an affair with her mother.The lawsuit comes as the Spanish monarchy is entangled in a major fraud case and after Juan Carlos, 77, abdicated in favor of his son, who was proclaimed King Felipe VI last June. In abdicating, Juan Carlos lost his full immunity from prosecution, allowing people who had unsuccessfully filed paternity claims against him in the past to reactivate them.The Belgian plaintiff, Ingrid Sartiau, asserts that her mother became pregnant while having an affair with Juan Carlos in the 1960s, before the end of the Franco dictatorship and the return of the Spanish monarchy in late 1975.The court, however, on Wednesday rejected a separate paternity claim filed by Albert Solà Jiménez, a Catalan waiter, who grew up in a farming family but argued that he had been given up for adoption after an affair between Juan Carlos and a woman from a wealthy Catalan family.AdvertisementAlthough the two plaintiffs filed separate paternity lawsuits last year, shortly after the king’s abdication, they had initially cooperated and even undergone DNA testing, whose result, they claimed, showed that there was a 91 percent probability that they were half-siblings. As part of her lawsuit, Ms. Sartiau is expected to demand that Juan Carlos take a similar DNA test.A spokesman for the Spanish royal household said that it “respected the independence” of the judiciary, without commenting further. Ms. Sartiau could not immediately be reached for comment.AdvertisementWhile Juan Carlos faces the paternity suit, one of his daughters, Princess Cristina, is expected to appear in court this year to answer tax fraud charges as part of a corruption investigation that has centered on the business dealings of her husband, Iñaki Urdangarin. Mr. Urdangarin is accused of using his royal credentials to secure inflated contracts from regional politicians for his sports events company, then siphoning millions of dollars from the contract fees to other companies and offshore accounts controlled by him and his business associates.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline:  Court Takes Paternity Suit Against Spain’s Ex-King.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.