By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEJAN. 14, 2015
GENEVA —  The United Nations said Wednesday that it was starting a new round of talks here aimed at ending the chaos and violence in Libya, as international concern grows over the widening influence of Muslim extremists there.The talks, aimed at reaching a political settlement, including a national unity government, are seen as a last chance to end months of fighting among rival militias that has plunged Libya into deepening insecurity and economic chaos and destabilized surrounding countries, Bernardino León, special representative of the secretary general and head of the United Nations Mission in Libya, said in Geneva.“It’s going to be a long process; it’s going to be difficult,” Mr. León said. “We are not expecting to have a breakthrough tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. There is a gap between the parties, which is becoming more complicated; there is more fighting on the ground.”Mr. León called for the talks after two months of consultations with a wide variety of groups, including the government of Prime Minister Abdullah al-Thinni, now based in the eastern city of Tobruk, and the rival Libya Dawn movement, which seized control of the capital, Tripoli, in August. Other participants in the talks include representatives of some militias and important municipalities, Mr. León said.AdvertisementDespite the lengthy preparations, some important political actors have not committed to the talks, though the door remains open, Mr. León said.AdvertisementMr. León stressed the critical importance of reaching a settlement now. “There is military and security chaos in the country,” with new lines of conflict opening in recent weeks, a surge in terrorist activity in many areas and an economic crisis, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The abduction of 21 Egyptian Christians in recent days by militants associating themselves with the Islamic State underscored concern about the spread of Muslim extremist groups outside the main areas of conflict in Syria and Iraq.“The general impression is the country is very close to total chaos,” Mr. León said, warning that if this effort failed, it would be hard to imagine a situation that would allow another peace process to start. On top of the fighting by rival militias, Mr. León cited fears that Libya is heading for an economic crisis. Fighting in recent weeks has damaged key oil facilities, cutting exports, and falling oil prices have knocked a further hole in the only major source of revenue supporting Libya’s national budget.Libya’s militias have said they do not want to fight and instead want a political solution, Mr. León said, observing that although they had not announced a cease-fire, the fighting had eased in the last two or three days.“I would like to think that it is because we are having these talks, and both sides are trying to show good will,” he said.The first round of talks in Geneva will continue until Saturday, Mr. León said, adding that he hoped that after participants reported back to Tripoli, the discussions would resume early next week. “As early as next week, we would like to start talking to military actors in a conference setting,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Fearing ‘Total Chaos’ in Libya, U.N. Plans New Peace Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.