By MELISSA EDDYJAN. 14, 2015
BERLIN — Austrian authorities are exploring whether they can expropriate the house where Adolf Hitler was born if the current owner refuses to sell the pale yellow building in the heart of Braunau, in northern Austria, near the border with Germany.The house, where the Nazi leader was born in 1889 and lived until his family moved three years later, belongs to a woman whom authorities refuse to identify. Austria’s Interior Ministry took over the building in 1972, in order to prevent what Karl-Heinz Grundböck, a spokesman for the ministry, called a “questionable use” of the premises.Under the 1972 agreement, the building may house only an educational, social or bureaucratic facility, Mr. Grundböck said. For many years, it housed a workshop for disabled workers, but the owner refused to allow renovations necessary to make the building more accessible. It has been unoccupied for the past three years.Attempts to find a new tenant to help cover the monthly rent of 4,800 euros, or about $5,600, which is ultimately paid by taxpayers, have also been stymied by the owner’s unwillingness to permit any renovations of the interior.AdvertisementMr. Grundböck said his ministry had made an offer to purchase the house, which is under protection as a site of historical interest. The owner has not yet responded, he said. Should she refuse, the ministry has asked legal and financial authorities to investigate whether the government would have grounds for dispossessing her of the house.“We have spoken with other ministries in Austria, as well as state and city officials, regarding a use for the house, all of which led to nothing,” Mr. Grundböck said. “Because we have not been able to find a solution for the house, we are examining our other options.”AdvertisementA commemorative stone bearing the inscription, “For Peace, Freedom and Democracy. Never Again Fascism, Millions of Dead Warn,” stands at the curb outside of the three-story house on a cobbled street in Braunau’s city center, which attracts tourists despite attempts to play down its link to Hitler.A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Austria: Officials Weigh Expropriating Hitler House.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.