By EDWARD WONGJAN. 14, 2015
BEIJING —  The police in Shanghai have arrested 10 Turkish citizens and two Chinese citizens and accused them of providing altered Turkish passports to terrorist suspects from the western region of Xinjiang, a state-run newspaper reported on Wednesday.The people trying to use the passports — nine ethnic Uighurs trying to leave China illegally through a Shanghai airport — are also under arrest, according to the newspaper, Global Times.All of the suspects were detained in November and formally charged recently, the report said. It added that the nine Uighurs were planning to go to Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria after leaving China. Audio and video materials with content related to terrorism were found on those trying to leave, the report said.Those involved in providing the forged passports have been charged with smuggling terrorists and altering legal documents, Global Times reported. On Wednesday afternoon, calls made to the Shanghai police seeking comment were not immediately answered.AdvertisementThe Uighurs are a mostly Muslim, Turkic-speaking ethnic group in Xinjiang. Many Uighurs resent rule by the Communist Party, and some say they face discrimination by the Han, the dominant ethnic group in China. Violence in Xinjiang has been on the rise, and Chinese officials have deployed more security forces in cities with large Uighur populations and tried to suppress some Islamic practices, such as the wearing of burqas.AdvertisementTurkish leaders have made statements in the past supporting the Uighurs, as they did during a bloody 2009 ethnic riot in Urumqi, the provincial capital of Xinjiang. Many Uighurs have sought refuge in Turkey, which is also a popular destination for Uighur students. The arrest of the 10 Turkish citizens could result in greater diplomatic tensions between China and Turkey. On Wednesday, a woman answering the telephone at the Turkish ambassador’s office in Beijing said there was nobody available to comment on the issue.Survey results released last July by the Pew Research Center’s Global Attitudes Project showed that in 43 countries polled, Turks have among the most unfavorable opinions of China, with 68 percent of those polled saying they held a negative view of the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Many Uighurs have been trying to flee China to Turkey, usually by first traveling overland through Southeast Asian countries to Malaysia. Last year, hundreds of Uighurs in separate groups, most of them women and children, were detained by Thai security forces in the jungles of southern Thailand. They told Thai officials that they were Turkish citizens, and they were later visited by diplomats from the Turkish Embassy in Bangkok. Chinese officials insisted to the Thai government that the migrants be sent back to China. The fate of those migrant Uighurs is unclear.Nine of the Turkish citizens arrested in Shanghai had come to China to hand over their passports to traffickers who were trying to smuggle out the Uighurs, Global Times reported, adding that the Turks were paid $2,000 a passport. Each of the Uighurs had paid the traffickers 60,000 renminbi, or about $9,700, for a passport, according to the report. It said the Uighurs were trying to leave China on flights from Shanghai Pudong International Airport.The report identified the main two traffickers as Lamazan, a Turkish citizen, and Dawuti, a Chinese citizen living in Turkey. Dawuti is a Mandarin Chinese transliteration of a Uighur name. The report said Dawuti was a native of Kashgar, a Silk Road oasis city in the Uighur heartland near the border with Pakistan. The two men had a Turkish citizen, identified as Kaluke, alter the passports, the report said.Chinese leaders say terrorist groups are responsible for growing violence in Xinjiang, though officials have not given many details on the groups or much evidence of their activities. Many Uighurs and human rights advocates say China’s repressive policies in the region, including its attempts to suppress Islamic practices, are laying the foundation for the violence and encouraging young Uighurs to embrace more militant teachings. There have been signs that some militant Uighurs have trained at camps in the tribal belt of Pakistan.China has shown it is willing to engage with Islamist militants outside China to try to create more stability in the region. Afghan officials say Chinese officials met late last year with Afghan Taliban officials in Beijing to talk about a potential peace process to end the long-running civil war in Afghanistan, where the American military is drawing down its forces. Afghanistan, like Pakistan, borders Xinjiang.Mia Li and Bree Feng contributed research.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Turks Are Held in Plot to Help Uighurs Leave China.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.