By CHRIS BUCKLEYJAN. 14, 2015
HONG KONG —  The embattled leader of Hong Kong’s government warned on Wednesday that concessions to pro-democracy demonstrators could invite anarchy, as he laid out measures to defuse public anger over housing and inequality that resounded with the protesters who seized streets for 11 weeks last year.Leung Chun-ying, the chief executive of Hong Kong, offered the proposals in his first major policy package since the street demonstrations ended last month. Since Mr. Leung came to office in 2012, he has repeatedly vowed to address the city’s housing shortages and narrow the growing divide between rich and poor. But the protests echoed a view, particularly widespread among the young, that Mr. Leung is beholden to the city’s pro-Beijing business elite.On Wednesday, Mr. Leung sought to counter the discontent over economic issues while ruling out any retreat from government proposals for changing the city’s electoral rules. Those proposals, put forward by the Chinese national legislature on Aug. 31, were the trigger for the protests last year. They would give residents a direct vote for the chief executive, but only from among two or three candidates screened by a committee that is dominated by members loyal to Beijing. Mr. Leung said he would not bow to opponents’ demands to change the plan.“The rule of law is the foundation of Hong Kong,” Mr. Leung said in a televised address. “The democratic development of Hong Kong must therefore be underpinned by the same. As we pursue democracy, we should act in accordance with the law, or Hong Kong will degenerate into anarchy.”AdvertisementOn the economic concerns, Mr. Leung called housing “the most critical of all livelihood issues in Hong Kong” and said, “Sustained economic development will provide our young people with more and better employment opportunities and chances of upward mobility.”AdvertisementBut supporters of the recent demonstrations were skeptical that Mr. Leung could make good on his promises.The protesters’ political demands reflected widespread complaints that the city’s inequalities are yoked to its political dysfunctions because the government favors wealthy supporters. The 1,200-member election committee that appointed Mr. Leung included many executives allied with Beijing, who see their corporate strength as a pillar of the city’s prosperity.“It’s kind of a clash between generations,” said Au Wai-ling, a 22-year-old who is studying land surveying at the City University of Hong Kong. She said that home affordability was her biggest concern, although her major would give her good job prospects in the building sector. “The government officials and ordinary citizens live in really different worlds,” she said.Analysts said the demonstrations last year exposed a gulf of political distrust that is likely to persist, making governing the city increasingly difficult. Mr. Leung’s report Wednesday to the city’s Legislative Council was loudly interrupted by two lawmakers who accused him of earning illicit wealth and of betraying the city’s interests, before officials dragged them out of the chamber.“More and more Hong Kong people believe that the political system is strongly skewed to commercial interests, leading to the problems they are now facing,” said Chung Kim-wah, director of the Center for Social Policy Studies at Hong Kong Polytechnic University.The government, lacking political legitimacy, “is unable to move ahead to do something which is unpopular,” Mr. Chung said. “Hong Kong is going to be very difficult to govern.”Buzz Yu, 20, an electronic engineering student, echoed that point of view. “The Chinese government has lost this generation’s support,” Ms. Yu said. She added of Mr. Leung, “I can see his efforts to improve, but it’s not enough.”AdvertisementThe discontent here reflects a convergence of heady property prices and a shifting labor market, which has made it more difficult for younger residents to win a place in the middle class. The city has enjoyed robust growth, but secure, well-paid jobs for university graduates are not as plentiful as in past decades, Alfred C. M. Chan, a professor of sociology and social policy at Lingnan University in Hong Kong, said in an interview.Ninety percent of residents said housing problems should be Mr. Leung’s priority, according to a telephone survey of 1,545 adults conducted in early January by Hong Kong University. By contrast, 81 percent listed “economic development” and 72 percent listed “political development” as priorities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the public reaction to Mr. Leung’s promises was tepid. A poll of 640 residents by the Hong Kong University unit found that 46 percent were dissatisfied with Mr. Leung’s report, about 30 percent were satisfied, and the rest had mixed feelings, Radio Television Hong Kong, a public broadcaster, reported.Louis Ho, a 26-year-old employee of an e-commerce company, said he did not think the government’s plans to sell more subsidized apartments would make much difference.“Housing prices reach new records every year, but my salary has barely nudged up,” he said. “That’s not an isolated issue; it relates to every part of a family life,” he added. “I’m just waiting for the housing market to collapse. I’m genuinely hoping that it does.”The Hong Kong government, however, relies on land revenue. In some years, up to about a third of its income comes from land- and property-related sources, including land sales and stamp duties, said Peter Churchouse, an investment analyst in Hong Kong with long experience in the city’s property sector.“C. Y. Leung has inherited the bad consequences of past policies,” said Mr. Churchouse, using the initials by which Mr. Leung is widely known. “But this needs to be done faster.”Hong Kong’s rising property prices benefit owners and investors but have made it increasingly difficult for young workers to afford housing. In 2013, the median price of a home in Hong Kong was 14.9 times the median household annual income, higher than in any other market covered in an annual international study conducted by Demographia. Average home prices in the city grew by 12 percent in the first 11 months of last year, according to government data.Mr. Leung started his career as a land surveyor and has long experience in housing policy. He has promised to ensure that 480,000 apartment units are built in the next 10 years, including 200,000 public rental units. Acquiring enough land has been difficult, and Mr. Leung detailed steps to speed up housing development approvals, warning that zoning and regulatory barriers, as well as housing density limits, would have to be eased, despite public opposition.Advertisement“The root of many social and economic problems in Hong Kong lies in the shortage of land for development,” he said. “We cannot have our cake and eat it.”Supporters of the pro-democracy movement said Mr. Leung showed no appetite for changes that would hurt the city’s wealthiest. At the height of the protests, Mr. Leung said in an interview that giving ordinary residents an unfettered vote for their leaders would give poor residents too much political influence.On Wednesday, Mr. Leung made his case using less abrasive language. “Some people have underestimated the importance of economic growth,” he said. He added that the government must “forestall any act that harms the investment and business environment.”Alan Wong contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hong Kong Leader Says Yielding to Protesters Could Stir Chaos.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.