By ELISABETH MALKINJAN. 9, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  Julio Scherer García, a newspaper and magazine editor who created a school of critical journalism that unmasked Mexico’s political corruption and helped lay the groundwork for the country’s democratic transition, died here on Jan. 7. He was 88.His death was announced by the magazine Proceso, which he founded in 1976. He had been treated for a gastrointestinal illness for two years, the magazine’s website said.Over seven decades, Mr. Scherer defied Mexican presidents, shook up the newspaper culture by introducing political reporting and diverse opinion, and interviewed some of the world’s most notable figures, including John F. Kennedy, Zhou Enlai, Fidel Castro and Pablo Picasso.But it was as the founder and editor of the weekly Proceso, an investigative magazine, that Mr. Scherer made his deepest mark. Its extensively documented articles broke the stranglehold on information imposed by the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or P.R.I., which governed Mexico for more than 70 years through coercion, corruption and distribution of the spoils, including to owners of the more docile news media.AdvertisementProceso published articles exposing the lavish homes built by Mexico City’s brutal police chief, Arturo Durazo Moreno, an emblematic figure of corruption in the 1970s, and the luxurious Acapulco hideaway of former President José López Portillo.The magazine’s success emboldened other publications to become more independent, contributing to the P.R.I.’s electoral defeat in 2000.“As though it were a platitude, we recite that ‘power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely,’ ” Mr. Scherer said in 2002. “But we should take the English statesman Lord Acton seriously. Absolute power destroys principles, degrades habits and attacks desire, the intangible grace of life.”Journalism “would lose its meaning if it didn’t follow the dark labyrinths of power,” he added.Mr. Scherer helped train a generation of reporters who now work at Mexico’s top daily newspapers and emulate his hard questioning of those in power.Advertisement“He never stopped being a reporter,” said Carlos Puig, a former Washington correspondent for Proceso. “He would come to the Monday meeting with 20 tips and say, ‘Now, let’s make them stories.’ ”He would prod his reporters all week but never read their articles before they went to press, Mr. Puig said, adding, “He knew that they would never reach his exacting level, and nothing would be published.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Describing him as an “incendiary journalist,” his friend and collaborator Elena Poniatowska, a Mexican journalist and writer, said in a 2005 homage, “I wonder if it is possible to understand Mexico’s reality without the pen of Julio Scherer García.”After retiring as editor in 1996, Mr. Scherer continued to write a column in Proceso, as well as many books. (He wrote 22.) He interviewed the leader of the Zapatista rebels, the indigenous rebel force in southern Mexico, and talked to some of Mexico’s most notorious drug traffickers, including Ismael Zambada, a leader of the Sinaloa Cartel, at a mountain hide-out.Criticized for that interview, Mr. Scherer replied, “If the Devil offers me an interview, I go to hell.”Mr. Scherer was born on April 7, 1926, in Mexico City. His father, Pablo Scherer, was the son of a prosperous German immigrant; his mother, Paz García Gómez, came from a prominent legal family.Mr. Scherer studied law and philosophy at the National Autonomous University of Mexico, but dropped out to work as a messenger at one of Mexico’s main daily newspapers, Excélsior.He became the paper’s editor in 1968, at the age of 42. He introduced political and foreign reporting, and invited a diverse group of opinion writers to join the newspaper.But the newspaper, which was run as a cooperative, ousted him as editor in 1976 in a coup widely seen as having been encouraged, if not engineered, by President Luis Echeverría. Many reporters followed Mr. Scherer out the door and joined him when he founded Proceso four months later.Mr. Scherer’s wife, Susana Ibarra Puga, died in 1989. He is survived by nine children and a number of grandchildren. In a tribute to her father in the literary magazine Letras Libres in October, his youngest daughter, María, recalled him working at his Olivetti typewriter — he kept two, in case one broke — with a photo of his late wife and a small Mexican flag by his side.AdvertisementHe refused to give interviews, she said, adding, “My father has insisted, and rightly so, that his work speaks for him: his interviews, his articles.”A version of this article appears in print on January 15, 2015, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Julio Scherer García, 88, Watchdog Journalist, Dies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.