As Chinese tourists make news with dismaying frequency — most recently for opening the emergency doors on moving planes — the government is considering keeping a closer watch on those who misbehave, according to a report in the state-run news media.Starting this year, China will begin tracking tourists’ “uncivilized” behavior to create a “communications and accountability mechanism,” the state news agency Xinhua reported on Friday. The information would be gathered in coordination with airlines, hotels and travel agencies, a senior tourism official was quoted as saying.The article gave few details about the “accountability mechanism” or how it would be used. But the tourism official, Li Jinzao, head of the National Tourism Administration, was quoted by China National Radio as saying that airlines should carefully consider whether to sell a ticket to a tourist with a record of behaving badly.With more than 100 million Chinese expected to travel abroad this year, the well-publicized gaffes by the nation’s tourists have been a source of embarrassment for the government. Last month, a group of Chinese tourists caused an AirAsia flight to turn around midflight and return to the airport after one threw hot water at a flight attendant and another threatened to blow up the plane. The same week, the Thai news media reported that a group of Chinese tourists had pushed over a barricade protecting a famous mural in the Grand Palace in Bangkok. And in Hong Kong, various reports of misbehavior among the rapidly rising number of visitors from across the border have been a contributing factor in the tensions between the city and Beijing.Mr. Li, who spoke at a conference on Thursday in the southeastern city of Nanchang, said the tourism agency would also publish photographs and videos of undesirable conduct by Chinese tourists as part of a national information campaign promoting “civilized” behavior. He said that text messages would be sent to tourists when they arrived at their destinations, reminding them to observe good manners, according to Xinhua.Xinhua also reported that 10,000 college students would be selected to “promote civilized tourism” during summer backpacking trips abroad.This is not China’s first attempt to encourage its citizens to mind their manners when traveling. In 2013, the country introduced its first tourism law to regulate the industry, including measures to protect tourists from sudden price increases and forced purchases during tours. The law also stipulated that travelers should “abide by the norms of civilized tourist behavior,” including respecting public order and local customs.The tourism administration also published an illustrated handbook on good behavior, with points covering basic hygiene (the necessity of flushing a toilet) as well as country-specific tips (women should wear earrings in Spain, it said).During the two-day conference this week, Chinese officials also discussed ways to improve the domestic tourism industry, including starting what the administration called a “toilet revolution,” Xinhua said. In response to longstanding complaints, China will build 33,500 new bathrooms and renovate an additional 25,000 at tourism sites over the next three years, the news service quoted Mr. Li as saying.