By PASCALE BONNEFOYOCT. 9, 2015
SANTIAGO, Chile —  The Central Intelligence Agency had “convincing evidence” that the Chilean dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet ordered the 1976 assassination of a former Chilean ambassador, Orlando Letelier, and an American colleague, Ronni Moffitt, in Washington and that General Pinochet considered eliminating his chief of intelligence to cover it up, according to newly declassified State Department records.In a secret 1987 memorandum to President Ronald Reagan, George P. Shultz, then the secretary of state, refers to a C.I.A. report that contained “what we regard as convincing evidence that President Pinochet personally ordered his intelligence chief to carry out the murders.”The C.I.A. review also confirmed that “Pinochet decided to stonewall on the U.S. investigation to hide his involvement” and kept doing so, even considering the “elimination” of his former intelligence chief, Gen. Manuel Contreras.General Contreras, director of the intelligence agency DINA that was responsible for the fatal car bombing, was eventually sentenced by a Chilean court in the mid-1990s for human rights violations and was imprisoned until his death in August.AdvertisementThe memorandum was part of a collection of over 280 declassified documents that Secretary of State John Kerry turned over to the Chilean government this week during a trip to Chile for a conference on issues related to oceans. They had been withheld from the Chile declassification project during the Clinton administration, which released more than 23,000 records in 1999-2000, because they were potential evidence for the Justice Department’s renewed effort to investigate the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Although it was generally believed in Chile and by American officials that General Pinochet ordered the murders, “the C.I.A. has never before drawn and presented its conclusion that such strong evidence exists of his leadership role in this act of terrorism,” Mr. Shultz wrote in the 1987 memorandum.AdvertisementThe actual C.I.A. report containing that assessment is still classified.“This is a blatant example of a chief of state’s direct involvement in an act of state terrorism, one that is particularly disturbing both because it occurred in our capital and since his government is generally considered to be friendly,” wrote Mr. Shultz, telling President Reagan that General Pinochet’s direct involvement “must affect both our overall policy towards Chile and the general conceptual framework of how we make decisions regarding that country.”In a secret telegram to the United States consul in Rio de Janeiro earlier that year, Mr. Shultz also referred to a series of intelligence reports that pointed to General Pinochet’s involvement. One, from May 1978, asserted that General Contreras had told an army prosecutor at the time, Gen. Héctor Orozco, that “all foreign operations had been approved by Pinochet.”Peter Kornbluh, of the Washington-based National Security Archive, which assisted the Chilean government in its request for the declassification of the documents, said, “By keeping its assessment secret for almost 30 years, the C.I.A. essentially helped Pinochet sustain the cover-up of his role as a mastermind of international terrorism and protected him from due prosecution in the U.S.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: C.I.A. Memo Ties Killings in U.S. in ’76 to Pinochet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.