By CHRIS BUCKLEYJAN. 16, 2015
HONG KONG — A senior official in China’s Ministry of State Security faces investigation by the Communist Party’s central anticorruption agency, the agency announced on Friday, breaching the wall of secrecy that usually protects the powerful ministry.The investigation of the official, Vice Minister Ma Jian, was the latest demonstration of President Xi Jinping’s drive to consolidate his control of the levers of Communist Party power. The inquiry was disclosed in a single-sentence announcement on the website of the party’s anticorruption agency, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection.Mr. Ma was suspected of “grave violations of discipline and the law and is currently under organizational investigation,” said the statement, using the party’s customary euphemism for an inquiry into official graft and abuses of power. It gave no details of the allegations against Mr. Ma.In China, corruption investigations of senior officials are usually first done by the party’s own agency. Then officials are handed over to prosecutors for criminal investigation, which is almost invariably followed by trial, conviction and imprisonment.AdvertisementBy taking down a senior functionary in the Ministry of State Security, which collects intelligence and suppresses the party’s political foes, Mr. Xi has defied expectations among some political insiders that his anticorruption drive could peter out after a year of spreading inquiries that felled powerful retired leaders.Advertisement“Drastic remedies to cure ills must not ease off,” Mr. Xi said at a meeting of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection on Tuesday, according to the state-run media. “At all times and under any circumstances, there must be a high degree of unity with the party center in thoughts, politics and deeds.”Last month, investigators announced a criminal investigation into Zhou Yongkang, who until late 2012 ran China’s domestic security apparatus, including the courts, police and state security forces. Military investigators revealed in October that Xu Caihou, a former People’s Liberation Army commander, confessed to taking enormous bribes in return for handing out promotions and business opportunities.Chinese party newspapers recently issued blunt warnings against officials forming corrupt “cliques” that defy central control. By publicly bringing down officials in once-insulated bastions of power, Mr. Xi wanted to deter defiance of his authority, Zheng Yongnian, director of the East Asian Institute at the National University of Singapore, said by telephone.“In addition to the military, internal security is the most important part of the state apparatus,” Professor Zheng said. “This is the difficult part for Xi, difficult not just in terms of rankings of the officials, but also because these are sensitive departments.”On Thursday, the Chinese military issued the names and positions of 15 senior officers who last year were investigated on suspicion of corruption, including Mr. Xu, as well as one officer who was tried and sentenced to life in prison for graft.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Ministry of State Security is among China’s main agencies for espionage abroad and surveillance at home, and it works alongside, and sometimes in rivalry with, military agencies and the Ministry of Public Security. State security officials have broad powers to monitor those suspected of opposing the party and to stifle dissent and ethnic discontent, and their surveillance capabilities can also give them sensitive information about Chinese politicians and business leaders.Mr. Xi has taken charge of a newly established National Security Commission, bringing together ministries and agencies involved in external and domestic security policy, and he has repeatedly warned that the party and state faced dire threats from ideological foes and from ethnic separatists in Tibet and Xinjiang, as well as from hostile forces abroad.A year ago, investigators detained Liang Ke, then the head of the municipal state security bureau for Beijing. Mr. Liang was accused of corruption, as well as illicitly passing information to Mr. Zhou, the former head of domestic security who is the most senior party official ever formally investigated for corruption. In 2012, a state security official was arrested on charges of spying for the United States. In neither case did the government confirm the investigation.AdvertisementBut the government has now confirmed the inquiry into Mr. Ma, after a burst of rumors and reports outside China about the case. Mingjing, an overseas Chinese website based in the United States, reported on Dec. 9 that Mr. Ma was under investigation.The official announcement did not say what responsibilities Mr. Ma held as one of several vice ministers of state security. The South China Morning Post, a newspaper in Hong Kong, which reported on his downfall, said that he oversaw counterespionage operations.Recent reports in the Chinese state-run news media and on government websites showed that Mr. Ma often met with foreign politicians and officials, including ones from countries important to the Chinese government’s efforts to quell ethnic discontent and violence in Xinjiang. As recently as last month, Mr. Ma accompanied more senior officials abroad, including to Kazakhstan and Pakistan. In late November, he was one of a delegation of officials who visited Afghanistan.Unlike some other Chinese ministers, the minister for state security, Geng Huichang, rarely makes public appearances and speeches. But in December, he published an essay in a party journal, marking the passing of a new counterespionage law.“Never allow anyone to violate the party’s political discipline,” Mr. Geng wrote in the journal, Seeking Truth. “Never allow anyone to turn the power of the law into an instrument for personal gain and for satisfying personal desires.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Anticorruption Agency Investigates a Security Official.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.