AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneConfronting bleak prospects for any resumption of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks soon, the so-called Quartet group of powers will convene late this month in an attempt to find a way forward in the increasingly intractable-looking conflict, the United Nations said on Thursday.Stéphane Dujarric, a United Nations spokesman, told reporters that a meeting of diplomats from the Quartet, an informal diplomatic group established in 2002 and composed of the United Nations, the European Union, the United States and Russia, would be held Jan. 26 in Brussels. The announcement came as the United Nations Security Council held its first formal meeting of 2015 on the Middle East. A senior official, Assistant Secretary General Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, presented to the Council’s 15 members a sobering assessment of the antipathy and mistrust that prevail between Israelis and Palestinians.He said the sides were “engaged in a downward spiral of actions and counteractions.” Exasperated over what they have described as Israel’s intransigence, the Palestinians have said they are no longer interested in pursuing negotiations without a clear timeline for an Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied after the 1967 war. The Palestinians have also used their membership status at the United Nations to join the International Criminal Court, where they have threatened to seek war-crimes prosecutions of Israeli officials. The Israelis have criticized the actions of the Palestinians, threatened to bring charges against them and frozen Palestinian tax revenue, an act that Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen called unacceptable. Intensifying the tensions is the fraying of a truce that halted the 50-day war last summer between Israel and Palestinian militants in Gaza.Last month, the Security Council rejected a resolution on Palestinian statehood that would have set 2017 as the deadline for Israeli withdrawal from occupied lands and created the basis for full Palestinian statehood. The United States, Israel’s closest ally, voted against the measure, which failed to get the nine votes needed for passage. This year, however, the Council has five new nonpermanent members — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela — viewed as more sympathetic to the Palestinian side. They could tip the balance for approval should there be another vote. That prospect could force the United States into the awkward position of having to use its veto power, as a permanent member, to block such a resolution. A veto would risk alienating Arab allies that have been collaborating with the Americans on other Middle East crises, most notably the campaign against the Islamic State extremist group in Syria and instability in neighboring Iraq.Asked about the possibility of another vote on such a resolution, Foreign Minister Heraldo Muñoz of Chile, the Security Council’s president for January, told reporters he was unaware of any imminent plans. Yet foreign ministers from the Arab League, meeting in Cairo, said in a statement that they were working on “the necessary communications and consultations to submit a new proposal to the Security Council,” news services reported.Advertisement