By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEJAN. 15, 2015
GENEVA —  The United Nations will resume talks with the Syrian government next week in the hope of achieving a cease-fire around Aleppo, the largest city in the north, the special envoy for Syria said Thursday. But the specifics remained hazy.“We are aiming at a reduction of violence and possibly a freeze of all military activities,” the envoy, Staffan de Mistura, said in Geneva. “Our hope is that Aleppo could be a signal of good will, a confidence-building measure which could and can facilitate the restarting of a political process with a clear political horizon.”He said world leaders had agreed on the need to break the deadlock in Syria and halt a civil war that he said had left over 220,000 dead, a million wounded and millions more displaced. Yet the response to proposals for a freeze around Aleppo has so far been tepid from both the Syrian government and opposition factions.Mr. de Mistura met with Secretary of State John Kerry on Wednesday and Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, on Thursday to discuss the situation.The positions of the sides may become clearer after a meeting of opposition factions in Cairo, planned for next week, and after peace talks that Russia plans to convene later in the month. But diplomats say they see little sign of an imminent breakthrough.Advertisement“No one wants to take the first step, not the government and not the opposition,” said one official who is closely monitoring the process, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity in line with diplomatic protocol.AdvertisementMr. de Mistura said he would send his deputy, Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, to Syria to resume the talks with the government. His spokeswoman said, though, that the Syrians had yet to set a date for that meeting, or for a visit Mr. de Mistura wants to make to Damascus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has expressed some interest in the freeze proposal, but “the devil is in the details,” Mr. de Mistura said. “That’s why we are fine-tuning what we understand are the areas of concern both by the government and the opposition.”He said the United Nations’ talks with the government would “bear in mind” the Geneva communiqué of June 2012, which called for the formation of an interim government, among other steps. But he said they would also take into account “new factors which have come up in the reality of the area,” such as the Islamic State, which now controls about one-third of Syrian territory.These new factors, Mr. de Mistura suggested, have created a “need to adjust aspirations without preconditions.”A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. to Renew Syria Talks, Seeking Aleppo Cease-Fire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.