By EDWARD WONG and SEBNEM ARSUJAN. 15, 2015
BEIJING — The Turkish Foreign Ministry has confirmed that 10 Turkish citizens are under arrest in China on charges of trying to smuggle people out of the country, but it did not say they had been helping terrorism suspects, as a Chinese news report asserted.A statement issued by the ministry late Wednesday in response to questions by The New York Times confirmed some aspects of the account published earlier in the day by Global Times, a major state-run newspaper. However, the statement’s failure to mention any of the terrorism-related charges that the paper did, citing police officials in Shanghai, where the arrests took place, raised questions about the newspaper’s account.Global Times said the 10 Turks and two Chinese citizens were charged recently with smuggling terrorist suspects and altering legal documents. The Shanghai police also detained nine ethnic Uighurs who are Chinese citizens, saying they were trying to leave the country illegally on flights from Shanghai, the article reported.It described how two masterminds of the alleged smuggling scheme — a Chinese Uighur living in Turkey named Dawuti and a Turkish man identified in Mandarin Chinese as Lamazan had bought passports from nine Turks entering China and then had them altered by a Turk before giving them to the nine Uighurs, who paid $9,700 each for the passports in order to leave the country. All the people were detained in November, when the nine Uighurs tried to fly out of Shanghai, the article said.AdvertisementIt added that the police had found video and audio material related to terrorism on the Uighurs, and that some had confessed that they had planned to travel to Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria to take part in jihadist activities.AdvertisementA Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said at a news conference on Wednesday that the Global Times article was “extremely accurate.”But the details given by the Turkish Foreign Ministry made no reference to either terrorism-related charges or terrorist suspects. Rather, the ministry said that 10 people — eight men and two women — had been detained by security officials in Shanghai on Nov. 17 on suspicion of “organizing people for illegal border crossings.”Among the 10 detained were a father and a daughter as well as a married couple, the ministry said. It said that nine of the Turks had arrived in Shanghai on Nov. 5 and that one entered China on Nov. 15.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Turkish citizens were not released after a month’s detention despite no legal charges having been brought against them, the ministry said. Then, on Dec. 24, after prosecutors had examined their case for a week, two Turks were formally arrested on the charge of “organizing people for illegal border crossings” and eight on the charge of “selling travel documents.” Their cases were transferred to criminal courts.All the suspects are in jail in Shanghai, where they have been visited twice by Turkish diplomats. The ministry said it expected court hearings to start around Feb. 25.The propaganda and media relations office at the Shanghai Police Headquarters did not answer calls seeking comment on Wednesday and Thursday.Violent attacks have been on the rise in the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, the homeland of the Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking, mostly Muslim people. Chinese officials blame Islamist terrorists for most of the attacks, but many Uighurs and some foreign scholars say the Chinese are exaggerating the threat of jihadism to justify repressive policies.Hundreds and possibly thousands of Uighurs illegally fled Xinjiang last year. More than 400 were detained by Thai security officials in separate groups in Thailand in March alone. Most were women and children trying to get to Turkey, and many had forged Turkish passports.Some scholars say the Uighurs detained in November in the Shanghai airport may have been simply trying to flee China rather than looking to join jihadist groups.AdvertisementThe Washington Post recently documented the case of Fang Jiushu, a member of China’s dominant ethnic group, the Han, who was shot and killed in May by police officers in the village of Luokan in Yunnan Province. The police immediately labeled Mr. Fang a terrorist and closed the case, even though witnesses said he was only trying to negotiate with local officials over compensation for seized land.Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misidentified the location of a Chinese village where a police shooting occurred in May. The village, Luokan, is in Yunnan Province, not the Xinjiang region.Edward Wong reported from Beijing, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: China: Turkey Confirms Arrests in Smuggling Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.