By ANDREW JACOBSJAN. 15, 2015
BEIJING —  A jump in violent crime in Chinese towns near the border with North Korea has prompted the authorities in China to organize civilian militias to help secure the largely unprotected border, a state-run publication has reported.The militias, described by the publication, China Defense News, are part of an enhanced system to keep villagers safe from North Koreans, some of them armed soldiers and border guards crossing into China in search of food and money.Last month, a North Korean soldier killed four people during a robbery attempt in Yanbian, a prefecture in Jilin Province, which shares a 300-mile border with North Korea. According to accounts in the state news media, the soldier fatally shot two older couples in their homes and wounded another resident. The suspect was subsequently captured by the Chinese police, and last week, Beijing lodged a formal complaint with the North Korean government in Pyongyang.The killings have strained a relationship frayed by North Korea’s erratic diplomacy and its continued pursuit of a nuclear arsenal, leading to increased tensions in northeast Asia.AdvertisementChina is North Korea’s most important ally, and according to some news reports, Beijing has expressed its discontent over Pyongyang’s truculence by constraining cross-border trade and reducing shipments of food and oil. North Korean defectors and international aid workers say that hunger and malnutrition are rife throughout the country.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition to establishing and arming militias, installing video surveillance cameras, and providing patrol vehicles, the Chinese authorities have set up a hotline for tips on people suspected of being North Korean intruders, China Defense News reported.Advertisement“The border meanders across the land; its situation is complicated,” the article said, explaining the need for expanded civilian patrols. “It’s difficult to rely on just one party in maintaining effective control.”The border between the two countries has long been porous. They are separated by the Tumen River, which allows easy crossings when it freezes over in winter.North Korean refugees and others begging for food occasionally cross into China, but in recent years, assailants thought to be from North Korea have killed at least 20 people in Nanping, the village where the most recent murders took place, according to Beijing News.Patrick Zuo contributed research.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Beijing Moves to Halt Crime Spilling In From North Korea.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.