By PETER BAKER and RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLDJAN. 15, 2015
Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, commented on the announcement that beginning Friday, the United States will ease restrictions on travel to Cuba.WASHINGTON —  For decades, the aging tourist mecca of Havana beckoned, but the United States did not make it easy for Americans hoping to visit. They had to justify their trips to a government agency, apply for licenses, sign up with a company organizing “people to people” exchanges, or circumvent the law altogether by flying somewhere else first.As of Friday, the door will open a lot wider. While ordinary tourism remains banned by law, new rules put in place by President Obama will make it easier for Americans to visit Cuba than it has been for most of the last half-century. If airlines begin regular service between the United States and Cuba, as they quickly moved to do, it could soon be as simple as logging on to a computer to order a ticket and checking a box to say the trip serves a legitimate purpose.The rules will usher in a new era of contact between neighbors that have been estranged for longer than most of their citizens have been alive. It will be easier not only to travel, but also to send money. American telecommunications providers, financial institutions and agricultural companies will be given more opportunities to do business in Cuba. Visitors will be allowed to spend more, use credit cards and even bring home up to $100 in Cuban cigars.United Airlines announced on Thursday that it planned to seek approval to begin regular service to Cuba from Newark and Houston. American Airlines, which operates charter flights to Cuba from Miami and Tampa, Fla., said it was reviewing the rule changes.Advertisement“This is basically the end of the travel ban, once they work out the kinks,” said Julia E. Sweig, a longtime scholar and author on Cuba. “At first glance, the new regulations look to allow most Americans to travel to Cuba without having to ask for permission in advance, and by booking air travel directly rather than through authorized groups and agencies.”AdvertisementThat is not to say everything will suddenly be possible. The embargo imposed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1960 after Fidel Castro stormed to power remains in effect, and most trade is still illegal. Travelers will have to certify that their visits are for educational, religious, cultural, journalistic, humanitarian or family purposes, among other permitted categories.Some analysts warned against expecting quick, drastic change. Visitors will still need visas from the Cuban government, and the island’s aging hotels and restaurants may not be able to accommodate them all.“Where are all these people going to eat?” asked John S. Kavulich, a senior policy adviser at the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council, a nonprofit group of businesses. “Where are all these people going to stay? The excitement, the exuberance, is just out in another galaxy. You can only do what can be done.”Moreover, those traveling on people-to-people exchanges will still need to go with a group that maintains a full schedule of approved activities. “So a couple cannot go to Cuba to educate themselves on a subject like Cuban music,” said Robert L. Muse, a lawyer experienced in laws relating to Cuba. “They can only go under the auspices of an organization that arranges a structured educational trip.”Still, while educational exchanges have been one of the most common forms of travel to Cuba in recent years, government officials said Thursday that they expected the new rules to make solo visits outside of such arrangements more frequent, because it will be easier to travel under other permitted categories.The rules put into reality the changes Mr. Obama promised last month when he announced plans to resume normal diplomatic relations with Havana for the first time since 1961. The administration made this latest move after Cuba freed 53 political prisoners it had agreed to release as part of a deal between Mr. Obama and President Raúl Castro, Fidel’s brother.Critics said Mr. Obama was playing into the hands of the Castro brothers by relaxing sanctions without obtaining commitments from them to expand freedoms for Cubans. Cuba remains one of the most repressive nations in the world, according to human rights groups and the State Department, which have cataloged the ways it smothers dissent through arbitrary arrests, government intimidation, selective prosecution and control of the news media.Advertisement“This is a windfall for the Castro regime that will be used to fund its repression against Cubans, as well as its activities against U.S. national interests in Latin America and beyond,” said Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida.Mr. Rubio, who is Cuban-American, sent a letter this week to Jacob J. Lew, the Treasury secretary, questioning whether the new rules violated American law. “While those questions remain unanswered,” Mr. Rubio said Thursday, “one thing that’s become even more crystal clear is that this one-sided deal is enriching a tyrant and his regime.”Mr. Obama argues that the approach of the last 50 years has not worked and that it is time to try something new. Officials said Thursday that they were confident the new rules complied with the law, and Mr. Lew said they would benefit Cubans.“These changes will have a direct impact in further engaging and empowering the Cuban people, promoting positive change for Cuba’s citizens,” he said.“Cuba has real potential for economic growth,” Mr. Lew added, “and by increasing travel, commerce, communications and private business development between the United States and Cuba, the United States can help the Cuban people determine their own future.”Cuba is the only country in the world to which United States law bans Americans from traveling as tourists. For years, Americans have found ways to bypass those restrictions, and Mr. Obama has twice before changed the rules to allow more exceptions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to the Cuban government, 98,000 Americans visited Cuba in 2012, a year after Mr. Obama most recently eased restrictions — twice as many as traveled there five years earlier. That does not include many more Cuban-Americans who visit each year but are not counted by Havana because they are still considered Cubans.Under previous rules, Americans wanting to travel legally to Cuba had to justify their trips under one of 12 categories and, in some cases, obtain a license from the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control. Under the new rules, Americans will not need specific licenses to certify they fit those categories.Just as important, airlines will be allowed to open regular commercial routes to Cuba once a civil aviation agreement is struck with Havana. Currently, they can operate only charter flights under a government license. About 300,000 passengers took charter flights to Cuba from Miami last year, and another 30,000 flew from Tampa, according to officials at those airports. In Tampa, the number was up 50 percent in just two years.AdvertisementThe Cuban government made no comment on Thursday but published articles on the changes on state news sites. Many Cubans embraced the new regulations but expressed skepticism that the United States would follow through.“Of course I want more customers and support, but I will wait until they are here to believe it,” said Juanita Ceballos, who rents a room in the Vedado neighborhood of Havana, a favorite of tourists.But others were encouraged by the higher ceiling on remittances, which are a major source of income for some families. “It will decrease the stress of living day to day,” said Herminia Salvador, 41, a former government secretary largely supported by money from relatives in Florida.Peter Baker reported from Washington, and Randal C. Archibold from Havana. Frances Robles contributed reporting from Miami, and Victoria Burnett from Mexico City.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 16, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. to Relax Limits on Cuba Travel, Opening Door to Commercial Flights.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.