AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneThe Obama administration has tried four military approaches to combat the Islamic State and to help shape the outcome of Syria’s civil war, which began more than four years ago.The main objective has been to cripple the Islamic State, which has gained control of territory straddling Syria and Iraq, rather than to aid the Syrian rebels fighting President Bashar al-Assad. But the administration has said Mr. Assad must give up power for there to be any settlement to the conflict.The American actions, which critics say have sometimes worked at cross purposes, have achieved mixed results at best. The emergence in recent weeks of a muscular Russian intervention in Syria to support Mr. Assad has raised new complications for the United States. Here is a look at each American approach:TRAIN AND EQUIP The Obama administration said Friday that it had halted this $500 million program, which was undertaken by the Pentagon and was meant to train as many as 5,400 Syrian fighters this year, and 15,000 over three years, at facilities in Turkey and Jordan for ground combat against Islamic State militants in Syria. The program was plagued with problems, including desertions and low recruitment, because many rebels wanted to fight Mr. Assad and not just the Islamic State. Only a handful of trainees completed it.COVERT C.I.A. TRAINING Little has been disclosed about this operation, which has helped train fighters battling Mr. Assad’s forces. Groups vetted by the C.I.A. and deemed sufficiently moderate and secular — calling themselves part of the loose-knit Free Syrian Army — have received training and supplies, sometimes including advanced antitank missiles. The Nusra Front, Al Qaeda’s affiliate in Syria, dealt a setback to the C.I.A. program last year by dismantling its main fighting groups and seizing American weapons, including some of the missiles. More recently, however, some of the groups have fought alongside Nusra in tactical alliances, aiding the advances that helped to spur new Russian intervention. In the past week, some units have been hit by Russian airstrikes.KURDISH-ARAB COALITION This effort, which American officials have increasingly promoted in recent days, is intended to arm 3,000 to 5,000 Arab fighters, who would join more than 20,000 Kurdish combatants to attack Islamic State forces protecting Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the group’s main stronghold and the capital of its self-proclaimed caliphate. The Arab contingent, which the Pentagon calls the Syrian Arab Coalition, is said to be composed of 10 to 15 groups. They would also be used in a related undertaking with Turkey to create a 60-mile “safe zone” along the border.AIRSTRIKES IN SYRIA AND IRAQ An American-led coalition of Western and Arab states has been bombing Islamic State positions for more than a year, initially in Iraq and then in Syria. Since Russia’s intervention a few weeks ago, American officials have said, the United States has undertaken more bombing missions in Iraq and fewer in Syria, partly to minimize the risk of conflict with Russian warplanes. While the American-led effort appears to have hurt the Islamic State’s expansion, the group remains ensconced not only in Raqqa, but also in the Iraqi cities of Mosul and Ramadi.Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.Advertisement