By HELENE COOPERJAN. 16, 2015
WASHINGTON —  The Pentagon will send up to 1,000 soldiers and other personnel on a mission to train Syrian rebels as part of the fight against the Islamic State, Defense Department officials said Friday.The training mission, to take place in Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Qatar, will begin in the early spring, said Rear Adm. John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, with soon-to-be-vetted “moderate” Syrian rebels.In addition to sending some 400 soldiers, the Pentagon will be sending several hundred others to provide logistics, communications and other support, bringing the number of Americans working to train Syrian rebels to around 1,000 people.Admiral Kirby said the trainers may begin to deploy in the next four to six weeks.The goal of the training program is to build up a ground force of Syrian opposition groups to do in Syria what Iraqi ground units have been doing in Iraq — call in airstrikes and work with the American-led coalition that has been battling Islamic State fighters. So far, that battle has been far more intensive in Iraq than in Syria, in large part, Defense Department officials said, because the coalition fighting the Islamic State has little visibility in Syria.AdvertisementIf the training program goes well, Admiral Kirby said, Syrian rebels could be back on the battlefield in Syria by the end of this year. He said the number of American troops to be involved in the mission has yet to be finalized. Training personnel from two other nations will be involved as well, he said, but he did not specify which countries.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.President Obama signed into law last month a defense bill in which Congress authorized the training of moderate Syrian rebels, months after he first announced the program. The bill also provided $5 billion to train Iraqis who are fighting the Islamic State.AdvertisementAmerican military officials met recently in Istanbul with moderate Syrian opposition leaders and “came away optimistic that the Syrian opposition leadership wants this program as badly as we do,” Admiral Kirby said.Defense Department officials have said that up to 15,000 Syrian rebels will be needed to reclaim parts of eastern Syria that are controlled by the Islamic State. Officials say the military can train around 5,000 in the first year, but it was unclear how many would be trained in the first wave.It remains unclear whether the Syrian rebels will also take on the government of President Bashar al-Assad.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Pentagon Will Send Trainers to Aid Some Syrian Rebels.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.