By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 16, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — Two journalists who have been vocal critics of South Korea’s president were acquitted Friday on charges of defaming her brother, in a case that rights groups saw as a test of freedom of speech here.Weeks before President Park Geun-hye’s election in December 2012, Choo Chin-woo, a reporter with the leading newsweekly SisaIN, and Kim Ou-joon, host of a popular politically oriented podcast, speculated that Ms. Park’s brother, Park Ji-man, might have been involved in the murder of a relative.The two reported what they characterized as loopholes and contradictions in the police’s conclusion that the relative had been murdered by someone else, and they raised suspicion that Mr. Park, a businessman, had been involved in the 2011 killing. Mr. Park vehemently denied involvement and sued Mr. Choo and Mr. Kim. In 2013, prosecutors indicted the two on charges of defaming and spreading false information about Mr. Park with the intent of preventing his sister’s election.A court acquitted Mr. Choo and Mr. Kim in October 2013, but the prosecutors appealed the verdict, seeking prison terms of several years. Reporters Without Borders and a local media workers’ labor union accused prosecutors of abusing South Korea’s defamation laws to pressure reporters into censoring themselves and to undermine freedom of information.AdvertisementOn Friday, the appeals court in Seoul acquitted Mr. Choo and Mr. Kim again.“There were enough grounds for the accused to raise the suspicion regardless of whether it was truthful or not,” the court said in its verdict. “Journalists’ activities should be fully guaranteed in an election year to help the people decide, and how to judge their reports should be left to readers and viewers.”International free speech advocates, including the United Nations special rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression, have voiced concern about what they call a lack of tolerance for dissent in South Korea. Critics have said that the country’s justice system hampers the press by placing the burden of proof in defamation cases not on prosecutors, or on those who say they were defamed, but on defendants, even when the alleged victims are public figures.AdvertisementCritics of Ms. Park have accused her government of abusing the law more generally to suppress freedom of speech. On Saturday, the government deported Shin Eun-mi, a Korean-American woman, who had been accused of breaking the country’s National Security Law by making positive comments about North Korea in lectures she gave last year. On Wednesday, a leftist political activist named Hwang Sun who co-hosted those lectures was arrested on charges of breaking the same law.A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: 2 Journalists Cleared in Defamation Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.