By ALISON SMALE and JAMES KANTERJAN. 16, 2015
BERLIN — After a series of police raids and a deadly gun battle, arrests of terror suspects in Belgium, Germany and France late Thursday and Friday highlighted the scope and complexity of the challenge facing European intelligence agencies and security services in confronting the expanding threat from radical jihadists, many of them battle-hardened in Syria and Iraq.On Friday alone, the Belgian authorities announced that 13 people had been detained nationwide after two men suspected of planning an imminent attack were shot dead by the police in the eastern town of Verviers on Thursday evening. The authorities in France reported 12 detentions, and 250 police officers in Berlin swooped down on 12 locations to detain five Turks — three of whom were later released — on suspicion of recruiting, financing and helping Turkish and Chechen fighters get to Syria.There was no public indication that the raids in Belgium and Germany were directly linked to the attacks last week in Paris, in which 17 people were killed and the three gunmen, all professing allegiance to militant groups, were shot dead by the police. The authorities in Paris said the 12 people detained there overnight might have belonged to a previously undetected cell that supported one of the gunmen in the Paris attacks.The combination of the raids in three countries suggested a new willingness on the part of the authorities across Europe to act more aggressively and pre-emptively to head off potential threats.AdvertisementJust before millions of people gathered to march in France last Sunday in defiance of the attacks, the interior ministers of 11 European countries huddled quietly in Paris to draw up measures to combat potential threats — in particular, officials said, more vigilance against radical material on the Internet and social media; more intense swapping of data among governments, especially no-fly lists; and a crackdown on illegal sales of weapons.Advertisement“The threat has increased,” said Rob de Wijk, director of The Hague Center for Strategic Studies in the Netherlands, pointing to the sharp increase in arrests for religion-inspired terrorism, which Europol statistics show rose to 216 arrests in 2013 from 110 in 2009. Even as governments are ramping up their counterterrorism efforts, though, they are igniting a growing debate about whether they are going too far, too fast, and are at risk of sacrificing civil liberties as they scramble to intensify security. The trade-offs are not always easy to discern at a time when there is clear evidence of a threat from a small but potentially dangerous group of residents of their own countries.American intelligence agencies have estimated that 18,000 foreigners, including 3,000 Europeans and other Westerners, have traveled to Syria and Iraq since the fight in the region broke out in 2011. Of those, more than 500 veterans of the fighting are estimated to have returned to Europe, according to research by Richard Barrett, a former British intelligence officer.The three gunmen in the Paris attacks, Saïd and Chérif Kouachi and Amedy Coulibaly, had all been monitored at various points by French law enforcement and intelligence agencies but were nonetheless able to plan and execute attacks on the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and a kosher supermarket.The handling of their cases has prompted widespread debate about whether Europe has adequate resources to track not just citizens traveling to and from Syria but a broader group of radicalized Muslims who could be potential threats to act alone or in loose affiliation with militant groups like the Islamic State and offshoots of Al Qaeda. Security agencies are clamoring for more money and powers to keep up.Germany, which was shocked to learn that Arabs at a Hamburg mosque played a key role in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, has so far escaped a major assault. But, as Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Thursday when outlining government moves to avert more terrorism, “we cannot completely rule out an attack on Germany.”The authorities here said Friday that some 600 people had headed from Germany to Syria and Iraq, with at least 180 now returned. At least 30 of those have battle experience, the German interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said. Others are “brutalized” by their experience, said Hans-Georg Maassen, the head of Germany’s domestic intelligence service. As far as possible, he said, they are watched.Early Friday, the German authorities moved to detain the five Turks in Berlin suspected of abetting terrorism on the grounds that it was too dangerous to leave them at large.Advertisement“We were afraid that these people will flee and had to rush in,” said Martin Steltner, spokesman for the Berlin state prosecutor’s office.Three of the five were released. All five had ties to a Berlin mosque where one of the two men who remained in custody, a 41-year-old Turk, acted as an “emir” linked to terrorism, the police said. Mr. Steltner said the action had long been prepared and had no link to the Paris attacks.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Belgium, Eric Van Der Sypt of the federal prosecutor’s office said several of the people arrested had been in Syria, but he declined to say whether they included the two people shot to death in Verviers on Thursday. He said the arrests there were to head off “plans to assassinate policemen in the street,” or at a police station.In Verviers, the authorities found several police uniforms, walkie-talkies, radios, falsified documents and weapons including four AK-47s. In Sint-Jans-Molenbeek, on the outskirts of Brussels, the authorities found a firearm, ammunition and a knife.As the sun set over Verviers on Friday evening, heavily armed police officers stood guard on the street where the deadly raid took place in a section of town that borders a relatively well-to-do district. The red brick building where the shootout took place lies in the middle of one of the short slopes that characterize many of the streets in towns in the hilly southeast of Belgium, but its windows were boarded up and its lintels blackened by fire.Martine Renier, the Verviers town councilor for social cohesion and integration, said she mostly blamed the alienation felt by some residents stemming from poverty and unemployment for the appearance of the terrorist cell. Many immigrants and children of immigrants, she said, “are caught between two cultures” — that of Belgium and that of the countries they or their relatives came from. Those people, particularly the young, “are completely ready to be radicalized,” Ms. Renier said, though she emphasized that Islam should not be blamed.In Quimper, France, the prime minister, Manuel Valls, said he did not believe there was a direct connection between the events in Belgium and the carnage in France last week, beyond a common ideology among the militants focused on attacking Western values.“There doesn’t seem to be a link, but we must always remain cautious,” he said. “France must protect itself against this jihadist terrorism, this radical Islam.”Ms. Merkel and other leaders have emphasized there is a place for Muslims and their faith in modern Europe. The vast majority are law-abiding and peaceful, Ms. Merkel said on Thursday, and while they make up some four million of Germany’s population of 80 million, “I don’t see an Islamization of Germany,” as thousands of anti-immigrant marchers in Dresden have alleged at weekly rallies the past three months.AdvertisementWeapons are still relatively hard to obtain in Europe compared with the United States, and it is chilling to most Europeans to hear gunfire echo in the streets, particularly bursts of fire like the military-style assault of the Kouachi brothers on Charlie Hebdo, or the gunfire that erupted when the Belgian police moved in on Thursday in Verviers.Worries have surfaced that a crackdown on violence will spawn more resentment and resistance among Europe’s young Muslims, many of whom say they already feel like outcasts, crowded into areas with high crime and unemployment and bereft of chances to get a good education or climb society’s ladder.But facing plots like the one uncovered in Belgium, said Mr. Maassen of Germany’s domestic intelligence service, “it is important that we are well equipped.”“You can’t fight I.S. with wooden guns,” he said, referring to the Islamic State.However, he told ARD public television this week, “we must be calm and master the situation with a sense of proportion. Panic and hysteria don’t help.” And going after the right information, he said, is crucial.“Separate the wheat from the chaff,” he said.Alison Smale reported from Berlin, and James Kanter from Brussels and Verviers, Belgium. Melissa Eddy contributed reporting from Berlin, and Alan Cowell from London.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 17, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: As Europe Moves Aggressively Against Terrorism, New Challenges Emerge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.