By JOE COCHRANEJAN. 17, 2015
JAKARTA, Indonesia —  When the political outsider Joko Widodo was sworn in as president of Indonesia, promising “people-centric politics” and a common touch, supporters hoped for miracles while opponents confidently predicted he would be destroyed politically within a year.Nearly three months later, neither side has been proved completely right or wrong, and those who look the most prescient were the ones who said the only thing predictable about Indonesian politics is its unpredictability.Two months into his presidency, an AirAsia jet with 162 people on board fell from the Indonesian sky into the Java Sea. While the cause has yet to be determined, the crash focused international attention on Indonesia’s airline safety problems and a regulatory apparatus that critics say has not kept pace with the country’s booming budget airline industry.“This is the moment to totally reform our air transportation,” Mr. Joko, 53, said in an interview at the state palace on Sunday, moving to the front burner an issue that had not even merited a mention in his campaign platform.AdvertisementOn more terrestrial matters, the record of the former slum child who rose to become the leader of the world’s fourth-most-populous nation has been decidedly mixed.AdvertisementFar from being destroyed by his political opponents, he has run roughshod over a hostile parliamentary opposition, pushing through earth-shifting campaign promises that could transform this poverty-ridden island nation of 250 million.At the same time, his appointment of a police general facing a corruption investigation to be the nation’s top law enforcement official has raised serious questions about his judgment and his political independence.Perhaps his most contentious proposal was the elimination of fuel subsidies which, popular with voters and politicians, cost the state tens of billions of dollars a year, more than the government spends on health care and social services combined. His predecessor had tried to kill the program and failed.He was able to eliminate the gasoline subsidy this month and, in a remarkable sleight of hand, lower fuel prices at the pump on the same day. The wild card that allowed that to happen was plummeting world oil prices.The change freed up money for his ambitious social programs. His government, as promised, mailed out national “smart cards” to more than 15 million poor Indonesian families in November, entitling them to free health insurance and education-related expenses for their children for up to 12 years of school.He has also rolled out grand infrastructure plans for 2015, including 13 new dams and a long-overdue upgrade to the north-south Trans-Sumatra Highway.The smart card program, especially, is already winning praise from needy families, said Wardah Hafidz, founder of the Urban Poor Consortium, a Jakarta-based nongovernmental organization.Advertisement“People are happy about it because it’s very different than before, when it was difficult to get health treatment, or people had to pay or were being turned away from public hospitals,” she said. “People are watching, people are commenting on the program, they are active. It’s hopeful.”But if the political opposition has crumbled, hobbled by divisions and leadership struggles, analysts said Mr. Joko’s most worrisome political problems lie within his own coalition.On Jan. 9 he nominated Budi Gunawan, a three-star police general and governor of the national police academy, as the new national police chief.The nomination was widely believed to have been made at the behest of Megawati Sukarnoputri, a former president and the chairwoman of Mr. Joko’s political party, Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle.General Budi once served as her senior police aide when she was president.On Tuesday, Indonesia’s independent Corruption Eradication Commission announced that General Budi was a suspect in a bribery investigation involving millions of dollars. The announcement, apparently timed to sabotage his confirmation hearing, was hardly a surprise: Allegations of irregularities in his bank accounts were reported as far back as 2010.General Budi insists the transactions under scrutiny were legal, and Mr. Joko said on Thursday that he had vetted the nomination with the National Police Commission, which said it had found no wrongdoing. The nomination was approved by Parliament on Thursday amid protests by anticorruption groups.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Mr. Joko, under increasing pressure, announced in a televised address to the nation on Friday night that he had delayed General Budi’s appointment until his legal problems were resolved.“So it’s delayed, not canceled. That needs to be underlined,” Mr. Joko said, adding that Gen. Badrodin Haiti, the deputy national police chief, would serve as interim police chief.But that nomination was only the latest in a pattern of presidential appointments that have cast doubt on Mr. Joko’s reputation as an outsider and his promises of a squeaky-clean government.AdvertisementHe filled more than half of the posts in his cabinet with political appointees linked to Ms. Megawati and their party, and other parties and groups that had backed his successful presidential run last summer. Mr. Joko had repeatedly said during the campaign and right after he was elected that he wanted a cabinet of professionals.Among the appointees are Puan Maharani, Ms. Megawati’s daughter, appointed senior minister for human development, and H. M. Prasetyo as attorney general, who is a member of a political party run by Surya Paloh, a prominent politician and media mogul who backed Mr. Joko’s presidential bid.During his campaign, Mr. Joko, a former carpenter, promoted himself as a common man who would be the first president in Indonesian history who had not been an army general or part of its cozy, aloof political elite.Ms. Megawati, the daughter of the country’s founder, has been a prominent member of that elite for decades.She had stepped aside and personally appointed Mr. Joko as her party’s candidate for the July 9 election, given his high polling numbers, but the move immediately prompted speculation that she would try to control the presidency from behind the scenes.To some, that speculation has been borne out.“It underlines how much of a hostage he is to the other powerful players in his cabinet, in particular Megawati,” said Edward Aspinall, a professor of politics at the Australian National University in Canberra. “A lot of the focus after he became president was about relations with the opposition in the D.P.R.,” the Parliament, “but the real issue is managing his own coalition.”The nomination of General Budi in particular, which has dominated national news coverage, has given Mr. Joko his first public relations black eye.On Friday, The Jakarta Globe, a leading English-language daily, published a full-page photo on its front showing Mr. Joko bowing to Ms. Megawati with the headline, “End the Kowtowing.”Advertisement“If Budi is inaugurated,” an editorial in the newspaper said, “Indonesia will have a graft suspect as police chief, a humiliation for the nation, and Joko will face nationwide protest from the very people who helped him become president.”Indonesia remains one of Asia’s most graft-ridden countries, a legacy of the Suharto dictatorship, and its police force and national legislature are among the nation’s most distrusted public institutions, according to Transparency International.At a lunch of noodle soup at the palace on Jan. 11, Mr. Joko indulged in a moment of reflection, a rarity for a politician known for his hyperkinetic energy.His government was moving rapidly, he said, and would accelerate only programs and projects he promised during the campaign. “I hope that what we have achieved so far shows we are really serious,” he said.For many Indonesians, the jury is still out.A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: For Indonesians, President’s Political Outsider Status Loses Its Luster.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.