By REUTERSJAN. 17, 2015
NIAMEY, Niger —  Demonstrators threw stones and set fire to two churches in Niamey, Niger’s capital, on Saturday, as protests continued against the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad in the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.A day after five people were killed in Niger during demonstrations over the cartoons, protesters in Niamey attacked a police station and burned at least two police cars on Saturday near the main mosque after the authorities banned a meeting called by local Muslim leaders. The police used tear gas to disperse the crowd.“They offended our Prophet Muhammad,” said Amadou Abdoul Ouahab, who took part in the demonstration.“That’s what we didn’t like,” he said. “This is the reason we have asked Muslims to come, so that we can explain this to them, but the state refused. That’s why we’re angry today.”AdvertisementViolence was also reported in other towns, including Maradi, 375 miles east of Niamey, where two churches were burned. Another church and a residence of the foreign minister were burned in the eastern town of Goure.AdvertisementFour Muslim preachers who had convened the meeting in Niamey were arrested, the police said. Protesters burned the French flag and set up roadblocks on streets in the city’s center, but no casualties were reported on Saturday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The French Embassy in Niamey warned its citizens not to go out on the streets.The death toll from Friday’s clashes in Niger’s second-largest city, Zinder, rose to five after emergency workers discovered a burned body inside a Roman Catholic church. A police officer and three civilians were also killed, the police said.On Friday, churches were burned, homes of some Christians were looted and the French cultural center was attacked in Zinder, residents said.Marches took place after Friday prayers in the capitals of Mali, Senegal, Mauritania and Algeria, all former French colonies.In Algiers, several police officers were injured in clashes with protesters.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.