By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI and JIM YARDLEYJAN. 17, 2015
PARIS —  In the year after the United States’ invasion of Iraq, a 22-year-old pizza delivery man here couldn’t take it anymore. Sickened by images of American soldiers humiliating Muslims at the Abu Ghraib prison, he made plans to go fight United States forces. He studied a virtual AK-47 on a website. Then he took lessons from a man, using a hand-drawn picture of a gun.It was an almost laughable attempt at jihad, and as the day of his departure approached, the delivery man, Chérif Kouachi, felt increasingly unsure of himself.When the police arrested him hours before his 6:45 a.m. Alitalia flight on Jan. 25, 2005, he was relieved. “Several times, I felt like pulling out. I didn’t want to die there,” he later told investigators. “I told myself that if I chickened out, they would call me a coward, so I decided to go anyway, despite the reservations I had.”A decade later, Chérif Kouachi, flanked by his older brother Saïd, 34, no longer had any reservations, as the two jihadists in black, sheathed in body armor, gave a global audience a ruthless demonstration in terrorism.AdvertisementWalking with military precision into the guarded Paris offices of the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, they killed 12 people in the name of Islam. Then in the hours before the brothers died in a gunfight with the police, Chérif nonchalantly took a telephone call from a reporter to make sure the world knew they were carrying out the attack on behalf of Al Qaeda’s branch in Yemen.AdvertisementThe 10-year evolution from easily spooked amateur to hardened killer is a story of steadily deepening radicalism that occurred virtually under the noses of French authorities, who twice had Chérif in their grasp. After the arrest of Chérif in 2005, when he was no more than a fledgling jihadist, he spent 20 months in prison. There, he met and became an acolyte of Al Qaeda’s top operative in France, Djamel Beghal, who had been dispatched to Paris to set up a cell aimed at attacking United States interests here, French counterterrorism officials said.He also befriended a convicted robber, Amedy Coulibaly, who would later synchronize his own terrorist attack with the Kouachi brothers, killing a police officer and staging a siege inside a kosher supermarket in the days after the Charlie Hebdo carnage, bringing the death toll to 17.Much remains unclear about their lives. But thousands of pages of legal documents obtained by The New York Times, including minutes of interrogations, summaries of phone taps, intercepted jailhouse letters and a catalog of images and religious texts found on the laptops of Chérif Kouachi and Mr. Coulibaly, reveal an arc of radicalization that saw them become steadily more professional and more discreet.They shaved regularly, eschewing the conspicuous beards worn by many Islamists. They dressed in jeans and basketball sneakers, offering no outward hint of their plans or jihadist beliefs.After at least one of the Kouachis traveled to Yemen in 2011, the United States alerted French authorities. But three years of tailing the brothers yielded nothing, and an oversight commission ruled that the surveillance was no longer productive, said Louis Caprioli, the deputy head of France’s domestic antiterrorism unit from 1998 to 2004.
                Key moments in the lives of Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, based on accounts from thousands of pages of legal documents obtained by The New York Times.            The brothers appeared so nonthreatening that surveillance was dropped in the middle of last year, he said, as hundreds of young Muslims cycled back and forth to Syria for jihad and French authorities shifted priorities.“The system is overwhelmed,” said Jean-Charles Brisard, a terrorism expert who is a former counsel to France’s chief antiterrorism prosecutor.AdvertisementBy the time the brothers burst through the heavy metal doors of Charlie Hebdo, the newspaper that had repeatedly lampooned Muhammad, on Jan. 7, even their relatives were shocked.“The only way I can make sense of this,” Khadija Hamyd, Chérif Kouachi’s sister-in-law, said, “is to say that he was leading a double life.”Class RepresentativeAs the mug shots of the Kouachi brothers flickered on television sets across this stunned nation after the rampage, Mohamed Badaoui, 34, noticed the mole.“It can’t be,” he said to himself. He had not seen Chérif Kouachi, the younger brother of his classmate, Saïd, since all three of them attended the same boarding school for orphaned or troubled children in the village of Treignac in central France.Chérif and Saïd Kouachi were 12 and 14 years old in 1994 when their mother fell ill, and they were sent to the Centre des Monédières, a foster center financed by the Fondation Claude Pompidou. Their father had died years earlier, and when their mother died, the campus where the boys slept three to a room became their only home, Mr. Badaoui said.Despite the upheaval, the boys seemed to thrive. Saïd enrolled in a vocational program in hotel management, and his classmates voted him their class representative.“Saïd was shy but you could tell he was intelligent — that’s why his classmates chose him,” Mr. Badaoui said. “He didn’t struggle in school. He was disciplined, and he didn’t goof off.”On Wednesdays and Saturdays, the two brothers walked to a nearby soccer stadium to play for the Central West League, run by the A. S. Chambertoise club.Though he was two years younger, Chérif was more aggressive, playing striker while Saïd played defense, their former coach said. “They laughed and played like normal teenagers,” said Alain Lascaux, the president of the club. “Nothing then could have predicted what they did last week, nothing at all.”AdvertisementMr. Badaoui — who is himself Muslim — said he could not remember their ever praying. Like other boys in the center, the brothers just dreamed of leaving their parochial village of 1,700.“If they had a religion,” he said, “it was Paris.”Not a ‘Good Muslim’The brothers moved there around 2000, staying in an apartment in the 19th Arrondissement, a working-class neighborhood heavily populated with newly arrived Muslim immigrants from France’s former colonies in North Africa.Chérif Kouachi got a job at El Primo delivering pizzas. His high school classmates do not remember either brother so much as touching a cigarette, but Chérif later admitted to prosecutors that he was regularly smoking marijuana.Then, after the start of the American invasion of Iraq in 2003, the brothers began attending prayers at the Adda’wa Mosque on Rue de Tanger. The mosque — which has since been torn down — held 5,000 in a carpeted space interrupted only by pillars, said the mosque administrator, Aissa Amar.Before and after prayers, young men would sit in their stocking feet in groups of threes and fours, discussing the events of the day. It was here that the Kouachi brothers met Farid Benyettou, then 22, the son of Algerian immigrants.Mr. Benyettou’s sister had been expelled from the Pailleron secondary school in Paris for refusing to take off the niqab, according to their former neighbor, who asked not to be identified in order to discuss their private lives. To the impressionable Chérif, Mr. Benyettou’s devoutness was striking.“Chérif Kouachi did not consider himself to be a good Muslim,” wrote Paris prosecutors in a final report after his 2005 arrest. “He indicated he had started going to the mosque two to three years earlier and had started progressively praying more, even though he still smoked marijuana.”AdvertisementSelf-taught, Mr. Benyettou began offering lessons to a group of young men, later called the Buttes-Chaumont group for a neighborhood park, everyone seated on the carpeted floor of the mosque almost daily for two hours.The classes kept Chérif on the straight and narrow — when he was attending them, the prosecutor wrote — and he no longer drank or smoked. When he stopped going, he immediately went back to his old habits.Charismatic and self-assured, Mr. Benyettou incited young men to join jihad. He set up a pipeline for young French Muslims to travel to join Abu Musab al-Zarqawi’s network in Iraq, which would soon become Al Qaeda’s franchise in the region, according to a detailed account in the court files.By September and October 2004, court transcripts show, Chérif and Saïd began going regularly to Mr. Benyettou’s apartment to discuss the religious justification for suicide attacks. There, they talked about how to load a bomb into a truck and drive it into an American base.It was Chérif who began clamoring to stage an attack in France, a plot that not even his spiritual mentor approved.“Chérif never stopped talking about the Jewish shops, of attacking them in the street in order to kill them,” said his friend and co-conspirator Thamer Bouchnak during his deposition. “He talked obsessively about this — about doing something here in France.”“He asked Farid Benyettou if it was allowed,” Mr. Bouchnak added. “He wanted to have permission from the person who had taught him. Farid didn’t give his permission.”Instead, Chérif decided to head to Iraq, but grew increasingly anxious.When one member of their cell made it to Falluja only to be killed in coalition airstrikes, Mr. Benyettou reassured them that the soul of their 19-year-old friend was now in the body of a bird in paradise surrounded by 72 virgins. Chérif was relieved when he saw the police officers coming to arrest him, said his lawyer, Vincent Ollivier.Advertisement“He was a lost kid who was scared to death,” Mr. Ollivier told the French newspaper Le Figaro. “I will never know if the person he became is the result of his time in jail, or else the result of a hardening of his commitment.”Jailhouse IslamChérif Kouachi spent nearly 20 months inside the Fleury-Mérogis prison before his trial.Situated 15 miles south of Paris, the jail is the largest prison complex in France and was known for its bad conditions. It was also roiling with Islamic resentment and would expose Mr. Kouachi to one of France’s most radical jihadists. Inside, Muslims complained of having little access to imams or opportunities for religious services compared with their Christian cellmates. They protested by staging group prayers on the common grounds, a prison violation, according to a Muslim activist in Paris familiar with the situation at the prison. Anger sometimes boiled into confrontation.Prison authorities quickly recruited a handful of Muslim chaplains, but jihadist hecklers disrupted their prayers.“They would ask a religious question, and whatever answer he gave, they would contest it,” the Muslim activist said. They would mockingly toss out questions: What did the imam think about jihad? What about the situation in Palestine? Why wasn’t halal meat served in the prison?One of the most notorious inmates was Djamel Beghal, a jihadist who trained in one of Osama bin Laden’s camps in Afghanistan and was dispatched to France by the No. 3 of Al Qaeda, French prosecutors say, to set up a cell dedicated to targeting American interests. In 2001, he was convicted of plotting to bomb the United States Embassy in Paris.He was kept in isolation at Fleury-Mérogis, though prison guards concede that he most likely had opportunities to meet and influence others.“Djamel Beghal had the ability — because he was a brilliant man — to convince people to adhere to radical Islam,” Mr. Caprioli, the former counterterrorism official said.AdvertisementMr. Beghal made a lasting impression on Mr. Kouachi, as well as another inmate — Mr. Coulibaly, then 23 and a petty criminal serving time for armed robberies. Mr. Beghal, at 40 the elder jihadist, became the bridge between the future gunmen, investigators said.In court documents, Mr. Coulibaly described befriending Al Qaeda’s representative in France through the window of his cell.“On a human level, he is a person who touched me,” Mr. Coulibaly said in a series of depositions in 2010. “When I was in jail, his cell was just above mine and he was in isolation.” He added: “He puts religion ahead of everything. He practices religion vehemently.”Though inmates were confined to their cells for 22 hours a day, they found ways to communicate and build networks. They spoke through open windows. They used makeshift “yo-yos” of tied sheets to lower notes from floor to floor.Prison guards, meanwhile, were often overwhelmed, with one guard for every 100 inmates in some areas. In interviews with several guards, they described radical Islam as a potent force that was difficult to contain.“We are not really trained or prepared in any way to deal with religious radicalism,” said David Dulondel, the secretary-general of the Confédération Générale du Travail, one of the unions representing prison guards. “If we have such a hard time regulating something as simple as cigarettes, how do you expect us to regulate something as abstract as ideas, as religion?”In 2006, Chérif was released from prison under judicial supervision as the case continued. He would be convicted in 2008 but sentenced to time served. Fleury-Mérogis had changed him, though.At a court hearing, a lawyer in the case said, he refused to stand because the judge was a woman. Upon his release, he moved to an apartment in a brick building on Rue Basly in the Parisian suburb of Gennevilliers. At City Hall in 2008, he married Izzana Hamyd, municipal records show.AdvertisementFor their honeymoon, the couple went on a pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia, according to the Journal du Dimanche newspaper, as well as his marriage certificate and passport entry stamps seen in court documents.Leaving prison also reunited Chérif with his older brother. Saïd Kouachi, always quieter and seemingly less impulsive, had struggled to find work, sometimes picking up short-term jobs through government unemployment programs.As his brother became more radicalized behind bars, Saïd also veered toward a stricter form of Islam, though his path is less documented.In 2007, he worked for the Paris government as part of a team of sanitation workers, who went door-to-door promoting recycling. He was fired in 2009, according to a municipal spokesperson.The French daily Le Parisien reported that Saïd Kouachi was part of a group of fundamentalist employees who refused to shake women’s hands and insisted on bringing prayer mats to work.A Place in the CountryBy 2009, both of the future gunmen and their mentor had been released from prison. Mr. Beghal, still considered dangerous, was placed under surveillance inside a hotel in Murat, deep in the French countryside.Mr. Beghal had been stripped of his French citizenship but was appealing extradition to Algeria. French authorities had found no better solution.The three men resumed contact and immediately went to work on a plan. By the spring of 2010, the police began intercepting phone calls between Mr. Coulibaly, Mr. Kouachi and their jihadist mentor, speaking in what appeared to be code.Chérif Kouachi, one of the suspects in the Charlie Hebdo shootings in Paris, appeared in a 2005 investigative documentary about jihadism that aired on French television.They refer to Mr. Beghal’s town not as Murat, but as “the place where you feel cold.” They begin talking about a future “marriage” — a well-known code used by fighters from Al Qaeda’s North African branch to mean a pending operation.AdvertisementThe police began tracking Mr. Kouachi and Mr. Coulibaly. Surveillance pictures showed Mr. Kouachi leaving Paris on the A15 freeway for the more than 300-mile drive to Murat. Once there, he was seen walking with Mr. Beghal in a forest, and doing exercises in an open ground.Mr. Beghal’s cellphone was tapped by the police. The transcripts showed that on multiple occasions he called an inmate incarcerated inside Cell No. 208 at the prison in the French town of Clairvaux. The inmate, Smaïn Aït Ali Belkacem, then 41, a terrorist boss of Algerian descent, was serving a life sentence for the 1995 bombing of a Paris rail station.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The men, the police concluded, were plotting to break Mr. Belkacem free.Mr. Coulibaly, who had contacts with arms dealers from his criminal past, was working to stockpile the weapons for them. Transcripts of the wiretaps show the men, still conversing in code, speaking of “books” (weapons) and saying they needed to find a “new library” (arms dealer).In May 2010, the authorities searched Mr. Coulibaly’s home in Bagneux outside Paris. There, they found a gun holster in a closet and 240 cartridges of 7.62-mm ammunition hidden inside a paint can, according to the report from the police raid.They also found a document in Arabic, written by Mr. Beghal, asking an unknown individual for forged administrative documents “for an objective of truly great importance that goes beyond my own personal interests.”One of Mr. Coulibaly’s lawyers in the case said a close examination of the summaries of the coded conversations suggested that their plans, beyond the jailbreak, also included a future attack.In one call, Mr. Beghal told Mr. Belkacem: “There are two things that I have been thinking about for a long time. It’s something that I have been preparing brick by brick for years now in order to be able to hit them hard, because as they say, a strike with a pickax is equal to 10 hits with a hoe.”In the summer of 2010, the police broke up the plot. Mr. Beghal and Mr. Coulibaly were eventually convicted and returned to jail, with Mr. Coulibaly serving his sentence until last March.AdvertisementThe same judge ruled that there was not enough evidence to convict Chérif Kouachi, who resumed his life in Gennevilliers.In retrospect, the material found on Chérif Kouachi’s computer in 2010 should have set off alarms, said a lawyer involved in the case who requested anonymity in order to speak candidly about the government’s response.Five years before this month’s bloodshed, it showed Chérif was already steeped in the doctrine of violent jihad.Among the texts recovered on the laptop — which were included in the court documents — was one titled “Operation Sacrifice.”It described a plan of attack that eerily augured the actions he would later take.“A mujahideen forces his way into the enemy’s base or else a zone where there is a group and fires at point-blank range without having prepared an escape plan,” it said. “The goal is to kill as many of the enemy as possible. The author will very likely die himself.”Another document described the fatwa against the novelist Salman Rushdie, calling it “fully justified.” It also attacks Michel Houellebecq, a French writer who has made disparaging comments on Islam, and rails against “the dishonest scribbles” of journalists who have turned “blasphemy into a form of sadistic entertainment.”Still others advised on operations. One, by the Qaeda ideologue Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, told jihadists planning attacks to limit their communications with the mother cell.“It is not indispensable in the majority of cases for the financier to know when and where the operation will take place, nor by whose hands it will be carried out,” it read.AdvertisementBy this time, it seems, Chérif had evolved far beyond the scared kid who had butterflies in his stomach before his plane flight in 2005. The lesson of discretion was fully absorbed.When called for his deposition in May 2010, Chérif coolly stonewalled his interrogators. “We note that Mr. Kouachi keeps on staring at the floor and does not answer, neither by gesture, nor by words,” one officer wrote in his report.After asking more questions, the officer continued: “Mr. Kouachi remains silent, doesn’t move.”Shortly before being killed in police shootouts, Chérif Kouachi and a man believed to have killed a police officer spoke on the phone with a French television station.He tried one more time. Then concluded: “Mr. Kouachi doesn’t reply, but his left eye blinked.”A Missing PassportSometime in 2011, one, or perhaps both, of the brothers traveled to Yemen to train with Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.Initially, United States officials said it was Saïd Kouachi who had gone to Yemen in 2011. Now they believe Chérif may have gone instead, using his brother’s passport, to receive training and $20,000 from the Qaeda affiliate there, according to two counterterrorism officials who requested anonymity to discuss classified details of the investigation.That possibility is consistent with what Saïd’s wife, Soumya Kouachi, has told her lawyer, Antoine Flasaquier. Mrs. Kouachi said that she was pregnant in 2011. Saïd stayed at her side, never leaving for more than a few days at a time.She added that it would have been impossible for Saïd to travel because he had lost his passport, or else forgotten to renew it. It was for that reason that he had not joined her on vacations to visit her family in Algeria, Mr. Flasaquier said.AdvertisementIn his brief telephone interview with a TV reporter before his death, Chérif said that the brothers were acting on the orders of the Qaeda affiliate and that he had been trained and financed by Anwar al-Awlaki, a New Mexico native who became the group’s main propagandist.Days after the attack, Al Qaeda in Yemen claimed responsibility, saying the terrorist group’s leaders had “chosen the target, laid the plan and financed the operation.”At the same time, it said that the attack on the Hyper Cacher kosher market by Mr. Coulibaly — who claimed allegiance to the Islamic State, a rival extremist group — was a coincidence, which they described as a blessing from God.That authorities detected no signs of the pending attack is a reflection of the fact that, by 2015, both Mr. Kouachi and Mr. Coulibaly had extensive experience dealing with France’s antiterrorism unit.“It’s the lesson that every gangster learns when they land in prison. They go through a kind of ‘lessons learned,’ ” Mr. Caprioli, the former counterterrorism official, said. “When they are freed, they’ll make sure to keep a low profile. They’ll refrain from using their phones. They’ll avoid behaving like Islamic extremists.”The French police confirmed that this is Amedy Coulibaly, one of three men suspected in the deadly terrorist attacks in Paris.Saïd Kouachi offered no outward signs of what was to come.In Reims, 90 miles northeast of Paris, where he and his wife lived for the past two years, Saïd doted on their toddler and kept tabs at the unemployment office for work. He whiled away hours playing the soccer of his youth, if virtually, on a FIFA video game.The mundane nature of his daily routine — not once did he mention Charlie Hebdo or the situation in the Middle East — has left his wife, who so far has been cleared of any wrongdoing, and her family stunned by the carnage he helped commit.“She now knows that there is a part of him that slipped away from her,” said Mr. Flasaquier, the wife’s lawyer. “She doesn’t think that couples tell each other everything. She thinks they all have a little secret garden. But this isn’t a secret garden. It’s a secret planet.”AdvertisementAs for Chérif, neighbors at his suburban Parisian apartment building recalled nothing special about him, except that he helped women carry their groceries up the stairs when the elevator broke.Investigators have since confirmed that Chérif and Mr. Coulibaly most likely spoke hundreds of times in recent months on phones belonging to their wives.If the Kouachi brothers were pointedly discreet, Mr. Coulibaly left a clearer trail in his final weeks. Prosecutors in Belgium have arrested an arms dealer and are investigating whether he sold the weapons used by Mr. Coulibaly at the kosher market.Spanish officials have confirmed that he drove his longtime girlfriend, Hayat Boumeddiene, to Madrid on Dec. 31, and remained there until she flew to Istanbul on Jan. 2, five days before the first attack. He then drove back to Paris.He also apparently used a bank loan to help finance his operation. On Dec. 4, Mr. Coulibaly was approved for a loan of 6,000 euros from the credit agency Cofidis, after providing a telephone bill, pay slips and an identification card, according to the daily La Voix du Nord newspaper.In a posthumously released video, Mr. Coulibaly said he lent money to one of the Kouachi brothers to help pay for “what he had to buy.”CarnageThere was no sign marking the offices of Charlie Hebdo, and death threats were so common that a staff member was assigned to answer the daily current of hate mail with courteous replies.Julien Beaupé was in a nearby office when masked gunmen attacked the satirical newspaper. Moments later, he entered the newsroom to help emergency medical workers and survivors.So constant was the venom that Zineb El Rhazoui, one of the newspaper’s journalists, who began as a freelancer in 2011, said the staff members — and French authorities — had become somewhat inured, even though the newspaper had been firebombed in 2011.AdvertisementLast fall, the French government removed a police truck stationed outside the office, leaving only a single officer inside the premises, Franck Brinsolaro, who had become so close to the journalists that he was considered one of the staff.Entering the building required a magnetic key. Upstairs, the office had a metal, bulletproof door that required a code to open.None of it mattered. The onetime pizza delivery man, who had once practiced jihad with a paper gun, still made mistakes — the Kouachis initially went to the wrong building at No. 6 rue Nicolas-Appert instead of No. 10 — but he knew critical details.The entire editorial staff met only once a week, on Wednesdays, for approximately two hours starting at 10 a.m. The Kouachis broke into the office on Wednesday, Jan. 7, at 11:15 a.m.“These were no amateurs,” Ms. El Rhazoui said. “I am convinced they were not acting independently. This was an operation that was commanded from above.”No one knows whether the Kouachis paused to notice that Charlie Hebdo staff members had decorated the office with images and objects from the subjects they routinely pilloried: a flag of the Islamic State was draped on one wall, a burqa on another as well as a plastic AK-47.“I saw them from one meter away,” said Laurent Leger, a journalist with the magazine, who managed to slide off his chair and hide under a side table. “They were dressed like soldiers. They came in screaming, ‘Allahu akbar,’ at least twice.”They shouted for the editor, Stéphane Charbonnier, known as Charb, and gunned him down before spraying the other cartoonists around the main conference table.AdvertisementA female journalist, Sigolène Vinson, tried to crawl away, and one of the brothers addressed her. “We don’t kill women,” he said, as Mr. Leger recalled.The Kouachis left bodies piled on the floor, survivors crying or cowering in fear, and then they coolly walked onto the street, with one brother pumping his weapon in the air. One passer-by heard them yell out, “Tell the media we are with Al Qaeda in Yemen.”They shot a police officer who rushed to the scene and then nonchalantly killed him with a bullet to the head as he lay writhing on the sidewalk. The next day, Mr. Coulibaly wounded a city employee and killed a police officer.By Friday, Jan. 9, as the police had cornered the Kouachis at a printing factory on the outskirts of Paris, Mr. Coulibaly stormed into the Hyper Cacher market, killing four people and taking more than a dozen hostage. In the hours that followed, one shopper told Le Monde that he saw the gunman filming the scene with a GoPro camera.Later he took out the memory card, inserted it into a laptop and appeared to edit the images. Mr. Coulibaly had time to pray on the floor of the bloody supermarket before the police stormed the store, pouring bullets into his chest.At the printing factory where the Kouachis would stage their final, fatal gun battle with the police, the owner, Michel Catalano, later told reporters that he assumed he was about to die when the two brothers first approached, bearing machine guns and a rocket launcher.When a salesman came to the door, one of the Kouachi brothers merely told him to go away.“Leave,” the brother said, like a soldier. “We don’t shoot civilians.”Reporting was contributed by Aurelien Breeden, Laure Fourquet and Bruno Meyerfeld from Paris, and Eric Schmitt from Washington. Daphne Angles contributed research from Paris, and Alain Delaquérière from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: From Scared Amateur to Paris Slaughterer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.