By TIM ARANGOJAN. 17, 2015
BAGHDAD —  Under her black chador, Awatif al-Azawy clutched a few things for her imprisoned husband: a can of 7Up, two falafel sandwiches and a tube of skin cream.But even as she stood in a garden outside Baghdad’s main judicial complex, off limits to the relatives of the accused, she knew she was unlikely to see him.“I just like to spend my time here because I feel closer to my husband,” she said. “If I stayed at home, I’d feel guilty.”On any given day, Sunni women gather here in search of answers about their men, some of whom have been jailed for years.Advertisement“The Iraqi Army took my son in March of 2014,” said Tawfika Abbas. “Until now, I don’t know where he is. Zero information.”AdvertisementAnother woman, Entisar Gannos, cried for her four sons: one jailed since 2006, another since 2010, and the other two since 2011, all without court hearings.Their grief, and the pain of not knowing what is happening to their loved ones, highlight a vital task for Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi: reforming Iraq’s criminal justice system. Well-documented abuses of the system, including long detentions without trial and confessions obtained by torture, are the primary grievance of the country’s Sunni minority.The stakes are high, given the success that Islamic State jihadists have had in exploiting Sunni outrage at the government to help them take over large expanses of Iraq. Mr. Abadi’s ability to reconcile with the Sunnis will ultimately hinge on reforming the justice system.“It is the most important thing Abadi can do to re-enfranchise the Sunni population,” said Erin Evers, the Iraq researcher for Human Rights Watch.In seeking reforms, Mr. Abadi is facing not just the bitter sectarian legacy of his predecessor, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, but also a troubled vestige of the American occupation. At the core of the grievances of the Sunni community are practices adopted by the United States after the invasion in 2003: arbitrary arrests in the name of counterterrorism, the reliance on confidential informants rather than forensic evidence, and the exclusion of former Baath Party members — mostly Sunnis — from public life.Mr. Abadi took office in September with a mandate to be a more inclusive leader, and he has promised judicial reforms, including ordering officers to carry out arrests only with a judicial warrant, and judges to speed the release of defendants who have already been declared innocent but still sit in prison.So far, on that issue, Mr. Abadi’s promises have been largely unfulfilled.That reflects both deeply entrenched problems, including a reliance on secret informers and confessions rather than forensic evidence, and the fact that many of the armed groups on the government’s side, such as Shiite militias, continue to carry out arbitrary arrests and other abuses and are largely beyond Mr. Abadi’s reach.Advertisement“We know arrests are continuing until now, and we know torture is continuing,” said Ayad Allawi, a vice president who is overseeing the new government’s reconciliation programs.Late last year, for example, when militias pushed the Islamic State out of Jurf-al-Sakr southwest of Baghdad, hundreds of local men were summarily detained. “We don’t know where they are,” said Sheikh Qassim al-Janabi, a tribal leader from that area, who added that “a basic right of a democratic society is to know where your son is when he is arrested.”The scope of the problem is not precisely known, but officials and activists agreed that there were likely tens of thousands of Sunni men languishing in jails, having never seen the inside of a courtroom.Many were put there solely on the word of a secret informer, as Ms. Azawy said was the case with her husband; others because they confessed to crimes after being tortured. Even those proven innocent must pay bribes to actually walk out the door — anywhere from $2,000 to $50,000, said Shahlaa al-Awosy, a defense lawyer who represents detained Sunnis and who herself has been arrested on terrorism charges.Every Sunni family, it seems, has a story about detentions.A man who gave his name as Abu Zaid, who lives in Madaen, south of Baghdad, said that his brother was arrested in October, after Mr. Abadi took office, and that after a painful search, he had found his body in a Baghdad hospital. He said his son had been sentenced to death after being tortured and confessing to setting off a car bomb, and he hopes the case will be reviewed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are thousands of stories similar to mine,” he said.The resentments of the Sunni community have been largely shaped by the actions and decisions of American officials more than a decade ago.“We blame the American administration for everything that has happened,” said Sheikh Abu Salem, a Sunni tribal leader from Madaen, who said countless members of his tribe had been detained over the years.Many secret informers who were once on the payroll of the Americans now are employed by Iraqi officials. All too often, senior judicial officials admit, the informers provide unreliable information that still becomes the basis for convictions.A man in Diyala Province who works as an informant, and spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the secret nature of his job, said that after the Americans left in 2011, the authorities would often fail to follow up tip-based arrests with investigations. “I would say 70 percent of secret informers provide false information,” he said.AdvertisementAnother informant, who works in Anbar Province and makes $550 a month, plus bonuses, for tips against high-value targets, said new orders had come since Mr. Abadi took power, threatening informants with arrest if they provided false information.At the garden, some of the women say they do not know where their men are being held or, in some cases, even if they are alive. Nearly two years ago, amid a series of prison breaks carried out by the Islamic State, the government stopped allowing families to visit prisoners.“Until today, we don’t know where he is or what happened,” said Attia Abdullah, who last saw her 40-year-old son, Ammar, in July, when he was suddenly taken away in a midnight raid on their house. She hired a lawyer, who she said ran off with $20,000 of her money without finding her son.Ms. Azawy’s husband was first arrested by the Americans in 2008 in Baquba, in Diyala Province, she said, and then handed to the Iraqi authorities.“At the time, when anything would happen in the street, like an I.E.D. or a car bomb, especially against an American convoy, they arrested everyone on the street,” she said.Inside the judiciary’s headquarters, out of reach to the women in the garden, Judge Abdul Sattar al-Bayraktar, a judiciary spokesman, admitted that torture was a problem, but largely dismissed the grievances of the women outside.Referring to their stories of nighttime raids, he said: “So an old woman claims her son was sleeping and he was arrested. Yes, he was sleeping, but what was he doing before he was sleeping. Murders? Assassinations?”Ms. Azawy waited in the garden until late afternoon before learning that her husband’s court appearance had been delayed until February. She wasn’t allowed to give him the sandwiches or soda or ointment, which she said he needed for a skin condition he had contracted in prison.Even so, she remains hopeful that things will change. Before, when Mr. Maliki would appear on television, she would change the channel, or turn off the TV. “But with Abadi it’s different,” she said. “We want to hear what he has to say.”Advertisement“Abadi is much better than Maliki,” she added. “We are all optimistic.”Omar Al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, and employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Anbar and Diyala provinces.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Sunnis in Iraq Are Kept Waiting for Reforms, and Word on Loved Ones.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.