By FLOYD WHALEYJAN. 17, 2015
MANILA —  Before he left Rome for the Philippines, Pope Francis said that consoling the victims of a devastating 2013 typhoon was his primary reason for visiting the country.On Saturday, he made good on that pledge, even as a tropical storm sent strong winds and rain to the island of Leyte, eventually cutting short his trip.“So many of you have lost everything,” the pope said during a morning Mass in Tacloban, the city hit hardest by Typhoon Haiyan, which killed more than 7,000 people and displaced more than four million. “I don’t know what to say to you. But the Lord does. Some of you have lost part of your families. All I can do is keep silence and walk with you all with my silent heart.”Thousands of people attended the Mass despite Tropical Storm Mekkhala. Many in the crowd wore yellow plastic ponchos, as did the pope.Advertisement“Even with the storm, he pushed through. He really wanted to see us. He has compassion for us,” said Shara Serdan, a 19-year-old college student from Tacloban who said by phone that she had waited 24 hours in the rain to see the pope Saturday morning. “This was a once in a lifetime experience for me.”AdvertisementRuel Garcelazo, 36, expressed hope that Francis’ visit would prove healing, according to The Associated Press, saying, “I hope that the pope will bless and restore our faith, because many are asking why God can do this.”The pope’s short visit to Leyte was marred by several accidents, including the death of a young woman who was struck by scaffolding that was being moved after the Mass. The woman, Kristel Padasas, 27, worked for Catholic Relief Services, which said she had been involved in a Typhoon Haiyan recovery project.Later on Saturday, a private jet with several senior government officials aboard slid off the runway of the Tacloban airport while trying to return to Manila. No one was injured. The plane carried Executive Secretary Paquito N. Ochoa Jr. and Communications Secretary Sonny Coloma, both cabinet-level officials, as well as 13 others, according to the presidential spokesman, Edwin Lacierda.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the morning Mass, Francis traveled in an open vehicle to the nearby town of Palo, with thousands of well-wishers thronging the roadside along the way. In Palo, he attended a lunch with 30 families who had survived Haiyan. Afterward, he met with priests, seminarians and other church members at the Palo Cathedral, which was damaged in the typhoon.At that event, the pope was given a small statue of the Virgin Mary made from debris from when Haiyan struck the cathedral. Francis told the audience that the pilots of his plane had said he must leave immediately because of the tropical storm, and the crowd reacted with a disappointed groan, according to a live television broadcast of the event.Responding to the vocal dismay, the pope joked: “I ask you for two things, please. First, pray for me. Second, be quiet.” The audience broke into laughter.Jennifer Hardy, an information officer with Catholic Relief Services who attended the event, said there had been more excitement than disappointment among the people there.“Everyone was so excited to see him; they were laughing and smiling and taking photos,” Ms. Hardy said by telephone. “I think people understood that he had to leave because of the seriousness of the storm. They were just delighted to see him at all.”On Sunday, the pope is scheduled to celebrate Mass at a park in the center of Manila, with more than five million people expected to attend.AdvertisementOn his first full day in the country, Friday, Francis made some of his strongest statements of church teachings against artificial contraception, exhorting the faithful to “be sanctuaries of respect for life.” He also appeared to make a strong statement in support of the church’s stance against same-sex marriage.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Storm Ends Part of Pope’s Philippine Trip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.