By SAM ROBERTSJAN. 16, 2015
On Dec. 1, 1980, two churchwomen, Jean Donovan and Sister Dorothy Kazel, spent the night at the American Embassy in San Salvador as guests of Ambassador Robert E. White and his wife. The next day, the two women and two other nuns, all crusaders for human rights, were abducted, raped and murdered.Mr. White concluded that El Salvadoran government death squads had been complicit in the crimes and conveyed those suspicions to the Carter administration’s State Department. The United States, however, was supporting the military government in El Salvador in its struggle against leftist revolutionaries, and after President Ronald Reagan took office that January, Mr. White, who had been appointed by President Jimmy Carter, was recalled by Reagan’s secretary of state, Alexander M. Haig Jr., and forced out of the Foreign Service.His suspicions about the deaths were later confirmed by the conviction of five National Guardsmen and by declassified State Department documents accusing the Salvadoran military of a cover-up.“I regard it as an honor to join a small group of officers who have gone out of the service because they refused to betray their principles,” Mr. White said at the time.AdvertisementMr. White died Tuesday at a hospice in Arlington, Va. He was 88. The cause was cancer, his daughter Claire Kelly said. After leaving government, he had served as president of the Center for International Policy, a Washington research and advocacy group founded by former diplomats and Vietnam-era peace advocates.Serving every president since Dwight D. Eisenhower as a career diplomat rather than a political appointee, Mr. White was distinguished by his dispassionate, boots-on-the-ground analysis and his blunt conclusions.He once branded Roberto D’Aubuisson, the Salvadoran rightist, a “pathological killer.” And in a face-off that Mr. White had with Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, Mr. Kissinger blinked, revoking a reprimand he had ordered after Mr. White, at a meeting of the Organization of American States in Chile, delivered an unalloyed critique of the host government’s human-rights infractions.Advertisement“I was fired by the Nixon White House for opposing politicization of the Peace Corps, reprimanded by Henry Kissinger for speaking out on human rights, and finally, definitely dismissed by Alexander Haig for opposing a military solution in El Salvador,” Mr. White recalled.Inspired to serve in Latin America by what he called President John F. Kennedy’s “creative response to the revolutionary fervor” sweeping that region, Mr. White lamented that once Kennedy was assassinated, Washington adopted a single-minded goal to thwart Communism, whether in Vietnam or in its half-century embargo of Cuba.He lived just long enough to witness his criticism of the embargo vindicated, when President Obama announced on Dec. 17 that it would be lifted.“For a half-century,” Mr. White asserted in an Op-Ed essay in The New York Times in 2013, “our policies toward our southern neighbors have alternated between intervention and neglect, inappropriate meddling and missed opportunities” to, as he put it, “restore bonds with potential allies who share the American goal of prosperity.”William LeoGrande, an American University political scientist and the author of “Our Own Backyard: The United States in Latin America, 1977-1992,” described Mr. White as a hero.“He stood up for his principles, which reflected the values of the American people — a belief in democracy and human rights,” Professor LeoGrande said. “His courage cost him his job, but he never wavered, spending the rest of his life advocating for those ideals.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Robert Edward White was born in Melrose, Mass., on Sept. 21, 1926. He enlisted in the Navy at 17 and served in the Pacific during World War II.He received a bachelor’s degree from Saint Michael’s College in Vermont, won a Fulbright Scholarship, and graduated from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.In 1955, he married Maryanne Cahill, who survives him along with a son, Christopher; two daughters, Claire Kelly and Marylou White; a brother, David, and three grandchildren.AdvertisementHe joined the Foreign Service that same year and served in Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras and Nicaragua.In Latin America he was regional director of the Peace Corps and deputy permanent representative to the Organization of American States.President Carter nominated him as ambassador to Paraguay in 1977 and to El Salvador in 1980, where the embassy was targeted by rockets from leftists and besieged by rightists.A cable sent by Mr. White from Paraguay in 1978 and declassified in 2001 suggested that Latin American officers involved in a joint effort by right-wing governments to crush leftist opposition had used an American communications network to share intelligence.In El Salvador, he said, American support for the military government had been misplaced.“We took the concept of national security and wrenched it out of context to the point where it bore no relation to reality,” he said last year in an interview for Retro Report on nytimes.com. “How can a country the size of Massachusetts, where you can see the entire country from 9,000 feet from a helicopter — how can a homegrown revolution in that country threaten the security of the United States?”In 1980, the four churchwomen were murdered eight months after the assassination of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, a human rights advocate, as he celebrated Mass. Mr. White, who witnessed their exhumation, was asked why the women were singled out. “In the eyes of the military,” he replied, “identification with the poor was the same as identification with revolution.” But this time, he was quoted as saying as he stood over their grave site, “The bastards won’t get away with it.”He later testified in a suit against two retired Salvadoran generals living in Florida who were accused of covering up the deaths of the four women.“One of the primary tasks of an American ambassador is to protect American citizens,” he said in the interview. “And that’s why, when somebody asked me at the end of one of the trials, why I testified against the general, I said, ‘I regard this as completion of duty,’ because it was my duty to protect American citizens.”Gene Palumbo contributed reporting from El Salvador.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2015, on Page A23 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert E. White, Ex-Ambassador, 88.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.