By BEN HUBBARDJAN. 18, 2015
BEIRUT, Lebanon —  In a recent video from Saudi Arabia, three uniformed security officers and a professional swordsman in a white gown struggled to placate a woman cloaked in black and sitting in the street. A Saudi court had convicted her of murder, but she was proclaiming her innocence.Then the officers stepped back, the swordsman took aim and the woman shrieked and fell silent as he struck her neck with his blade, three times in total. Medics wearing white gloves tended to the body, and the swordsman wiped his blade with a cloth.The video was distributed by human rights activists and posted online after the execution in the city of Mecca on Jan. 12, shedding light on the way Saudi Arabia applies the death penalty.On Sunday, Saudi news outlets reported that the authorities had arrested the man who had shot the video and planned to prosecute him. Although the reports did not specify what charges he faced, an Interior Ministry spokesman said such matters fell under the country’s law against cybercrimes.AdvertisementSaudi Arabia, a hereditary monarchy governed by a strict interpretation of Shariah, the legal code of Islam based on the Quran, is an economic and military ally of the United States. But some of its practices have come under greater scrutiny with the rise of the Islamic State extremist group in Iraq and Syria, which also claims to rule according to Shariah law and has shocked the world with videos of its fighters beheading captives.AdvertisementThe kingdom recently delayed the second round of the public caning of a writer sentenced to 1,000 blows for running a liberal website after his sentence was criticized by the State Department and the United Nations. That followed an uproar caused by a video of the first round of the punishment that was posted online.Many Saudis object to their country’s being compared to the Islamic State, saying that Saudi Arabia executes only those convicted of grave crimes, while the fighters of the Islamic State indiscriminately kill those who do not share their Sunni Muslim faith.International human rights organizations have criticized the Saudi justice system, and two United Nations human rights experts called for a moratorium on beheadings in Saudi Arabia last year, labeling them “cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.”Although Saudi Arabia criminalizes any words or acts that insult the Prophet Muhammad, it condemned the deadly attack this month on the newspaper Charlie Hebdo in France and has joined the American-led air campaign against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Still, some Saudis worry about how domestic practices affect their image abroad.“You reach a stage where you can’t defend the country,” said Khaled Almaeena, a social and media analyst who lives in Jidda. “I can’t go on a platform in Europe and say that everything is hunky dory when someone is being lashed every Friday.”Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist and commentator, said that while some Saudis saw the damage such practices caused abroad, the government faced little opposition domestically, partly because of the belief that Islamic punishments should be carried out in public.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“It is the Saudi Foreign Ministry that will face the heat, but locally we don’t have a problem with that,” he said of public executions.Saudi Arabia, a country of 27 million, executed 87 people last year for crimes like rape, murder, armed robbery and drug trafficking, according to a count compiled by Human Rights Watch. It has executed 11 people so far this year.AdvertisementWhile most executions are believed to be beheadings, the government does not usually disclose the method used.The United States, by contrast, executed 35 people last year, according to the Death Penalty Information Center, using methods that are not always flawless.According to the state-run Saudi Press Agency, the executed woman was a citizen of Myanmar who had been convicted of severely beating her husband’s 7-year-old daughter, also from Myanmar, and violating her with a broomstick “without mercy or pity, which led to her death.”In the video, which appeared to have been filmed with a mobile phone, the women repeatedly yelled, “I didn’t kill! I didn’t kill!” and “This is oppression!” in Arabic while the men positioned her for the blows of the sword.The Saudi newspaper Okaz reported on Sunday that the police in Mecca had arrested a security officer who had filmed the beheading and that he would face both military and civilian justice.Another Saudi newspaper, Al-Riyadh, cited Lt. Col. Atta al-Quraishi, a spokesman for the Mecca police, as saying that the man would be turned over to the “relevant authorities.”The Interior Ministry spokesman, Maj. Gen. Mansour Turki, said in a text message that he had no information about the reported arrest but that such cases were handled according to the country’s cybercrime law.Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Man Who Filmed Execution Is Arrested, Saudi Outlets Say.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.