By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICKJAN. 18, 2015
TOBRUK, Libya —  The main factions fighting in Libya agreed to a provisional cease-fire on Sunday, apparently in response to pressure from the United Nations Security Council.The cease-fire, beginning midnight Sunday, is the closest that international mediators have come to ending the violence in Libya since it began to escalate last summer with the breakdown into two rival national alliances of competing militias.The wording of the truce, however, left much room for doubt — including one side’s vague qualifications about continuing to fight “terrorists.” Supporters of the general behind that statement, Khalifa Hifter, routinely refer to most of their opponents as “terrorists” or their collaborators.The statement also said that General Hifter’s forces would watch closely “to prevent any change in front lines or transportation of weapons and ammunition” by their opponents. Asserting that any such moves would warrant a cancellation of the truce, the statement said General Hifter’s fighters “have been given the right to defend themselves if they come under fire.”AdvertisementThe rival militia alliances, including General Hifter’s, back separate, warring governments.One in the capital, Tripoli, is dominated by a coalition that calls itself Libya Dawn and includes moderate as well as extremist Islamist groups, along with tribal or regional militias that fear that General Hifter seeks to build a new autocracy.AdvertisementGeneral Hifter, who last year attempted a coup against the former elected parliament, has now aligned himself with the other government, based here in Tobruk. It includes some or most of a parliament that was elected last year and whose members fled here from Tripoli before the body’s first session. It also comprises eastern Libyan “federalist” fighters who are seeking regional independence, some militias consisting of former fighters once loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and others fearful of the Islamists.The two sides met last week in Geneva for peace talks brokered by the Spanish diplomat Bernardino León, the United Nations secretary general’s special representative in Libya. After two days of talks, those present agreed to a series of preliminary steps to alleviate civilian suffering and build trust, while continuing their discussions about forming a potential unity government.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Libya Dawn coalition, which has now set up its own government with part of a disbanded parliament in Tripoli, announced on Friday its own cease-fire “on all fronts” if its opponents respected the truce.Then, on Saturday, the United Nations Security Council issued an unusually firm statement warning that it might “sanction those who threaten Libya’s peace, stability or security or that obstruct or undermine the successful completion of its political transition.”Diplomats familiar with the Council’s deliberations on the subject said the statement was meant as a warning to those on either side of the fight who block steps toward reconciliation.It is not clear whether the truce will control the fighters on the ground. For example, neither side’s cease-fire pledge seemed to apply to Benghazi, the city where the bloodiest battles have taken place in recent months. There, hundreds of fighters aligned with the militant Islamist group Ansar al-Shariah — part of Libya Dawn, and classified as a terrorist organization by the United States and the United Nations — are fighting groups of armed civilians reporting to General Hifter, and none of the antagonists may feel constrained by the cease-fire agreements.Still, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya said in a statement on Sunday that the cease-fire pledges were an “encouraging sign” that helped create a “conducive environment” for continuing talks.Suliman Ali Zway contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 19, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Libya Militias Agree to Halt in Fighting, With Caveats.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.