Edward J. Snowden, the former contractor for the National Security Agency whose revelations of American cyberspying were widely praised in China’s state media, may have lost a little of his shine among Chinese leaders after his latest revelations gave details of Beijing’s own cyberespionage.Many in China lauded Mr. Snowden when he exposed a widespread N.S.A. spying program, Prism, in 2013. Among other disclosures was the fact that the United States had been spying on key allies, leading to a series of diplomatic tangles for the United States and not a little schadenfreude in China.Praised as “a bright idealistic young man” in one state media commentary, Mr. Snowden offered China the opportunity, enthusiastically seized upon, to expose what it sees as American hypocrisy over cyberspying issues. Chinese officials have also been using the Snowden revelations as a defensive retort when American officials press China to end state-sponsored hacking.But Beijing has not been so quick to embrace the latest batch of leaked N.S.A. materials.On Saturday, the German magazine Der Spiegel published the latest cache of documents leaked by Mr. Snowden. Among them: a United States government presentation that says China had stolen data on a stealth jet, the F-35 Lightning II. The document, marked top secret, said that China stole “many terabytes of data,” including details of the stealth jet’s engine schematics and radar design.United States defense experts have long pointed to striking similarities between Chinese stealth jets and the F-35, but the government has yet to directly accuse China of copying the plane.Mr. Snowden’s revelation appears to be the first public confirmation that China had sought classified information on the aircraft.The United States’ regional allies Japan and Australia are set to adopt the fifth-generation stealth jet as a crucial component of their fleets. However, it is understood that the main data breach, targeting the primary contractor, Lockheed Martin, took place in 2007 before Japan and Australia placed their orders, The Sydney Morning Herald reported.A spokesman for the Chinese foreign ministry on Monday denied China had stolen data on the plane. The “complexity” of cyberattacks “means that it is extremely difficult to identify the source,” the spokesman Hong Lei said. “I wonder if they can produce evidence to prop up such accusation and groundless attack.”Mr. Hong added that the documents released by Mr. Snowden “showed that some countries do not have good records to talk about when it comes to cyberattacks.”The Chinese government was much faster to believe Mr. Snowden’s revelations when they initially surfaced in 2013.At the time, Xinhua, the state-run Chinese news agency, published a commentary praising Mr. Snowden. The Prism program revealed American hypocrisy about “Internet freedom” and was the “bleakest moment yet in the history of the Internet,” it said. The commentary also said that China, “despite the fact that it does not have a good reputation as far as Internet governance is concerned, should move boldly and grant Snowden asylum.”People’s Daily, the official mouthpiece of the Chinese government, wrote in a front-page commentary in 2013 that Mr. Snowden had torn off Washington’s “sanctimonious mask.” In addition to targeting the F-35 jet, the documents released this weekend also show that Chinese hackers sought data on other jets including the F-22 fighter, nuclear submarines and other defense projects. The United States Defense Department spent more than $100 million to repair the damage caused by the Chinese cyberespionage operations, which constituted the “estimated equivalent of five libraries of congress (50 terabytes),” the presentation said.The Chinese government has yet to comment on another disclosure that the N.S.A. succeeded in hacking into the computer of a high-ranking Chinese military official, as Der Spiegel reported.