Xi Jinping, the leader of China, the world’s most populous country and soon to be (maybe) the planet’s biggest economy, draws a basic salary that is so low it could not cover the monthly rent at a modest Beijing apartment complex.But Mr. Xi, along with the other six members of China’s elite Politburo Standing Committee, got a 62 percent raise on Tuesday, increasing his monthly pay to 11,385 Chinese renminbi, or about $1,830 a month, the English-language China Daily reported, citing the country’s Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security.That comes out to less than $22,000 a year, lower than the median wage in the United States in 2013 of $28,031, according to the United States Social Security Administration. And at that salary, Mr. Xi couldn’t afford a comfortable two-bedroom apartment in many parts of the city, even if he used every yuan, jiao and fen of his salary on rent. For example, a 2,000-square-foot, three-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment at the Guanyuan apartments in western Beijing is advertised for rent at 17,500 renminbi a month.President Obama has it far better: His base annual salary is $400,000, not including allowances for entertainment, travel and the use of a rather large residence at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. in Washington, as well as a spacious weekend home in the mountains of Maryland.Fortunately for Mr. Xi, the Chinese president does not have to live solely on his salary. As China Daily noted, the figure does not include other allowances that government officials regularly draw. And as for lodging, Mr. Xi has that covered. When he’s not cooling his heels at the Zhongnanhai leadership compound in central Beijing, he can spend the night at the Xi family home, a grand traditional walled compound in the fashionable Nanlouguxiang neighborhood. And he might find a better deal at the tasteful and leafy Guanyuan complex, considering his older sister and brother-in-law were the property developers.Salaries for all public officials in China are on the rise — with the increase retroactive to last Oct. 1, the paper reported. The lowest-level officials will see their base monthly pay more than double, from just over $100 a month to about $212 a month, the first raise since 2006, according to China Daily.