Getting out of prison early in China can be a matter of ingenuity. It might not even need to be one’s own.Under Chinese law, prisoners who have come up with useful new technologies can be eligible for sentence reductions. And that has helped spur an underground market in patents for sale to inmates, according to a report in Beijing Youth Daily.Some prominent prisoners have received sentence reductions in part because of patents, including Nan Yong, former vice chairman of China’s national soccer association. Mr. Nan, who was given a 10-and-a-half-year sentence for corruption and match fixing in 2012, saw a court take one year off his sentence in December for good behavior, including writing science fiction and receiving four patents, China Daily reported. His inventions included a device for controlling desktop monitors, a mobile phone stand and two soccer-related items: a portable goal and a tool for measuring shot accuracy, China Daily said.Liang Jianxing, a former health official in Zhejiang Province who was given eight years for bribery in 2008, had a year and three months taken off his sentence for inventing devices including a disposable nose cover to block air pollution, Beijing Youth Daily reported.The newspaper did not accuse the imprisoned officials of benefiting from others’ inventions, but its reporters did contact services that claimed to be able to procure patents for a fee. One office in Shaanxi Province said it could provide a simple patent for 6,800 renminbi, or about $1,100, with prices rising to nearly $10,000 for more complex patents.Since the newspaper’s story ran Monday, it has been widely picked up by other Chinese news outlets. The sentence reduction scam does not appear to have been widely known previously, and the new attention will probably make it harder to carry out in the future. “We’ve never run into this situation,” a prison official in Tianjin told the newspaper. “But according to the regulations, it definitely has to be one’s own invention. To substitute designs or practice fraud is definitely not acceptable.”