The billboard sat in a leafy park east of the old presidential palace in the center of Ho Chi Minh City, near several other posters that, among other things, celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Army of Vietnam. This one had a white dove flying across a blue background with a long red ribbon in its beak. To the dove’s left was a red flag with the hammer and sickle, the symbol of the Communist Party. To its right was the national flag of Vietnam — a red banner with a yellow star.The slogan, in Vietnamese, said, “Stay strong. Keep safe the rights of the oceans and islands of Vietnam.”I noticed this particular piece of political propaganda — which used “bien dao,” the Vietnamese term for “oceans and islands” — on a trip to Vietnam in December and assumed the poster referred to the long-running and turbulent territorial disputes between Vietnam and China in what the Vietnamese call the East Sea, known to Westerners as the South China Sea.
Last May, those disputes reached new heights of tension when a Chinese state-owned oil company moved an oil rig into disputed waters off the Paracel Islands that were also part of the exclusive economic zone, or E.E.Z., off the main coast of Vietnam. The move by China led to violent protests in Vietnam and condemnation by the Vietnamese government. China moved the oil rig elsewhere in July, saying it had completed its exploratory mission off the Paracels.After being shown a photograph of the recent poster with the dove that referred to bien dao, several scholars of Vietnam weighed in with their thoughts.“I cannot imagine that protecting the bien dao would be understood as anything less than direct reference to Hoang Sa and Truong Sa — and, since last May, the E.E.Z. — to the vast majority of Vietnamese,” said Jason Morris-Jung, a visiting research fellow at the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore, using the Vietnamese names for the disputed Paracel and Spratly archipelagos.“But I would be careful of reading too much into these signs,” he added. “If anything, they show that socialist realism is still alive and kicking in Vietnam,” he said, referencing the style of art developed in the Soviet Union.Carlyle A. Thayer, an emeritus professor at the University of New South Wales at the Australian Defense Force Academy, said that the poster calls “for the party, for the army or military and for the people to uphold Vietnam’s sovereignty in the East Sea.”“Note the hammer and sickle and national flag — combining ideology and nationalism,” he said. “The dove represents the party line that Vietnam seeks peace and promotes a peaceful settlement of its disputes.”Mr. Thayer said a poster on display in a patch of nearby park showing soldiers holding up firearms against a red background with a yellow star marked “the 70th anniversary of the Vietnamese People’s Army by stressing the unity of the three types of military force — regular, regional and local — and the people are one family.”The last major war the Vietnamese and Chinese armies fought was against each other in 1979, along the land border between the two nations. The Vietnamese often talk of how they have resisted Chinese hegemony for centuries.In another park square by the old palace, a green poster depicted warriors from three parts of the Vietnamese military —  the navy, army and militia. Yet another poster in the area showed fighters against a red-and-blue flag with a yellow star. Mr. Thayer said it “commemorates the 54th founding anniversary of the National Front for the Liberation of Vietnam, and the photo depicts ordinary people and southern revolutionaries in armed struggle.”