By ANNE BARNARDJAN. 19, 2015
BEIRUT, Lebanon —  Miss Lebanon was just minding her business, she says, when Miss Israel came along, pulled out a smartphone and snapped a selfie — posting it on her social media accounts and implying to all the world that the Lebanese beauty queen had been fraternizing with the enemy.It was a weekend on which the Lebanese Internet was buzzing with allegations of Israeli offenses large and small.An Israeli airstrike in Syria had killed Hezbollah fighters there, and Hezbollah loyalists were calling it a provocation, posting photographs of the funeral of the most prominent victim, the son of the top commander Imad Mughniyeh, who was assassinated in Damascus in 2008 in an attack that Hezbollah also attributes to Israel. The slogan “Je Suis Jihad Imad Mughniyeh,” honoring the son in the style of Charlie Hebdo, was shared tens of thousands of times.Yet that outpouring was largely among Hezbollah loyalists. Uniting perhaps a broader-based segment of Lebanese citizens was outrage over a different act of (in their view) Israeli aggression.AdvertisementOn Jan. 11, it seemed, Miss Israel, Doron Matalon, had taken a snapshot of herself in Miami, where the world’s representative beauties were gathered for Donald Trump’s Miss Universe pageant.AdvertisementStanding next to her was Miss Lebanon, Saly Greige, along with Miss Slovenia and Miss Japan. When the image began circulating on social media — with the word “Israel” prominently seen on Ms. Matalon’s T-shirt — the Lebanese were not pleased.People started a hashtag in Arabic offering to tell Ms. Greige, “Two Words.” Most of those words were not words of approval.“You don’t represent Lebanon,” a journalism student, Yasmeena el-Sabeh, declared on Twitter.Yet others defended Ms. Greige. “You are beautiful, it’s one image,” wrote Sana Rhimi, a dentistry student. “Others are doing much more terrible things, and no one says a word about it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Officially, a state of war has persisted between Israel and Lebanon since 1948. The creation of Israel, and the ensuing war, flooded Lebanon with Palestinian refugees. Israel invaded Lebanon several times, and ultimately occupied parts of the south until 2000. It fought a war with Hezbollah in 2006.Ms. Greige, on her Facebook page, said Ms. Matalon had taken the photograph without asking.“Since the first day of my arrival to participate to Miss Universe, I was very cautious to avoid being in any photo or communication with Miss Israel,” Ms. Greige wrote. “I was having a photo with Miss Japan, Miss Slovenia and myself, suddenly Miss Israel jumped in, took a selfie, and put it on her social media.”She even posted a revised version of the picture, with Miss Israel cropped out.Ms. Matalon said the brouhaha “doesn’t surprise me, but it still makes me sad.”She wrote: “Too bad you cannot put the hostility out of the game, only for three weeks of an experience of a lifetime that we can meet girls from around the world and also from the neighboring country.”It was not the first time Middle East politics had marred the pageant. In 1993, Lebanon’s Daily Star newspaper reported, another Miss Lebanon, Huda al-Turk, was stripped of her title for posing for a picture with the Miss Israel of the day.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Miss Israel’s Selfie Puts Another Miss in a Bind.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.