By JAMES GLANZJAN. 19, 2015
In November 2008, British spies captured email messages addressed to reporters and photographers with at least a dozen international news organizations, many United Nations officials, workers at far-flung oil companies and tens of thousands of other people, according to a newly disclosed classified document.The document, a spreadsheet of some 70,000 lines — each with a brief summary of the information gleaned from a single intercept — is contained in a cache of British documents that are among the classified trove leaked by Edward J. Snowden, the former contractor for the National Security Agency.There is no explanation of why the vast collection of messages was sucked into the global system of electronic surveillance created and maintained by British and American spies. But code words within the document suggest that it may be a glimpse of the colossal amount of information gathered each day before being “minimized,” or stripped of irrelevant material.Time stamps in the spreadsheet suggest that it may represent no more than a few minutes of collection on a single day that November.AdvertisementWhy email messages traveling to reporters with news organizations were captured is also left unexplained in the document. Some of the captured messages contain email addresses associated with The Washington Post, Reuters, Le Monde and The Baltimore Sun. Messages to at least four New York Times reporters were intercepted.AdvertisementThe spreadsheet does not include the content of those messages, but they appear to be mass mailings to journalists around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One Times journalist whose email address appears in one of the intercepts, Eric Schmitt, said that he was in Mali at the time.The intercepts were made during a time of global turmoil: The financial crisis was in full swing, President Obama had just been elected and in late November, a Pakistani terrorist group would attack Mumbai, killing 166 people.It is unclear whether any of those events can help explain the enormous rate of data collection on a single day, or whether the document provides a look at a routine moment.Mr. Obama’s name appears repeatedly in the intercepts, but mostly in fairly innocuous ways. The summary line for one document indicates that it contains a link or attachment to a photo of Mr. Obama with his Kenyan grandmother. Another intercept refers to a news article about a statement by Ayman al-Zawahri, the Qaeda leader, condemning Mr. Obama. Other intercepts are even harder to explain. One refers to the battle over same-sex marriage in California; another passes on a bit of folk wisdom: “Angels exist, only sometimes they haven’t got wings and we call them friends.” Still another appears to be a plaintive note from a student trying to call attention to his doctoral thesis, which covered a type of beetle that might be killing mango trees in Pakistan.It is unlikely that the collection of these emails — as irrelevant as most of them seem to be — broke any laws because British and United States laws place few restrictions on the collection of overseas communications.A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: British Spies Seized Emails to Reporters.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.