By ANDREW HIGGINS and JAMES KANTERJAN. 19, 2015
BRUSSELS —  European foreign ministers, meeting here in a city patrolled since Saturday by Belgian paratroopers as part of stepped-up precautions against terrorism, called on Monday for an alliance against Islamic extremism with the countries of North Africa and other Muslim nations like Yemen, where at least one of the gunmen responsible for attacks this month in Paris received training.“We need an alliance, a dialogue, because we are all facing the same threat,” Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s foreign affairs chief, said at a news conference at the end of the one-day meeting of ministers.In an effort to increase counterterrorism cooperation both inside Europe and with countries outside the bloc, particularly those in the Muslim world, the 28-nation European alliance will assign security attachés at its diplomatic missions overseas, Ms. Mogherini said.Didier Reynders, the foreign minister of Belgium, where the authorities last week said they had foiled an imminent terrorist attack with a raid on a house in the east of the country, said the European Union needed to increase intelligence sharing and other cooperation with countries like Algeria, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia to help curb radicalization and violent extremism.AdvertisementMany Muslims living in Belgium and France, including the two brothers involved in the attack on the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and the reported ringleader of the foiled Belgian plot, trace their origins to North Africa.AdvertisementMr. Reynders said Europe wanted to work “much more directly with these partner countries.”The police in Greece, which is also a European Union member, said on Monday that a 33-year-old Algerian had been detained in Athens in connection with the Belgian plot, and that Belgium had requested his extradition.The Belgian government says the terrorist operation was thwarted when police officers on Thursday shot dead two suspects in the town of Verviers, near the German border.The authorities have declined to name the dead men, and the Belgian news media, citing official sources, have issued contradictory reports about their identity, a confusion that has raised questions about who was present in the house at the time of the raid.A third man who escaped from the house without injury, Marouane el Bali, has denied any involvement in terrorism and has said he went there for a drug deal, according to Belgian media reports. He is now under arrest. His lawyer in Brussels did not return calls seeking comment.Eric Van Der Sypt of the Belgian federal prosecutor’s office said by telephone on Monday that releasing the identities of the two dead suspects in Verviers would jeopardize the investigation, but did not elaborate. He cautioned that the extradition from Greece of the detained Algerian, who is wanted in connection with the Belgian terror case, could take weeks if he fights Belgium’s request in court.Mr. Reynders and other ministers called for the establishment of a European system for exchanging passenger information, similar to one introduced in the United States after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Proposals for such a program in Europe were put forward years ago but were stalled because of opposition from the European Parliament, where many lawmakers worried about violating citizens’ privacy.Under the program, information about seat numbers, flight reservation dates, payment methods and travel itineraries would be exchanged. Mr. Reynders suggested that such a system could have helped prevent an attack in May on the Jewish Museum in Brussels that left four people dead. The main suspect in that case, Mehdi Nemmouche, traveled from France to Syria before returning to Belgium, Mr. Reynders said.Advertisement“If we don’t know the route, if we don’t have the chance to follow people step by step, we can’t make progress,” he said.Shortly after the shooting in Brussels last year, the French authorities apprehended Mr. Nemmouche during a routine customs check as he arrived by bus in Marseille from Brussels still carrying an assault rifle and a revolver.Ms. Mogherini, the foreign affairs chief, said the European Union would also step up efforts to block the financing of terrorism, another program inspired by measures taken by the United States but long stalled by privacy and other concerns.She said European officials would meet in the coming days with officials from the United States, Canada, Japan and other nations to discuss ways to counter the financing of the militant group the Islamic State.Several thousand young European Muslims have traveled to Syria and Iraq to join the Islamic State and other extremist groups, a jihadist pipeline that has helped spread extremist views inside Europe and raised fears that fighters will return home to carry out terrorist attacks.Amedy Coulibaly, a Paris gunman of African descent who killed four hostages at a kosher supermarket on Jan. 9, said he was acting on behalf of the Islamic State. The Belgian authorities have said that the plot they disrupted last week involved several people who had returned from Syria.The foreign ministers’ meeting was the first of senior European Union officials since the three-day rampage that killed 17 people in Paris and raised worries across Europe that Muslim extremists may be gearing up for more attacks.Concerned about potential attacks on Jewish sites, embassies and other possible targets, Belgium on Saturday deployed 150 paratroopers in Brussels, the capital, and in Antwerp, a diamond-trading center with a large Orthodox Jewish population. It was the first time troops had been used for domestic security in more than 20 years.James Kanter contributed reporting from Brussels, and Niki Kitsantonis from Athens.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: E.U. Urges Cooperation to Combat Terrorism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.