By AUSTIN RAMZYJAN. 19, 2015
HONG KONG — Indonesia’s weekend executions of two foreigners convicted on drug charges have prompted an indignant diplomatic reaction, as Brazil and the Netherlands withdrew their ambassadors and Australia said it would not rule out such a move.A Dutch citizen, Ang Kiem Soei, and a Brazilian, Marco Archer Cardoso Moreira, were executed early Sunday by firing squad along with convicts from Indonesia, Malawi, Nigeria and Vietnam.President Dilma Rousseff of Brazil personally appealed to President Joko Widodo of Indonesia to spare the life of Mr. Moreira, who was convicted of smuggling cocaine in 2004. Ms. Rousseff was “distressed and outraged” that the sentence was carried out, according to a statement from the Brazilian president’s press office.The Netherlands condemned the executions of Mr. Ang, who was convicted in 2003 on the charge of producing ecstasy, and the five others. “My sympathies go out to their families, for whom this brings a dramatic end to years of uncertainty,” the Dutch foreign minister, Bert Koenders, said in a written statement.AdvertisementMr. Joko said earlier this month that the executions would be “important shock therapy” in his country’s fight against illegal drugs. He had rejected calls for clemency, saying the convicts had received due process under Indonesian law. Mr. Joko wrote on Facebook after the executions that there should be “no halfhearted measures” in the war on drug syndicates.AdvertisementAustralia has expressed concern that two of its citizens on death row in Indonesia for drug smuggling could also be executed, although a specific schedule has not been made public. The two, Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran, are part of the Bali Nine, a group of nine Australians convicted in 2006 of attempting to smuggle heroin out of Indonesia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Foreign Minister Julie Bishop said Australia would continue to urge Indonesia not to execute the men. In an interview with Sky News, she did not rule out recalling Australia’s ambassador if Indonesia carried out the sentences.“This is not just a matter that Prime Minister Abbott and I have been involved in,” she told the network, referring to Prime Minister Tony Abbott. “Across our diplomatic corps they have been making representations at every level in the Indonesian government, and that will continue.”In 2013, Indonesia carried out its first execution in more than four years, ending an informal moratorium put in place because of concerns of wrongful executions and an acknowledgment that the punishment was falling out of favor in much of the world.Human Rights Watch has raised concerns about the resumption of the death penalty in Indonesia and has called its application in drug-trafficking offenses “particularly odious.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.