AdvertisementSupported byBy Diaa Hadid and Rami NazzalRAMALLAH, West Bank — At one riotous demonstration this week, Palestinian university students seemed to be inviting Israeli soldiers to shoot them, moving closer rather than away from the drawn rifles and pointing at their chests as though offering a target.At another, an unusually large number of young women turned out, their heads and faces — all but their eyes — covered in the signature black-and-white checked kaffiyehs. These teenagers in tight jeans and sneakers hurled rocks and firebombs, too, but resentful boys accused them of sometimes panicking when the Israelis responded with tear gas and of screaming when the rubber bullets flew.A third protest brought scores of preteen boys, many still in their striped school uniforms and hauling book-filled backpacks. “Look how small you are!” exclaimed an older man as a group of boys who did not reach his waist ducked behind a wall to avoid gas. Laith, all of 10 years old, grinned and boasted, “I want to liberate Palestine!”An apparently uncoordinated series of attacks by Palestinians on Israelis, mostly with knives, over the past week, have been accompanied by swelling protests in the occupied West Bank, East Jerusalem and Israeli towns with large populations of Arab citizens. Clashes between Palestinians and Israeli settlers and soldiers are as old as the conflict itself, but the demonstrations in recent days have been more numerous, more sustained and more confrontational than those of the past few years.“We feel that the intifada has begun,” said Mohammad Zeid, 23, an activist at Birzeit University, on a hill outside Ramallah. He said the demonstrations were a way to continue momentum, adding, “This is a letter to our political leaders: We don’t want submission, which is what they think peace is.”The most intense confrontation so far erupted Friday afternoon after the funeral of Muhanad Halabi, the 19-year-old law student who was killed after fatally stabbing two Orthodox men in Jerusalem’s Old City on Saturday night before being shot dead. The army sprayed skunk water and live bullets, but many of the mourners, who had carried butcher knives and even swords to the burial, were not deterred.“I am here to march in a hero’s celebration,” Yousef Sarhan, 38, who had come from Jerusalem, said earlier. “His courageous attack has shown the whole world that the Palestinians will keep resisting, despite the martyrs who continue to drop.”Some of the protests have broken out spontaneously, as when hundreds gathered late Thursday night in Kufr Aqab, a crowded neighborhood on the outskirts of Jerusalem, to block Israeli forces from raiding the home of Thaer Abu Ghazala, 19, who was killed by a soldier after wounding four Israelis with a screwdriver near military headquarters in Tel Aviv.Other were planned by political factions, who bused students from the universities of Birzeit and Bethlehem to friction points with Israelis two days running.“Cage a cat in a room and it will start scratching you. We are like the cats now,” said Elias Sarras, who has worked at the Bethlehem campus for 32 years and said it now “looks like it did” during the Palestinian intifadas, or uprisings, of decades past. “The students encourage each other to protest because of the ongoing conflict, and it doesn’t take much to make them move.”The Israeli military has bolstered its presence in the West Bank, and the police have flushed Jerusalem with about 2,000 additional officers to contain the outbursts they universally call riots. Several Palestinians have been killed, including five shot Friday by Israeli soldiers at a fence that separates the Gaza Strip from Israel, according to a spokesman for the Gaza Health Ministry, and a 13-year-old bystander in Bethlehem the army said was shot by mistake on Monday. The Palestinian Red Crescent reported about 1,000 injuries before Friday.“What we’ve seen in recent weeks is indeed an escalation,” said Lt. Col. Peter Lerner of the Israeli military.That was certainly the case on Wednesday near the Ramallah checkpoint. Masked youths filled two-liter water bottles with kerosene at a nearby gas station, then poured the fuel into scores of empty soda bottles and hurled the makeshift firebombs toward Israeli positions. About 300 protesters, mostly Birzeit students, tried to climb up a hill toward the wall of the Israeli settlement Beit El, but soldiers firing into the air chased them back.Buses from Birzeit returned the next day for a repeat performance, though the presence of so many women changed the dynamic. “The party is just starting!” said one, named Mais, 26, who stood with three girlfriends and, like most of the protesters, spoke on the condition that her last name not be used.One male student found the female presence frustrating, and he said half the boys had showed up only to stare at the girls. “I shouldn’t say this, but the girls are really causing tensions,” he said, because they shied away when things got intense. “That means we can’t throw rocks. We are too busy making sure the girls are O.K.”On Tuesday, dozens of small boys and skinny teenagers turned up for a march called by Palestinian leaders at Qalandia, the main checkpoint into Ramallah. Some older brothers could be seen pushing the little ones out of the melee. One man angrily scooped up a boy who was crying behind a concrete barricade and shoved him into a bus leaving the area. But another youngster ignored the elder trying to hold him back, speeding off with a rock in his chubby hand.“This is fun!” said Yehye, 14, who was clutching a Palestinian flag. He was soon scolded by Firas, 15. “It’s to liberate Al Aqsa,” Firas said, referring to the mosque at the heart of the Old City compound in Jerusalem that Palestinians fear Israel wants to divide. “And it’s for the martyrs. They are taking our lands and our holy sites, and as a Palestinian, I should defend my land.”So far, the situation is more one of sporadic outbursts than the sustained movement that marked the intifadas of the late 1980s and early 2000s. Unlike those times, most stores and shops in Palestinian cities and neighborhoods were open this week.“I think that people are not all willing to go out and fight,” said Mousa Ahmad, 21, a Bethlehem business student.“I remember that Yasir Arafat said the pen of a writer, the brush of a painter, the microphone of a professor are all ways of resisting the occupation,” Mr. Ahmad said of the first Palestinian president. “So let us as Palestinians use these methods instead to increase awareness without losing lives. Life is too valuable to lose, especially at a demonstration.”Over at Birzeit on Thursday, the student council played pounding, nationalistic music and had five buses ready to take people to the protest, but many did not board.“I am ready to give my life for Palestine,” said Samih, 21, an engineering student. “But I have a class I can’t miss today.”Jodi Rudoren contributed reporting from Jerusalem.Advertisement