President Obama held up China as a formidable rival to the global influence of the United States in his annual State of the Union address on Tuesday, warning lawmakers that failure to take action on trade legislation could be tantamount to ceding America’s leadership role to Beijing.Among other matters, Mr. Obama used his speech to push for so-called trade-promotion authority, a way to get trade pacts through Congress with an up-or-down vote and no amendments. The administration is negotiating two major trade deals, one with European nations and the other with Pacific countries, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership. That agreement would end tariffs among the United States, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam, but would exclude China for now.“But as we speak, China wants to write the rules for the world’s fastest-growing region,” Mr. Obama said, referring to the Asia-Pacific region. “That would put our workers and our businesses at a disadvantage. Why would we let that happen? We should write those rules. We should level the playing field.”China is an easy foil for Mr. Obama because the United States’ policy toward it does not necessarily fall along partisan lines. Republicans and Democrats alike have expressed concern over China’s human rights record, and many Democrats have joined Republicans in backing trade agreements.Mr. Obama’s first ambassador to China was a Republican, Jon M. Huntsman Jr., the former governor of Utah. And this week, another Utah Republican, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, chairman of the Finance Committee, said he was working on legislation to give the president trade-promotion authority, the newspaper The Hill reported.“Obama ran on a platform of change, but on Asia policy it was another C word. It was consistent,” Paul Haenle, who served as the top China adviser on the National Security Council during George W. Bush’s presidency as well as the first few months of the Obama administration, said in a telephone interview.The president also used China as a positive example in urging support for a new global treaty, citing the agreement reached in November in which Beijing pledged to cap its carbon emissions by 2030.“The general framework for approaching China has remained consistent, which is we do want to engage China where we have common interest,” said Mr. Haenle, now the director of the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy in Beijing.On issues apart from the climate accord, the relationship is more problematic. Mr. Haenle took notice of another remark that Mr. Obama made that touched on tensions between China and its neighbors, especially Japan, the Philippines and Vietnam, over disputed territory in the South China and East China Seas.Mr. Obama said that in the Asia-Pacific region, the United States was “modernizing alliances while making sure that other nations play by the rules in how they trade, how they resolve maritime disputes, how they participate in meeting common international challenges like nonproliferation and disaster relief.”