AdvertisementSupported byBy Suzanne DaleyILION, Greece — Harry Theoharis, whose relentless efforts as head of Greece’s tax collection agency prompted one newspaper last year to nickname him Little Stalin, was out campaigning recently in a smoky cafe in this working-class suburb of Athens.Some of the pensioners there ignored him. Others openly asked how Mr. Theoharis, 44, who was reportedly forced to resign over his zealousness in addressing Greece’s chronic tax-avoidance problems, had the nerve to come asking for votes. But Mr. Theoharis, who is now running as a member of a new political party, To Potami, charged on, arguing with good humor that efficient tax collection led to lower taxes.“Here,” he said, handing out his leaflets. “This is the first piece of paper you have gotten from me that does not have a bill attached.”Whether or not Mr. Theoharis will win a parliamentary seat in Sunday’s general election is an open question. But his party, founded just last March by a journalist and largely made up of candidates who, like him, have never run for office before, is, to the surprise of many, running third in the polls.To Potami could end up being the kingmaker if neither of the two leaders in the field — Alexis Tsipras’s left-wing Syriza party, which is leading in the polls, or Prime Minister Antonis Samaras’s center-right New Democracy, which is several percentage points behind — gets a clear majority.For Mr. Tsipras in particular, an alliance with To Potami, which has cast itself as the party of moderation and preached the need to stay in the eurozone at all costs, could be politically useful. It could help soothe the fears of creditors and financial markets that have been unnerved by earlier statements from Mr. Tsipras about renegotiating Greece’s bailout agreements. And it could provide him political cover should he need to shift away from the more radical demands of the far left wing of his party and compromise with the so-called troika that has imposed strict conditions on Greece for the last five years: the European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund.But just days away from a vote that could change Greece’s trajectory and fuel a broader debate about austerity policies across Europe, Mr. Theoharis’s party is not the only one that could tilt the balance of power in a new government. With faith in leaders and institutions ebbing away, 25 percent of the country unemployed and the economy showing only small hints of a turnaround, the political field is fractured. Polls suggest that there may be as many as eight parties in Parliament, one of them founded just this month by former Prime Minister George Papandreou.Experts say that the many small parties — three of them have emerged since the crisis — are in part a measure of the collapse of the traditional center-left party, Pasok, which was led by Mr. Papandreou, won 44 percent of the vote in 2009 before the depth of the crisis became clear, and now polls at about 5 percent. But the center right is losing support to smaller parties, too, experts say, because many Greeks no longer want to see a single party with a clear majority in Parliament, free to do as it pleases.“What you are seeing is the process that began a while ago,” said Nick Malkoutzis, the editor of Macropolis.gr, a political analysis website. “The slow realization that a big vote for a single party with legitimacy to do whatever it likes was what got Greece into trouble in the first place. There is a reluctance today to give any party a majority.”Mr. Malkoutzis said he also saw a growing discomfort with the two main choices before Greek voters, and the conduct of their leaders.Mr. Samaras has concentrated on dispensing a message of fear. One of his latest commercials offers a frightening possibility should Mr. Tsipras win. The ad says that negotiations between Mr. Tsipras and the country’s creditors would break down and the country’s funding would be cut off, and that soon the elderly would lose their pensions and the country would suffer shortages of fuel and medicine.Mr. Tsipras, on the other hand, talks every day about the ways in which he would challenge the austerity measures imposed on Greece by its creditors.Though polling at around 7 percent, To Potami, which means The River, does not yet even have a clear program, except that it is pro-Europe and pro-stability. On Monday, at the opening of a new campaign headquarters in Glyfada, a middle-class suburb of Athens, the leader of To Potami, Stavros Theodorakis, told a crowd that he had experts working on a proposal for how to renegotiate Greece’s huge debt. Though only six days remained before the election, no one in the crowd seemed much bothered by the lack of specifics.Nikolas Kriparakos, 23, an optician about to start his required military service, who had come to hear Mr. Theodorakis speak, said he liked the new image that the party projected, with so many candidates who were not longtime politicians.“It is not something old,” he said of the party. “And having more than one party expressing opinions is a good idea, I think.”If Mr. Tsipras should win but fall shy of a majority, he will have no shortage of parties that have expressed interest in teaming up with him, most of them polling from 3 to 7 percent. Even Evangelos Venizelos, the leader of Pasok, which right now is in a coalition with Mr. Samaras, has said he is ready to change course and “cooperate” with Mr. Tsipras. Mr. Papandreou has said that his new party will also be willing to partner under certain conditions.In addition, the Independent Greeks, a right-wing party created not long before the 2012 elections that also argues against austerity, has said it is available to partner with Mr. Tsipras.The open question is what kind of concessions, if any, Mr. Tsipras would be willing to make to gain the support of various parties. He has said he wants to team up with the Communists, but they have loudly proclaimed that they want nothing to do with him and have campaigned actively against him.He has also said that he will not team up with To Potami, Pasok and Mr. Papandreou’s new party, the Movement of Democratic Socialists, though some experts say that he might change his mind. In any case, the front-runner in the election will have three days to try to form a government if there is no outright majority. After that, the second-place party gets its chance.Pollsters say that To Potami has impressed voters because of candidates like Mr. Theoharis, who was once labeled a technological whiz kid and who managed to computerize Greece’s tax filing system before falling out with his bosses.Mr. Theoharis had been hired for a five-year term that was supposed to protect him from political pressure. But after 20 months, he left office. The Finance Ministry issued a statement at the time saying only that he had left for personal reasons. But on the campaign trail, he says that he left because he could no longer fend off political pressure to play favorites.“When they sent me their friends,” he told the men in the cafe, “I said no.”Elias Nikolakopoulos, a pollster and professor of political science at the University of Athens, said that recent polls showed 15 to 20 percent of the population was still undecided and that surprises were possible. Since the crisis began, he said, political affiliations have been far more unpredictable.In the May 2012 vote, he said, “exit polls found that 40 percent had made up their minds in the last two weeks.”Dimitris Bounias contributed reporting.Advertisement