AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickPhotographs of an American holding a hunger strike in Cairo to protest his imprisonment without charges show him badly bruised and gravely ill, raising alarms about his deteriorating health and possible abuse.On Tuesday the family of the American, Mohamed Soltan, released six photographs taken in prison that showed him unconscious with blood running out of his mouth, sores on his lips and gums, and large bruises on his hands and arms.Mr. Soltan, 27, is one of several thousand political prisoners arrested in Egypt during a crackdown on dissent after the ouster of President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood in 2013. He is also a dual citizen of the United States and Egypt who attended high school and college in the Midwest.In a recent letter to the family that was provided to The New York Times, American diplomats working on the case warn that his hunger strike “has done and continues to do severe, in some cases irreparable, damage to his body” and “is a significant threat to his life.”In a statement, his family said the photographs of Mr. Soltan, who has been held without charges for more than 16 months, confirm “reports of increased physical and psychological torture.”Mr. Soltan is not a member or supporter of the Brotherhood, but he is the son of a prominent figure in the group. He also volunteered as a translator for journalists covering an Islamist sit-in against the ouster of Mr. Morsi, saying he opposed the takeover as undemocratic but did not support Mr. Morsi. On Aug. 14, 2013, security forces smashed the sit-in and shot Mr. Soltan in the arm. They arrested him in his home 11 days later. His father, Salah Soltan, was also arrested and remains imprisoned.Mohamed Soltan’s family says that he has been on a hunger strike for nearly a year, since last Jan. 26, and that he has sometimes been hospitalized because of his health. In the statement released Tuesday, his family said Mr. Soltan “has recently agreed to begin taking in a sufficient amount of liquids.”Spokesmen for the Egyptian interior minister did not respond to repeated requests for comment.Advertisement