By MARGALIT FOXOCT. 6, 2015
Arpad Goncz, a playwright, translator and anti-Communist dissident who became the first president of post-Communist Hungary, died on Tuesday. He was 93.A family spokesman confirmed the death to the Hungarian news agency MTI, giving no information on where Mr. Goncz died.Although the Hungarian president occupies a largely ceremonial post, wielding far less power than the country’s prime minister does, Mr. Goncz (pronounced Guntz) was widely credited with helping to ease Hungary’s transition out of four decades of Communist rule.Elected by a vote of the Hungarian Parliament in 1990, Mr. Goncz served two five-year terms, leaving office in 2000. His reformist aims and literary background made him an admired if less well-known counterpart of his friend Vaclav Havel, the Czech dissident playwright who served from 1989 to 1992 as his country’s first post-Communist president.AdvertisementMr. Goncz, who was trained as a lawyer, received a life sentence for treason for his role in the Hungarian uprising of 1956. (His activities included helping to smuggle out of the country a manuscript by Imre Nagy, the leader of the uprising, who was executed in 1958.)AdvertisementImprisoned in 1957, Mr. Goncz was released in 1963 amid a nationwide amnesty and afterward worked as an agronomist, welder and clandestine translator of English-language literature.In 1988, as Communist influence throughout the East Bloc began to wane, Mr. Goncz helped found a liberal political party, the Alliance of Free Democrats. After the fall of Hungarian Communism the next year, he was chosen for the presidency by members of the country’s first democratically elected Parliament. (Then as now, the Hungarian president is not directly elected by the people.)Admired for his level head and fatherly mien, Mr. Goncz, who was known among members of the public as Uncle Arpi, was widely beloved during his presidency. Early in his first term, he helped avert violence after government officials threatened to use force to quell a strike by Budapest taxi drivers.When he left office, The Star-Ledger of Newark reported in 2000, his approval rating was at 86 percent.Mr. Goncz often found himself in stark public opposition to Jozsef Antall, the leader of the country’s conservative coalition and its first post-Communist prime minister. In 1992, for instance, as Mr. Antall sought to exert tighter control over the national news media, Mr. Goncz refused to comply with his request to fire the directors of the state radio and television stations.His actions led to his being praised by the Hungarian left as a defender of press freedoms and denounced by the Hungarian right as a panderer to Western interests.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Goncz, who taught himself English during his six years in prison, produced Hungarian translations of a string of English-language writers, including Saul Bellow, E. L. Doctorow, William Faulkner, William Golding, Ernest Hemingway, Edgar Allan Poe, Mary Shelley, Susan Sontag, William Styron, J. R. R. Tolkien, John Updike, Alice Walker, Edith Wharton and Thomas Wolfe.He also produced a body of original work in Hungarian — much of it political allegory — that included plays, novels and short stories. Several volumes of his work are available in English translation, including “Plays and Other Writings” (1990) and “Homecoming and Other Stories” (1997), both translated by Katharina M. Wilson and Christopher C. Wilson.AdvertisementArpad Goncz was born in Budapest on Feb. 2, 1922. In World War II, he was conscripted by the Hungarian military, which was aligned with the Nazis. He deserted and, fighting with the resistance, was wounded in 1944.Mr. Goncz’s survivors include his wife, the former Maria Zsuzsanna Gonter, and four children, among them a daughter, Kinga Goncz, who was Hungary’s foreign minister from 2006 to 2009.Mr. Goncz, who devoted himself to charitable work after leaving office, was admired throughout his career for his roguish wit. It was readily apparent in his 2000 interview with The Star-Ledger, when he reflected on the rigors of being a translator one day and president the next.“Certainly,” he said, “a bad translator can cause less trouble than a bad president.”A version of this article appears in print on October 10, 2015, on Page D8 of the New York edition with the headline: Arpad Goncz, 93, Ex-Leader of Hungary .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.