By JODI RUDORENJAN. 20, 2015
JERUSALEM — Traditional math does not always apply to Israeli elections.As in any coalition system, the party that gets the most votes does not necessarily win. That was the lesson of 2009, when Tzipi Livni failed to form a government even though her party, Kadima, filled 28 Parliament seats, compared with 27 for Likud, the party of Benjamin Netanyahu. Now, Ms. Livni hopes that the merger of her new party, Hatnuah, with the Labor Party of Isaac Herzog will prove to be more than the sum of its parts: Their parties now have six and 15 seats, respectively, but the latest polls show their combined Zionist Camp winning up to 25 in the March 17 vote.“In school I learned that two plus two equals four — in politics I learned that this isn’t necessarily true,” Uri Avnery, a nonagenarian leftist, wrote last week, calling for the left-wing Meretz party to join the camp. “The mission is to change the math big time.”The magic number is 61: a simple majority of the 120 seats in Parliament is the minimum needed to create a coalition. That is also the number it takes to stop someone from creating one, with what is called a “preventive bloc” or a “blocking majority,” as the Arab-dominated parties did to keep Yitzhak Rabin in power when one of his coalition partners quit during the Oslo peace process.Arab Parliament members would not actually join a coalition headed by the Zionist Camp; they are not Zionists, and they refuse to shoulder collective responsibility for, say, another attack on the Gaza Strip or continuing funding of West Bank settlements. But they would like very much to prevent Mr. Netanyahu from getting a fourth term as prime minister.AdvertisementSo the Arabs could, essentially, form an alliance with Mr. Herzog and Ms. Livni that promotes their formation of the government without actually becoming part of it. The more seats the Arabs get, the thinking goes, the more the balance of power tilts away from Mr. Netanyahu and his conservative allies, and the easier it would be for the Zionist Camp to lure centrist parties to its tent.AdvertisementFirst, the Arabs have other math problems to work out. With a new law raising to 3.25 percent (from 2 percent) the threshold of votes required to enter Parliament, they are deciding whether to combine their current parties into a single electoral list or two. There are significant ideological differences — communist, nationalist, religious — among the parties, and analysts are also debating over which party is more likely to lift turnout from 2013’s 56 percent, far below the Jewish rate of about 70 percent.“If we maximize the potential of the Arab community in terms of participation,” said Mohammed Darawshe, a former campaign strategist, “this could be a game-changer.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Arab Israelis, often called Palestinian citizens of Israel, are 20 percent of the population, but their three factions now hold 11 Parliament seats (Mr. Darawshe said one in five Arab voters supported so-called Zionist parties like Labor). He cited recent polls showing that 80 percent prefer a single, united Arab list for the coming elections — but also that one list might bring fewer people to the polls.“Democracy means you go and vote for either a party, or an ideology, or a person that you believe in his way, in his issue, in his agenda,” said Eman al-Kassem Suleiman, who hosts a political program on Israel Radio’s Arabic service. “It seems very hard to have one Arab list that everyone will be satisfied.”Ahmad Tibi, a physician and Parliament member, said in an interview that the name Zionist Camp was “a spit in the face” of Arab Israelis but that Mr. Herzog was “less dangerous” than Mr. Netanyahu. He imagines a preventive bloc in which Arabs have a written agreement with the Zionist Camp guaranteeing them “budgets, infrastructure, education, lands.”While many analysts say competition between two Arab lists could spur turnout, Mr. Tibi — who was first elected in 1999, when turnout among Arabs was 78 percent — prefers one, so that “the main issue will be bringing people to vote.”“The most important thing is to bring down the right,” he said. “We can change the balance.”A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.