By BHADRA SHARMAJAN. 20, 2015
KATMANDU, Nepal — Maoist opposition leaders in Nepal threw chairs and microphones at members of the governing parties on Tuesday at a meeting of lawmakers working to draft a Constitution on deadline. Three lawmakers and about a dozen security guards were wounded.Hours later, the Maoists, who won only a small fraction of seats in elections for the Constituent Assembly in 2013, strictly enforced a nationwide strike that shut down traffic, schools and markets.The opposition alliance, which is led by the Maoist faction of the Communist Party, wants the new Constitution to carve provinces in Nepal along ethnic lines, a provision the governing coalition adamantly opposes. Regional parties representing members of the Madhesi ethnic group are seeking to declare the southern plains a separate province.During the fracas on Tuesday, opposition lawmakers attacked leaders from the Marxist-Leninist faction of the Communist Party, who are part of the governing coalition. The coalition, led by the Nepali Congress party, commands more than two-thirds of the 601-member assembly, providing sufficient votes to push through a draft of the Constitution. But such an agreement would be tenuous and short-lived, analysts say.Advertisement“The Nepali Congress thinks that if they accept the demand of the opposition parties, that is going to disintegrate the country,” said Lok Raj Baral, executive chairman of the Nepal Center for Contemporary Studies in Katmandu. “But if they do not address the demands of the minority groups, that is also going to harm the country.”AdvertisementAfter a 10-year civil war between the Maoists and the government ended in 2006, the Constituent Assembly spent four years trying, unsuccessfully, to write a Constitution, a stalemate that led to political paralysis.The Nepali Congress won the largest share of votes in 2013, followed by the Marxists-Leninists. Dividing the country into smaller political units remains one of the most contentious issues surrounding the new Constitution.Three Marxist-Leninist leaders were wounded on Tuesday when lawmakers threw microphones at them.“There are no words to condemn such an act,” said Subash Nembang, the speaker of the Constituent Assembly.The deputy prime minister and home minister, Bam Dev Gautam, said voting would go ahead despite the obstruction from opposition parties.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To promulgate the Constitution is our target, and we will make it a success,” he said.The Maoist opposition leader, Giriraj Mani Pokharel, defended the actions of his party.“We have already pushed for consensus,” Mr. Pokharel said. “The Constituent Assembly chairman’s push for majority process invited confrontation.”Mr. Pokharel said the opposition would continue to impede voting unless the governing parties agreed to continue negotiations on the Constitution.Bhadra Sharma reported from Katmandu, and Nida Najar from New Delhi.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Nepal: Chaos Erupts at Meeting to Draft Constitution.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.