By EDWARD WONGJAN. 20, 2015
BEIJING — The Chinese government is investigating the detention of more than 100 Chinese citizens by Myanmar on suspicion that they entered the country to engage in logging, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Myanmar said Tuesday.A group of diplomats has arrived in Myitkyina, the capital of Kachin State in northern Myanmar, to discuss the situation with officials there and to offer consular services to the detained Chinese, the spokesman, Pan Xuesong, said in a written statement.According to Chinese news reports on Monday, the Chinese were detained in early January after having entered Kachin, which is west of Yunnan Province. The state is a volatile area of Myanmar, also known as Burma, that has been split by a long-running civil war. Part of the state is controlled by the Kachin Independence Organization and its armed wing, the Kachin Independence Army. There has been intense fighting in recent years between the rebel army, made up of ethnic Kachin, and the military of Myanmar. Recently, there has been another surge in violence.Kachin is rich in natural resources that include jade and wood. Chinese have often crossed the border from Yunnan to exploit and trade those resources.AdvertisementMr. Pan said the Chinese diplomats in Myitkyina were holding talks with “relevant officials from the local government and police and immigration departments.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Pan also said that the diplomats in Myitkyina had failed to find any evidence that hundreds of Chinese civilians had been trapped with ethnic Kachin civilians in an area of Kachin where clashes have been taking place in recent days. On Monday, a state-run Chinese newspaper, Global Times, reported that hundreds of Chinese, including jade miners and merchants, had been trapped by fighting in the state and were running low on food and water. The Global Times report cited an intelligence official with a rebel group but did not give the official’s name.AdvertisementU Mong Gwong, an officer of the Kachin Independence Army, said by telephone on Tuesday that 250 to 300 Chinese civilians were indeed trapped in the Hpakant area and that the Burmese Army should allow them to leave. U Zaw Htay, a director in the office of the president, Thein Sein, declined to say how many people were trapped but said the issue would be resolved “according to laws.”Fighting has flared recently in other border regions of Myanmar between government forces and ethnic rebel militias similar to the Kachin Independence Army. In the northern state of Shan, the army is facing off against an alliance of ethnic Kachin, Palung, Shan and Kokang. The violence could derail government plans for a cease-fire on Feb. 12, which is Union Day, a national holiday commemorating the unification of the country in 1947.On Feb. 12 of that year, representatives of several ethnic groups signed the Panglong Agreement to reach a political accommodation with the Burmese government and its leader, Aung San, the father of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the prominent Burmese politician and recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.Wai Moe provided reporting from Yangon, Myanmar. Bree Feng contributed research from Beijing.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.