By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 20, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  North Korea on Tuesday demanded that Washington stop pressuring it over human rights, citing a prominent North Korean defector’s partial recanting of his story as evidence that a United Nations report on its rights violations could not be trusted.Over the weekend, the defector, Shin Dong-hyuk, 32, said that he had lied about key parts of a life story that had made him the best-known symbol of torture and other rights violations by North Korea. His retractions came amid mounting pressure from fellow North Korean defectors and the South Korean news media to clarify suspicions about his background.The retractions also raised concerns among human rights advocates that North Korea would seize upon them to further its campaign to derail an attempt at the United Nations to bring its top leaders before the International Criminal Court on charges of rights abuses.Those concerns were borne out on Tuesday. A commentary posted on Uriminzokkiri, a North Korean government-run website, said: “It’s not ‘parts’ of his story that are untrue. Everything he said and the things the so-called ‘defectors’ said and submitted to their American boss and the United Nations Human Rights Commission are all lies, woven with trickery.”AdvertisementIt said the United States and South Korea should stop their “human rights racket” because their evidence against the North was “fabricated” by “human trash” like Mr. Shin.AdvertisementHuman rights advocates countered that the landmark report last year by the United Nations’ Commission of Inquiry, which propelled the world body to adopt a resolution condemning the North’s rights abuses, was solid, even without Mr. Shin’s account. The report drew from interviews with hundreds of other defectors and with experts on human rights in North Korea.In numerous interviews and “Escape From Camp 14,” a best-selling 2012 book by Blaine Harden, a former Washington Post reporter, Mr. Shin has detailed his life in a notorious prison camp, where he had said he was born in 1982 and lived, surviving torture and starvation, until he escaped in 2005. Camp 14, located north of Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, is one of the worst prison camps in the country, from which no inmate is expected to leave alive, according to North Korean defectors and human rights officials.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Shin said recently that he actually spent most of his time in North Korea at Camp 18, a much less repressive re-education camp, from which former inmates said most prisoners were freed and assimilated into the rest of North Korean society in the 1980s and ’90s, when Mr. Shin now says he lived there.Mr. Shin returned on Monday from a trip to the United States, where he frequently traveled to discuss North Korean human rights. But he said on Tuesday he needed time before he could face the news media to explain his story, which began developing some cracks a few years ago after the 2011 publication of another former Camp 18 prisoner’s memoir.Last October, North Korea released a documentary aimed at discrediting Mr. Shin in which Mr. Shin’s father and people identified as neighbors and work colleagues called Mr. Shin a liar and a criminal.In his revised account, Ms. Shin now says that he was born at Camp 14 but that his village was incorporated into Camp 18 when he was a small child. He also says he was returned to the harsher Camp 14 after he escaped to China from Camp 18 in 2001, but was caught and repatriated.Mr. Shin originally told reporters that he was brutally tortured when his mother and brother conspired to escape Camp 14 in 1996. In Mr. Harden’s “Escape From Camp 14,” Mr. Shin revealed that he had betrayed his mother and brother by reporting their escape plan to a prison guard and that he then witnessed them being executed.But now, changing his story again, Mr. Shin says he witnessed their 1996 executions at Camp 18, not at Camp 14, and that he betrayed his mother and brother twice. After he first informed on them, he now says, a prison guard forced him to sign a document saying that he saw his mother and brother kill another inmate, whom the guard had tortured to death.Rights advocates and former prison camp inmates said this week that they were confused about whether to believe Mr. Shin’s revised account, which is difficult to verify.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.