Life in contemporary China as seen through the eyes of the Chinese filmmaker Jia Zhangke is often a gritty, somber affair. At times, the stark realism of Mr. Jia’s films has been too much for China’s censors, as was presumably the case with his last full-length film, the 2013 drama “A Touch of Sin,” which never made it onto Chinese screens.But the authorities are unlikely to have objections to Mr. Jia’s latest creative offering, a short film commissioned by Greenpeace East Asia titled “Smog Journeys.” In the seven-minute film, the indie director channels his signature meditative style to tackle a subject that has become a leading concern for both the government and the Chinese people: air pollution.Released on Thursday, the film follows the lives of two Chinese families — one a mining family in rural Hebei Province, and the other a cosmopolitan family in hyper-urban Beijing. The film is intended to show that every Chinese citizen, regardless of socioeconomic status or geography, is affected by dirty air.
“I wanted to make a film that enlightens people, not frightens them,” Mr. Jia said in a news release. “The issue of smog is something that all the citizens of the country need to face, understand and solve in the upcoming few years.”  While the film is not a documentary, Mr. Jia recreates and splices together scenes that show how air pollution has become an alarming part of everyday life in China. Smokestacks spew against the background of hazy gray skies; a mother (played by Mr. Jia’s wife, Zhao Tao) picks up her son at school, both wearing face masks; and a doctor examines the lungs of the mining family’s young child.As part of research for the film, Mr. Jia, who grew up in the coal mining province of Shanxi, said he had visited some of China’s most polluted cities, including Handan, Shijiazhuang and Xingtai.“The one thing that fascinated and shocked me the most was the fact that even on smoggy days, people still lived their lives as usual,” he said in the news release.Also on Thursday, Greenpeace East Asia published new figures showing that of the 190 Chinese cities to report data in 2014, 90 percent were exceeding China’s own limit on the average annual level of dangerous fine particulate matter, or PM2.5, in the air.Li Yan, head of climate and energy at the environmental organization, said that while the data had shown a slight improvement in overall air quality from the year before, the pollution situation in China was still very serious.“While there is much higher awareness about smog, even in very bad episodes, when the air quality is 20 times higher than the national standard, you still feel like people are not protecting themselves,” Ms. Li said by telephone. “I think that’s an indication that the seriousness of the smog and its health impacts are still not fully understood by the general public.”