By RAPHAEL MINDERJAN. 21, 2015
BARCELONA, Spain —  Núria Rivero, an art historian, gave a tour one recent day of a sumptuous mansion from Barcelona’s own bygone gilded age, one now owned by the city. But to her frustration, much of it was about what was not on the walls, instead of what was.A nail hole here. Some more over there. Discolored outlines of frames. All of it, she believes, the telltale signs of where paintings once hung.And not just any paintings. Some of them were probably masterpieces by Rembrandt, El Greco and Goya, she and the city claim, as well as Flemish tapestries and other objects — as many as 658 in all.“The real problem is not repairing some stitching,” said Ms. Rivero as she examined a Flemish tapestry from the 16th century in the entrance hall, “but the fact that we’ve only found seven of the 14 tapestries that should be here.”AdvertisementThe missing 352 paintings and drawings, together with tapestries and other works, constitute an art heist on a grand scale, according to the city. It is alleging theft and fraud in a criminal case against the four daughters of Julio Muñoz Ramonet, a Catalan industrialist who bequeathed the property to his native city of Barcelona when he died in 1991.AdvertisementAfter 17 years of legal battles over whether Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s will was valid, the Spanish Supreme Court ruled in favor of Barcelona in 2012. The city is now accusing the daughters of surreptitiously removing much of their father’s art collection from his mansion before being forced to hand over the keys to the property a year after that ruling.“We’re talking about a quantity and a quality of missing works of art that could probably fill a first-class museum,” said Marc Molins, a criminal lawyer representing the city. He added that he expected a judge to summon the indicted daughters to court in February.The criminal trial is the latest installment of what has already been an epic court battle, waged by the city to recover the property and its belongings.The daughters deny theft or any other wrongdoing. Their spokesman, Sergio Azcona, said Barcelona received all the works attached to the property, in line with a 1998 inventory that was reviewed by the city at the time.Any art possessed by the daughters, Mr. Azcona said, came instead from other companies owned by their father or through other family connections.Still, the city insists that the property was somehow emptied of the major art collection that it once contained.It is presenting various inventories, including one prepared in 1971, according to Eudald Vendrell, another lawyer who has represented Barcelona.AdvertisementBarcelona is also counting on the testimony of the associate provost for arts at Harvard, Lori E. Gross, who examined and estimated the art collection on behalf of the daughters after the industrialist’s death, according to city officials. Ms. Gross did not return emails seeking comment.Mr. Azcona said that Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s mansion may contain fewer works than in its first inventory, but that did not constitute evidence of theft by the daughters. “If works are missing,” Mr. Azcona said, it is probably because the industrialist “disposed of them freely and while alive, as is logical and normal.”The story of the works is as varied and intriguing as Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s own life.Mr. Muñoz Ramonet became one of Spain’s biggest tycoons in the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War, with businesses ranging from textiles to insurance. Through personal and business connections, he amassed a stunning collection.It was lucky for him. Ms. Rivero, the art historian, said the best of Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s collection was “what he got already collected by others” because he knew little about art and did not call on advisers to help in his purchases.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“He managed to spend a lot of money on artwork that turned out to be not that good and even sometimes fake,” she said.Some of the best pieces were gained when he took over a major collection of a textile manufacturer, Ròmul Bosch i Catarineu, who lost the works after he put them up as collateral for a loan before he died in 1936, the year the civil war began.In 1946, in a lavish ceremony held in Bilbao, Mr. Muñoz Ramonet married the daughter of one of Spain’s leading bankers, extending his influence beyond Catalonia.In the wine cellar, dust-covered bottles of 1969 Dom Pérignon Champagne serve as a reminder of a time when the industrialist hosted lavish dinners in his art-filled mansion in the city’s upmarket Sarrià-Sant Gervasi district.But after the civil war, much of Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s influence also derived from his close links to the Franco dictatorship.In the 1980s, after Spain returned to democracy, Mr. Muñoz Ramonet became the target of a major insurance fraud investigation, led by Judge Baltasar Garzón, at the time a rising star of Spain’s national court.AdvertisementMr. Muñoz Ramonet ultimately fled Spain for Switzerland, where he spent the last part of his exile in a luxury hotel.Barcelona’s fight to reclaim his property started four years after his death, when a friend of the tycoon alerted the authorities that Mr. Muñoz Ramonet had handed a final will to a notary in the Swiss city of Chur, in which he left his main property to Barcelona.That was the will contested in Swiss and Spanish courts by the daughters for almost two decades.Mr. Vendrell, one of Barcelona’s lawyers, speculated that Mr. Muñoz Ramonet decided to leave his property to the city rather than to his daughters “perhaps because they didn’t take care of him when he fell sick in Switzerland.”The city now plans to overhaul the mansion’s gardens in February and eventually open them to the public. But it has yet to decide how to use the mansion, as well as a smaller, adjacent house, in which Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s mother once lived.Depending on which of the allegedly missing works it can recover, the city is considering transforming the main house into an arts center.The smaller house could be showcased as “an example of how the bourgeoisie once lived, in a Barcelona that has almost completely disappeared and been transformed,” said Jaume Ciurana, the city’s councilor for culture.Asked whether Mr. Muñoz Ramonet’s fall from grace and his longstanding support for the Madrid politicians of the Franco regime would taint the city’s ambitions for the site, Mr. Ciurana took a diplomatic approach.“I’m not here to judge the contradictions in the life and work of Muñoz Ramonet, but to make sure that the city gets full usage of the incredible gift that he left for his city,” he said. “This isn’t about politics but about enriching Barcelona’s patrimony.”A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Disinherited Daughters Battle Their Father’s City Over Missing Artworks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.