By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 21, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — The leader of North Korea, Kim Jong-un, may visit Moscow in May on what would be his first trip abroad since taking control of his country in late 2011, the Russian government said on Wednesday.Russia has invited Mr. Kim to the May 9 celebrations of the 70th anniversary of the Soviet Union’s defeat of Nazi Germany, or Victory Day. Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov told a news conference in Moscow that “the first signal was positive” from the North Korean government. The North has yet to say whether Mr. Kim, who remains mostly an enigma, will attend.North Korea has been relying on its Cold War allies, China and to a lesser extent Russia, to help tide it over after the United Nations imposed sanctions because of nuclear and long-range rocket tests it conducted in recent years. It also is counting on the two countries to veto any United Nations move to bring Mr. Kim before the International Criminal Court on accusations that his country has violated human rights.In November, Mr. Kim sent Choe Ryong-hae, one of his closest aides, to Moscow to discuss improving political and economic ties.Mr. Kim’s predecessors — his father, Kim Jong-il, and grandfather, Kim Il-sung — had frequently visited China and also traveled to the former Soviet Union and Russia, though less frequently.The current leader, however, has chosen to stay in North Korea since taking power, meeting a senior Chinese Party official in Pyongyang in 2012. Since then, the only known prominent foreigner who has met Mr. Kim was Dennis Rodman, a former N.B.A. star from the United States. Mr. Rodman has visited North Korea several times since early 2013, calling the North Korean leader a “friend.”David M. Herszenhorn contributed reporting from Moscow.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: North Korea: Leader May Visit Russia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.