By PETER BAKERJAN. 21, 2015
The president discussed the military campaign against the Islamic State, and the larger battle against violent extremism, during his State of the Union address.WASHINGTON —  The long-running debate over President Obama’s foreign policy centered Wednesday on a speech to Congress — not the one the president just delivered, but one that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel will give in three weeks.A day after the president’s State of the Union address, Speaker John A. Boehner invited Mr. Netanyahu to address a joint meeting of Congress next month for what would effectively be a rebuttal. In the perennial argument over whether Mr. Obama’s approach to the world is wise or weak, Mr. Netanyahu essentially represents the “weak” case.The invitation stunned the White House, which called it a breach of protocol, but the surprise move was a sign that Republicans, who now control both houses of Congress, intend to use their new majorities to challenge the president not only on domestic policy but also on international affairs. Congressional leaders plan to press their assertion that Mr. Obama does not take the danger posed by Islamic terrorists, Iran or Russia seriously enough.“I don’t believe I’m poking anyone in the eye,” Mr. Boehner told reporters on Wednesday after announcing his invitation. “There is a serious threat in the world, and the president last night kind of papered over it. And the fact is that there needs to be a more serious conversation in America about how serious the threat is from radical Islamic jihadists and the threat posed by Iran.”AdvertisementFew take those threats more seriously than Mr. Netanyahu, who presumably will tell Congress on Feb. 11 that Islamic extremism is on the rise in the Middle East and that Iran should not be trusted during negotiations over its nuclear program. Never close to Mr. Obama, Mr. Netanyahu appears to have decided it is time for a frontal appeal to lawmakers to counter the president.AdvertisementWhite House officials said they had learned of his appearance only Wednesday morning, shortly before it was announced. Not only is Mr. Obama not scheduled to meet with Mr. Netanyahu during his trip to Washington, but miffed aides to the president said they had not even heard directly from their Israeli counterparts that the prime minister would be in town.“The typical protocol would suggest that the leader of a country would contact the leader of another country when he’s traveling there,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, told reporters traveling on Air Force One with the president to a speech in Boise, Idaho. “That certainly is how President Obama’s trips are planned when we travel overseas. So this particular event seems to be a departure from that protocol.”Decorum aside, the diplomatic row focused fresh attention on part of Mr. Obama’s State of the Union address that went largely overlooked amid attention to his tax and education proposals. While he outlined no new foreign policies, the president used the speech to defend his national security strategy, arguing that a more restrained approach had helped the country avoid messy overseas entanglements.“The question is not whether America leads in the world, but how,” Mr. Obama said in the address. “When we make rash decisions, reacting to the headlines instead of using our heads, when the first response to a challenge is to send in our military, then we risk getting drawn into unnecessary conflicts.”While this is the year he had hoped to say he had ended two American wars with the withdrawal of combat forces from Afghanistan, the emergence of the terrorist group called the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, has prompted him to send troops back to Iraq and to order warplanes to bomb enemy formations there and in Syria.Speaker John A. Boehner discusses his decision to ask Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to address Congress without consulting the White House, saying he is not “poking anyone in the eye.”But Mr. Obama noted that the total American military commitment overseas had shrunk sharply since he took office, with just 15,000 troops in Afghanistan and Iraq, down from 180,000 six years ago. The situation in neither country, however, is as clean or settled as the president had hoped, and he now faces the prospect of finishing his presidency two years from now with at least one of them still unresolved.Mr. Obama said his strategy represented a “smarter kind of American leadership” that would eventually degrade and destroy the Islamic State. Working with allies, the United States “is stopping ISIL’s advance” without “getting dragged into another ground war in the Middle East,” he said.AdvertisementBut he acknowledged that destroying the Islamic State would “take time,” and he called on Congress to pass legislation formally authorizing the use of force “to show the world that we are united in this mission.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His language drew complaints from Republicans that he was trying to minimize the severity of the challenge. While he vowed to “continue to hunt down terrorists,” he never used the words “Al Qaeda” and mentioned only in passing the recent attacks in Paris that galvanized world outrage.And his handling of Iran drew bipartisan criticism at a Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing on Wednesday. Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, the Republican chairman, objected to administration efforts to squelch legislation targeting Iran. “Saying, ‘No, we really don’t want you to play a role, we want you to just trust us,’ is totally unacceptable from my standpoint,” he said.The committee’s ranking Democrat, Senator Bob Menendez of New Jersey, who reportedly clashed with Mr. Obama over Iran during a private party retreat last week, was even harsher. “The more I hear from the administration and its quotes, the more it sounds like talking points that come straight out of Tehran,” he said.In his address Tuesday night, Mr. Obama repeated his vow to veto legislation threatening new sanctions against Iran if negotiations over its nuclear program did not succeed. Such legislation, Mr. Obama said, “will all but guarantee that diplomacy fails” and perhaps force an armed conflict. “The American people expect us to only go to war as a last resort, and I intend to stay true to that wisdom,” he added.The president used the speech to mock those questioning his toughness and made Russia his case in point. A year ago, during the height of the crisis in Ukraine, Mr. Obama said some had suggested that President Vladimir V. Putin was demonstrating strength while America was on the defense.“Well, today it is America that stands strong and united with our allies, while Russia is isolated, with its economy in tatters,” he said. “That’s how America leads — not with bluster, but with persistent, steady resolve.”What he did not mention was that Russia still controls Crimea, the peninsula it annexed from Ukraine, and still supports pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine despite a cease-fire. Russia’s economy has indeed taken a huge hit, but so far, Mr. Putin has not backed down.Indeed, the Ukrainian president, Petro O. Poroshenko, decided to leave early from the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday to rush home after saying more Russian troops had crossed the border.Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.
 A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Boehner Invites Another Response to State of Union, From Israel’s Premier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.