By MAÏA de la BAUME and DAN BILEFSKYJAN. 21, 2015
Manuel Valls, the French prime minister, announced new investment in the French intelligence services in the wake of the attack on Charlie Hebdo.PARIS —  The French government promised a sweeping legislative response on Wednesday to this month’s terrorist attacks, setting out proposals to monitor potential threats more closely and wading deeper into an emerging debate over balancing security and civil liberties.The moves would reinforce a set of existing laws already considered to be among the strictest in Europe.Prime Minister Manuel Valls announced “exceptional measures,” including plans to spend an additional 425 million euros, or more than $490 million, to create over 2,500 new jobs to buttress the fight against terrorism and monitor nearly 3,000 people the police consider surveillance targets. A bill aimed at updating the legal framework for intelligence and surveillance operations will be introduced in Parliament in March, he said.Among other proposals, Mr. Valls said his government would create a website intended to combat “jihadist indoctrination” as well as expand the number of separate quarters for radical inmates and provide more Muslim chaplains in French prisons.AdvertisementHe also said he would create a database listing the names of those who have been convicted of terrorism charges or who were members of “a terrorist fighting group.” The existence of such a file would force them to “declare any change of address or any trip abroad,” Mr. Valls said.AdvertisementHe said that his government would examine a proposal backed by the opposition Union for a Popular Movement that would bring back France’s “national indignity” law, creating a felony offense that could strip civic and political rights from those who commit terrorist acts.Mr. Valls made his announcements at a news conference after France formally charged and detained four men accused of providing logistical support to Amedy Coulibaly, one of the three suspects in the three-day onslaught in which 17 people were killed in and around Paris.And highlighting the difficulties the authorities face as they confront the terrorist threat, Le Canard Enchaîné, a French weekly, reported that just eight days before the attacks began, the police had allowed Mr. Coulibaly to leave without serious questioning after a routine traffic stop.In the wake of what some are calling “France’s 9/11,” the government is under pressure to prevent further attacks, with growing concern that the terrorist threat lurks within the country. All three of the suspects in this month’s attacks were Islamic militants from France. At the same time, the secular republic is protective of its freedoms, as was clear in the public response to the attack against the newspaper Charlie Hebdo, a target because it published cartoons of Muhammed that Islamic extremists saw as blasphemous.French antiterrorism laws were recently reinforced, with Parliament creating a new law last year outlining penalties for actions of a terrorist nature by individuals. It also made it easier to block people believed to be Islamist extremists from leaving France, and it authorized the Interior Ministry to void or confiscate the passports of people considered to be potential threats.The “national indignity” law, which Mr. Valls said should be examined, was established in 1944, to be used against French citizens who had collaborated with the Nazis. It was discontinued in 1951. According to several news reports, the law affected about 50,000 people, depriving them of their rights to vote, be elected or carry a weapon.The French authorities have also moved vigorously to use a law passed in November that reins in speech supporting terrorism. Up to 100 people are under investigation for making or posting comments that support or try to justify terrorism, prosecutors say, including a driver who drunkenly hit a car, injuring the other driver, and went on to praise the acts of the killers when the police detained him. He was sentenced to four years in prison.AdvertisementXavier Nogueras, a criminal lawyer who specializes in jihadist networks, warned that Wednesday’s measures could lead to a French version of America’s Patriot Act, allowing surveillance of its citizens without sufficient checks and balances.“If you try and impose a Patriot Act in France it would be a symptom that the society is sick, that the justice system, the family and the education system are not working,” he said. “Radical Islamists are making us fall into the trap of creating laws under the pretext of fighting terrorism that will, in fact, nullify our personal freedoms.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Police officials confirmed a report Wednesday in the newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné that Mr. Coulibaly had been stopped by officers while driving a rental car with his girlfriend, Hayat Boumeddiene, who the authorities suspect has since fled to Syria.It reported that there were instructions in Mr. Coulibaly’s police file indicating that he was “dangerous and belonged to an Islamist movement” and should be questioned thoroughly. “Get information without attracting attention,” the police report said.The newspaper also reported that when the officers informed the counterterrorism authorities that they had stopped Mr. Coulibaly, they received no response.Christophe Crepin, spokesman for the UNSA police union, said that the police officers had acted according to procedure.“At that moment, there was nothing to indicate that Mr. Coulibaly would go on to commit such barbaric acts, including killing a policewoman and killing four people at the kosher supermarket,” he said. “The police did their work. We didn’t have anything else on them. It is easy to criticize with the benefit of hindsight.”At a news conference, François Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said that four men, ages 22 to 28, accused of assisting Mr. Coulibaly were being formally investigated on charges of a “terrorist conspiracy to commit crimes against people.” One of them will face an additional charge of carrying weapons “in relation with an initiative to carry out terrorist acts.” The full names of the men, the first to be charged in the attacks, were not released.Mr. Molins described how three of the four suspects had bought equipment for Mr. Coulibaly, 32, who the authorities said fatally shot a police officer in a suburb south of Paris before taking several people hostage the next day at a kosher supermarket in Paris, killing four of them.Mr. Coulibaly was later killed by the police as they stormed the supermarket.Mr. Molins said that three men he identified as “Willy P., Christophe R. and Tonino G.” went to buy tactical body armor, knives, Tasers and tear gases for Mr. Coulibaly last year.Advertisement“We think that there is a group of people who agreed to help within the context of an agreement, and all of that was useful to undertake a terrorist act,” Mr. Molins said.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: France Vows Forceful Measures Against Terrorism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.