By ISABEL KERSHNER and IRIT PAZNER GARSHOWITZJAN. 21, 2015
Hamas and Israeli government spokesmen reacted to the attack in which a Palestinian man stabbed up to a dozen Israelis on a bus in Tel Aviv. Tensions between the two sides are high.JERUSALEM —  A Palestinian man stabbed and wounded up to a dozen Israelis on Wednesday as he rampaged through a bus in central Tel Aviv during the morning rush, the police said. He then fled on foot but was shot and wounded by security forces.At least three of the victims were reportedly hospitalized in serious condition. The assailant, a man in his early 20s from the West Bank city of Tulkarm, was arrested, the police said.The episode broke a period of relative calm that followed a spate of attacks against Israelis in October and November in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and the West Bank that were carried out by Palestinians armed with knives, cleavers and guns, or using vehicles as weapons.Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel sought to place the violence in a wider political context, and to affix blame on the Palestinian leadership. He said in a statement that the stabbing attack was “the direct result of the poisonous incitement being disseminated by the Palestinian Authority against the Jews and their state.”Advertisement“This same terrorism is trying to attack us in Paris, Brussels and everywhere,” he continued.The assailant, identified by the police as Hamza Muhammad Hassan Matrouk, 23, boarded a bus in Tel Aviv about 7:30 a.m. and traveled two stops as more passengers boarded. He first attacked the driver, who resisted, said Yehuda Dahan, the district police chief. Mr. Matrouk then stabbed a number of passengers before they managed to open the doors of the bus and escape, Chief Dahan said.AdvertisementThe assailant then got off the bus and continued attacking people in the street. Video footage from a security camera showed him stabbing one woman in the upper back as she fled.As the man ran off, armed personnel from Israel’s prison service who happened to be in the area chased him and shot him. A member of the prison service team told reporters that they were on a routine trip to the courts when they noticed the bus in front of them zigzagging and then stopping at a green traffic light. They realized that something was happening, he said, as passengers began fleeing the bus, screaming.“First we fired in the air, but he didn’t stop,” the head of the prison security team, who was not identified, told the Israeli news media. “Then we shot him in the legs,” he said, adding that the man did not say anything.Images from the scene showed the suspect lying face down in the mud, his hands handcuffed behind him, the lower left part of his jeans soaked with blood.The police said Mr. Matrouk lived in a refugee camp in Tulkarm and had entered Israel illegally on Wednesday morning to carry out the attack.A passenger who was slightly wounded in the attack, Liel Suissa, 14, said he was on his way to school “when suddenly the terrorist showed up and started stabbing people.”“We all moved toward the back,” he told news outlets. “The driver pressed the brakes as the terrorist was heading close to us.”Advertisement“I elbowed the window, and it broke so we could get out,” he said. “When we got out, he chased us with the knife in his hand. I ran and hid behind cars and then security personnel ran after him.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Israel has been struggling to prevent attacks that security officials say are carried out by individuals rather than orchestrated by organizations.The police said that during an interrogation, Mr. Matrouk said he had been motivated by the recent fighting in Gaza, tensions over a contested holy site in Jerusalem and radical Islamic broadcasts that spoke of “reaching paradise.”“He said he decided to achieve that by carrying out an attack,” a police spokesman said.Maan, an independent Palestinian news site, quoted a friend of Mr. Matrouk’s as saying he did not belong to any political or armed faction and had been acting normally the night before the attack.“Last night Hamza and I hung out with friends in the camp until 11 p.m. and we had fun,” the friend, who was not identified, told Maan. “He was laughing and kidding.”The attack came amid a charged political atmosphere in Israel, with elections scheduled for March 17 and with Israeli-Palestinian relations in a downward spiral since the breakdown of American-brokered peace talks last spring.Israel condemned the formation of a new Palestinian Authority government supported by the more moderate West Bank leadership, dominated by President Mahmoud Abbas’s Fatah movement, and by the militant group Hamas, which controls Gaza.The subsequent abductions and killings of Israeli and Palestinian teenagers were followed by 50 days of fighting in Gaza that killed nearly 2,200 people in Gaza and more than 70 on the Israeli side.Diplomatic tensions have escalated in recent weeks as the Palestinian leadership moved to join the International Criminal Court in an effort to pursue war crimes cases against Israel. Israel responded this month by withholding more than $100 million in tax revenue it collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. As a result, the authority has been unable to pay full wages to its 150,000 employees.AdvertisementMr. Netanyahu on Wednesday said that Hamas, Mr. Abbas’s “partners in a unity government, hastened to commend this attack.” Referring to Mr. Abbas by his popular name, Mr. Netanyahu added, “Abu Mazen is responsible for both the incitement and the dangerous move at the I.C.C. in The Hague.”In a statement after Wednesday’s attack, Naftali Bennett, a right-wing minister in the Israeli cabinet, said of Mr. Abbas, “The person responsible for the terrorist attack in Tel Aviv this morning is the same man we saw marching in the company of world leaders in Paris just last week” after terrorist attacks there.Mr. Bennett called on Israel to stop the flow of funds to Mr. Abbas, whom he described as a “terrorist.”A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Stabbing on Tel Aviv Bus Breaks a Fragile Calm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.