
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 22, 2015
Dozens of protesters staged a show of defiance against the authorities in downtown Cairo on Thursday, waving flares and chanting against military rule ahead of the fourth anniversary of the Egyptian revolution.Images of the demonstration, and subsequent clashes between protesters and the police, that were posted on social networks showed a banner stretched across Talaat Harb Square reading: “The future is reserved for our ideas. The barriers of fear do not intimidate us.”
@AbdelAzizH @nohabrahim الآن من ميدان طلعت حرب pic.twitter.com/vUrJ26UYan 
pic.twitter.com/WZAQPIgqdF 
            دى صورة من طلعت حرب قبل ما يضرب رصاص pic.twitter.com/6S8aquoz0B Sixteen people were arrested, a police spokesman told Aswat Masriya, a local news site supported by the Thomson Reuters Foundation, before the security forces took control of the square. Video posted on Facebook showed protesters chanting, “The people want to topple the regime,” and hurling fireworks at officers who fired tear gas.The Ahrar Movement, a youth group affiliated with a jailed, ultraconservative Islamist preacher, Hazem Salah Abu Ismail, took responsibility for the demonstration. An update headlined, “Ahrar Movement Members Ignited a Revolution in Downtown” was posted on its popular Facebook page before the rally, the independent Cairene news site Mada Masr reported.AdvertisementThe group also shared photographs and video of the protest and clashes on social networks, “to prove,” it said, “that there is still a revolution.”
            ملاحظة : الميدان بهذا الشكل الآن مش عشان الناس جريت من الداخلية، لكن عشان الناس جريت على الداخلية :)
#شعلة_الثورة pic.twitter.com/SCl7J18k5e The police, however, attributed the protest to the banned Muslim Brotherhood and the April 6 Youth Movement, whose co-founder was jailed more than a year ago for violating a new law banning unsanctioned street protests.As the journalist Ester Meerman noted, the April 6 activists, who played a central role in mobilizing support for the uprising that began on Jan. 25, 2011, urged Egyptians to continue to “resist” in a message shared with their 866,000 Twitter followers on Thursday afternoon.
            'Resist. Don't be depressed. Don't be bored. Don't stop.' tweets @shabab6april https://t.co/2TtsrNPjDe We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »