By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 22, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — South Korea’s Supreme Court on Thursday upheld a nine-year prison sentence for a former lawmaker who was convicted of encouraging followers to take up arms to overthrow the government in the event of war with North Korea.Lee Seok-ki, whose small, leftist United Progressive Party was disbanded by a court last month, was arrested in 2013 on charges including treason. It was the first time such a charge had been brought against a South Korean legislator since the country emerged from military dictatorship decades ago.Prosecutors said that Mr. Lee had gathered 130 followers in secret to discuss an armed uprising in support of Pyongyang should war break out and that one of his deputies had suggested sabotaging the South’s infrastructure. Mr. Lee’s lawyers accused prosecutors of taking the comments out of context and said the talk of sabotage was meant in jest.Last February, a court sentenced Mr. Lee to 12 years in prison, but an appeals court in August reduced the sentence to nine years and overturned a conviction on one charge. Six followers of Mr. Lee who had been convicted also saw their sentences reduced.AdvertisementOn Thursday, the Supreme Court upheld the appeals court’s ruling. “This court acknowledges that the accused incited a rebellion with an aim of disrupting the laws of the country,” Chief Justice Yang Sung-tae said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The case has drawn intense public attention in South Korea, highlighting the contentious issue of the limits the country places on freedom of expression where North Korea is concerned. Under the Cold War-era National Security Law, the government blocks access to North Korean websites, and people have been arrested in recent years for reposting North Korean propaganda material on Twitter.AdvertisementThere was no immediate comment on Thursday’s ruling from the office of South Korea’s conservative president, Park Geun-hye, but her party hailed the court’s decision, saying that “those who undermine free democracy and the nation’s foundation should not be allowed to exist in South Korea.” Kim Chil-joon, an attorney for Mr. Lee, called the ruling “a death certificate” for democracy.Rival protesters rallied outside the Supreme Court during the hearing, with leftists chanting slogans calling for Mr. Lee’s release and conservatives enacting a performance in which Mr. Lee was sentenced to death. Police officers were dispatched to prevent the two groups from clashing.Mr. Lee’s United Progressive Party was disbanded in December by order of the Constitutional Court, which also stripped Mr. Lee and the party’s four other lawmakers of their seats in Parliament.A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: Treason Sentence Upheld.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.