By MARTIN FACKLERJAN. 22, 2015
TOKYO —  Japanese officials said Thursday that they were trying every possible avenue to reach the Islamic State militants who have threatened to kill two Japanese hostages but had so far failed to make contact, with time running out on a deadline to pay for the men’s lives.The Japanese government has confirmed that the two men seen in a video released Tuesday, kneeling in orange jumpsuits as a masked, knife-wielding militant stands between them, are Kenji Goto, a journalist, and Haruna Yukawa, who has called himself a military contractor. In the video, the militant threatened to kill the men unless the Islamic State received $200 million within 72 hours, a deadline that would arrive Friday if the countdown began when the video was made public.The crisis has tested the resolve of Japan’s hard-charging prime minister, Shinzo Abe, who has vowed to give long-passive Japan a more active role in global affairs. When the video surfaced, Mr. Abe was in the Middle East, where he had pledged $200 million in nonlethal aid to countries battling the Islamic State, which controls territory in Iraq and Syria.In the video, the militant demanded a ransom equivalent to the aid package, accusing Japan of offering the money “to kill our women and children, to destroy the homes of Muslims.” Mr. Abe, who called an emergency cabinet meeting on Wednesday night after rushing back to Tokyo, ordered his ministers to use whatever diplomatic channels they could to win the captives’ release.Advertisement“This is a race against time, but the government will do everything it can,” Mr. Abe told reporters. But he said Japan would not back down on its pledge of nonlethal aid.AdvertisementOn Thursday, the top government spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, said Japan had yet to confirm whether the two men were still alive. He said Japan was trying to tell the militants that their demands were based on a “misunderstanding,” since the promised aid money would be used to help refugees and for other humanitarian purposes, not to support military action.Japan is trying to convey this “to the nations involved as well as leaders of tribal and religious groups, using every means that we can,” Mr. Suga told reporters. “We are sending the message that contrary to what the criminals are saying, we are absolutely not trying to kill people in the Muslim world.”He also said Japan had dispatched Yasuhide Nakayama, the No. 2 official at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to Jordan’s capital, Amman, to lead Japan’s regional response to the crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We are in a tough spot, but we are doing our very utmost to win the quick release of the hostages,” he said.In news conferences since the video was released, Mr. Suga has dodged questions about a ransom, leaving open the question of whether Japan is willing to pay for the two men’s safe return. Japan is known to have given in to such a demand at least once, when it paid $3 million in 1999 for the release of four mining experts held in Kyrgyzstan.But Mr. Suga did insist that Japan “will not give in to terror, and will contribute to the international community’s efforts to deal with terror.” Mr. Abe has also vowed not to be intimidated.New details in Japanese news reports suggested that the government knew that a hostage situation was developing even before the video’s release. According to several major news outlets, Mr. Goto’s wife was first contacted by the Islamic State in November in an email saying the militants were holding her husband.According to the reports, the emails did not demand a ransom until January, when she was asked to pay the equivalent of about $20 million. The reports said Mr. Goto’s wife had consulted with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs when her husband disappeared in October, and again after receiving the first ransom demand.The capture of Mr. Yukawa became public in August, when the Islamic State posted a video online. This has led to criticism that the government failed to act when it may have had a realistic chance of securing the men’s release.Advertisement“If the investigating authorities failed to build a channel to the kidnappers over the last five months, what can they do in three days?” said Kosuke Tsuneoka, a freelance journalist with experience in war zones who was himself held by the Taliban in Afghanistan. “I think the situation now is bleak.”A version of this article appears in print on January 23, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hostage Crisis Puts Leader of Japan to the Test.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.