By RAPHAEL MINDERJAN. 23, 2015
MADRID — The former treasurer at the heart of a slush-fund scandal that has undermined Spain’s governing Popular Party accused Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy on Friday of knowing “from the beginning” about the party’s illegal payments.Luis Bárcenas, the former party treasurer, made the claim against Mr. Rajoy a day after posting bail and leaving a jail near Madrid, where he had been awaiting trial on charges including tax fraud and bribery. His accusation, made to reporters outside Spain’s national court, came as the party gathered for a convention to prepare for a critical election year.Mr. Bárcenas left prison on Thursday afternoon after a judge allowed him to post bail of 200,000 euros, almost $225,000, saying he no longer presented a flight risk pending his trial. He had been held since June 2013, after the Swiss authorities revealed that he had amassed millions of euros in Swiss banks and other offshore accounts. He was accused of running a slush fund to channel corporate kickbacks to senior party officials.In February 2013, shortly after the publication of ledgers prosecutors say were used by Mr. Bárcenas and other former treasurers to manage the parallel payments over two decades, Mr. Rajoy made a televised address to denounce what he called “apocryphal” documents. In that address, Mr. Rajoy did not directly condemn Mr. Bárcenas, but insisted that there was no connection between the discovery of money hidden by Mr. Bárcenas in Switzerland and the Popular Party’s own funds.AdvertisementMr. Rajoy separately sent Mr. Bárcenas text messages, published by the newspaper El Mundo, urging him to “be strong” in the face of the corruption allegations.AdvertisementHowever, after Mr. Bárcenas was jailed and stopped denying the existence of a slush fund, the relationship between him and his party soured. Since then, it has essentially turned into the prime minister’s word against the former party treasurer’s.Asked on Friday to respond to Mr. Bárcenas’s comments, Carlos Floriano, a senior official from the Popular Party, told Spanish national radio, “This gentleman deceived us.”Mr. Rajoy did not respond on Friday to Mr. Bárcenas’ latest accusation. A spokeswoman for the government said no member of the government had been charged in the case and it was up to the judiciary to rule on the matter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Part of the problem for the Popular Party is that it has found itself at the confluence of separate corruption investigations, including one into political kickbacks that forced Mr. Bárcenas to resign as treasurer in 2009.Earlier this month, the prosecutor handling that case presented formal charges against 41 suspects, led by Mr. Bárcenas, for crimes including tax fraud, bribery and falsification of documents. The prosecutor is seeking a sentence of 42 ½ years in prison for Mr. Bárcenas and shorter prison sentences for two other former treasurers of the Popular Party.Mr. Rajoy and the most-senior members of his administration have yet to be threatened directly by the corruption allegations. In November, however, Ana Mato was forced to resign as Spain’s health minister after being accused by a judge of having benefited financially from the illegal business dealings of her husband at the time while he was mayor of Pozuelo, a suburb of Madrid.On Friday, Mr. Bárcenas also told reporters that the ledgers he says were used to run the party slush fund were accurate. In this parallel bookkeeping, he said, “there isn’t a single entry that doesn’t correspond to a real amount.”The corruption scandal centering on Mr. Bárcenas has spotlighted the opaque financing not only of the Popular Party, but also that of Spain’s other leading parties, which have been mired in major fraud cases of their own. The main opposition Socialist Party, which governs Andalusia, Spain’s largest region, is expected to call early elections even as Socialist politicians are suspected of involvement in a scheme that siphoned off public money set aside for unemployment programs.In Catalonia, the region’s governing Convergence party is also struggling to distance itself from the party’s founder, Jordi Pujol, who is set to go on trial alongside other members of his family. Mr. Pujol admitted in July that he had committed tax fraud. The Pujol affair comes ahead of a critical election in September in Catalonia that secessionist politicians are hoping will accelerate the region’s drive toward independence, despite strong opposition from Madrid.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Spain: New Accusation Rekindles Slush-Fund Scandal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.