By SUZANNE DALEY and DIMITRIS BOUNIASJAN. 23, 2015
GLYFADA, Greece —  Katerina Georgiou, 64, who used to own a private school, says that she will probably act out of fear when she decides who to vote for in Sunday’s general election.Fear that her pension, already cut, will be cut some more. Fear that Greek banks will collapse. Fear that if she makes the wrong choice, Greece will be thrown out of the European Union.“Everyone is scared,” she said recently. “All of our friends are taking their money out of the bank, keeping it I don’t know where. We don’t have any left, so we aren’t doing that.”After five years in which the country’s economy has shrunk by 25 percent and the number of jobless has risen far beyond what its creditors ever predicted, many Greeks, like Mrs. Georgiou, say they are struggling to keep fear at bay as they go to the polls for the third national election in three years.AdvertisementIt is not hard to see why. The past week has brought news on highly technical issues many do not understand — from Greece’s ability to benefit from the European Central Bank’s new easy-money policy to the machinery behind bank liquidity.AdvertisementAnd many are contemplating voting for the leftist firebrand, Alexis Tsipras, 40, who is promising something no other Greek leader has managed yet: renegotiating the grip of Greece’s creditors on the government’s policies.He is untested, a leap into the unknown, and there is no guarantee that he would be able to deliver on his promises or keep from making a bad situation worse.But it is a measure of how beaten down Greece is that voters, polls say, may be on the verge of making just that bet despite a threatening drumbeat from European officials saying that Greece must abide by the creditor-friendly austerity policies laid down by Germany.For many, the past few weeks have been brutal, not only because of the danger of a rift between Greece and its creditors at a time when it is not yet ready to stand alone financially, but also because of the incumbent party’s campaign, which has tried to play on a wide array of fears, including suggesting that Mr. Tsipras, an atheist, would ban religious icons in schools and public spaces.Newspapers and television stations, under the control of Greece’s oligarchs, have fed Greeks a daily diet of frightening stories about what would happen should Mr. Tsipras prevail. His victory would mark the first time that a eurozone country would be led by a non-centrist government, and columnists warn on a regular basis that his ideas and inexperience could have dire consequences for Greece.Each day, the newspapers deliver a tally of the billions of euros that left Greek banks in recent weeks. “Mammoth Outflow” read one headline on Wednesday.Prime Minister Antonis Samaras’s latest television commercial resembles a wartime newsreel, predicting a Tsipras victory would bring mobs to the streets by April, bank closings and medicine shortages by May. On Thursday, Sofia Voultepsi,  a candidate for Mr. Samaras’s center-right New Democracy Party, suggested on a morning talk show that Greeks should stock up on toilet paper.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some Greeks are furious about New Democracy’s campaign strategy, saying it has done the country’s image irreparable damage by suggesting that once more Greece is standing on the edge of a precipice.Advertisement“There is no democracy under such pressures,” said Timos Melissaris, a hedge fund manager. “How can you think with all this going on?”It is a strategy that worked for Mr. Samaras in 2012, experts say. And it has clearly helped Mr. Samaras win a slice of the voting population. In an upscale hotel here recently, men in tailored suits and women in fur coats listened to a New Democracy candidate. The country’s fate was in the balance, the candidate said, and the choice they made would determine whether Greece stayed in the European Union or was taken over by “communists.”Mrs. Georgiou, who was there, said she did not like Mr. Samaras and believed that he had been a poor leader, but she said she felt safer voting for him. “Syriza is the unknown,” she said, referring to Mr. Tsipras’s party. “You really don’t know what they will do.”But many Greeks have declared themselves fed up with fear. They say they are well aware how high the stakes may be, and that Greece is still in need of help from the European Union and its creditors, but they have been won over by Mr. Tsipras’s message of hope and dignity.“The government’s strategy appears to have failed completely this time,” said Elias Nikolakopoulos, a pollster and professor of political science at the University of Athens. “Fear does not work unless you begin with a positive message and then use fear in the last few days. They just did fear. Fear the whole time.”Polls have consistently shown Syriza leading New Democracy, although the differences have fallen within the polls’ margins of sampling error.At this final campaign rally on Thursday, Mr. Tsipras accused Mr. Samaras of using his position to spread fear and ultimately harm the country. But he told the crowd of thousands who had gathered in an Athens square that Mr. Samaras’s last hope, fear, was “done for.”Nonetheless, some Greeks are turning away from both of the leading parties, saying that they would feel safer if the winning party was forced to form a coalition.In his bike shop recently, Lefteris Frangos, 37, said he was still undecided but was inclined to vote for another party in hopes it would become part of the governing coalition. Fear, he said, was everywhere in Greece today and one of the reasons he was drinking tea, not coffee, on a recent morning. “In this situation,” he said, “you need to take care of your nerves.”A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: After an Anxiety-Filled Campaign, Greek Voters Consider a Turn to the Left.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.