By THOMAS FULLERJAN. 23, 2015
BANGKOK —  After months of claiming to be an honest broker in this deeply divided country, Thailand’s military junta swung decisively to the side of the conservative Bangkok establishment on Friday, imposing a five-year ban from politics on a former prime minister who is detested by the elites but loved in the provinces.The junta also announced that the former prime minister, Yingluck Shinawatra, who was overthrown by the military in May, would be indicted on a charge of criminal negligence, which could lead to a 10-year prison sentence.The decision to aggressively pursue Ms. Yingluck risks prolonging what has already been a lost decade of street protests, two military coups and bloodshed on the streets of Bangkok. It also revives a power struggle that has reduced Thai economic growth to near zero.Bitter recriminations and cynicism about the military’s intentions that had been muted since the coup quickly resurfaced Friday after the junta’s legislative assembly voted 190 to 18 to impeach Ms. Yingluck. The impeachment carries a five-year ban from politics.AdvertisementThe impeachment process was more show trial than legal proceeding: All the members of the assembly were handpicked by the junta, and the military never explained how someone who is no longer in power could be impeached.AdvertisementFor the members of the Bangkok establishment who last year led the takeover of government buildings and called for a hiatus of democracy, Friday presented them with a moment of jubilation.Akanat Promphan, a leader of last year’s protests, hailed the “bravery” of the junta’s assembly and said the vote would “set the standard of morality of Thai politicians in the future.”But for Ms. Yingluck’s supporters, a political movement that has won every election since 2001, this was confirmation that the military was out to destroy their movement and side with the Bangkok establishment accustomed to calling the shots.“Even though you tried to transform yourselves like a wolf wearing a shirt to fool Little Red Riding Hood, in the end people will see that you are indeed a wolf,” Reungkrai Leekitwattana, a member of Ms. Yingluck’s party, said on a satellite television channel sympathetic to the movement.“We are fighting on a battlefield owned by dictators,” Mr. Reungkrai said. The members of the assembly who impeached Ms. Yingluck “are not the representatives of the people,” he said.The power struggle in Thailand has always been more complicated than rich versus poor or democrats versus autocrats.But by aggressively pursuing Ms. Yingluck, the military risks turning her into a martyr, said Verapat Pariyawong, a Harvard-trained lawyer who fled to London around the time of the coup, after his home was attacked.Advertisement“The reality is one person may be blocked from politics for a few years, but a million more will be ready to call her back in,” he said.Mr. Verapat said the junta was making the same mistake as when the military ousted Ms. Yingluck’s brother, Thaksin Shinawatra, in a 2006 coup. Mr. Thaksin, the founder of the political movement that revolutionized Thai politics by drawing its strength from provincial voters, was widely considered corrupt and autocratic while in power. But his removal transformed him into a symbol of democratic struggle.The Thai news media speculated Friday that the military’s intention in backing the moves against Ms. Yingluck was to force her to flee the country, and thus follow the path of her brother, who lives in Dubai and London. Critics say such a strategy only leaves behind a seething group of supporters looking for new leaders.“This is the same path as in 2006,” said Methaphan Phothitheerarot, a professor at Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, a Buddhist institute in Bangkok, who is a member of the so-called red shirt movement affiliated with Mr. Thaksin.“Today we have seen that the N.C.P.O. has no sincerity,” he said, referring to the junta by its initials, which stand for National Council for Peace and Order. The military, he said, “is reforming the country in favor of one particular group.”Ms. Yingluck, he added, may become another Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese democracy leader.After her impeachment, Ms. Yingluck posted a note on Facebook that had the ring of a rallying cry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I am saddened for the farmers and all the Thais who have lost opportunities and have to go back into a cycle of poverty, debt, deprivation and the loss of basic democratic rights,” she wrote.The junta instructed Ms. Yingluck to cancel a news conference after the impeachment vote, reminding her that martial law was still in place.Both the impeachment and the criminal case center on the expensive agricultural subsidy program she put in place for farmers, which paid millions of rural Thais twice the market price for their rice.AdvertisementEconomists considered the rice program wasteful, and the program infuriated members of the Bangkok establishment, who resented that their taxes were being transferred to farmers.The anger over the policy exemplified the difference in priorities between the urban establishment and Ms. Yingluck’s iconoclastic, rural-based political movement.Ms. Yingluck has defended the rice subsidy program as assistance for the poor.“Many governments have public policies to help farmers,” she said in testimony at the impeachment hearings. “It’s the government’s duty to look after them.”The point of the program, she said, was “reducing the gap between the rich and the poor, reducing social disparity.”The rice subsidies, which caused the government to borrow heavily, benefited the rural constituencies that form the core support of Ms. Yingluck’s party.Her party has won consecutive victories for more than a decade partly because of policies like universal health care, microloans and rice subsidies that targeted members of the electorate who had previously been neglected.Both the impeachment and the criminal charges against Ms. Yingluck have been spearheaded by Vicha Mahakhun, a member of the National Anti-Corruption Commission and a longtime foe of Ms. Yingluck’s movement.During the impeachment hearings, Mr. Vicha responded to the charge that there was no concrete evidence of Ms. Yingluck’s involvement in corruption, telling the former premier: “Your behavior signifies a strong suspicion of corruption.”AdvertisementMs. Yingluck, Mr. Vicha said, had refused to heed his warnings about the cost of the rice subsidy. “This has led to enormous damage to the country,” he said. “This has given rise to continual violence in the country.”Mr. Vicha is notorious among supporters of Ms. Yingluck for helping rewrite the Thai Constitution after the 2006 coup, saying at the time that elections were “evil.”In the end, the impeachment proceedings came to resemble what the military had vowed to avoid: a proxy battle between the elected politicians overthrown in the coup and the military that overthrew them.A version of this news analysis appears in print on January 24, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: In Targeting Ex-Premier, Thai Junta Takes a Risk.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.