By ALISON SMALEJAN. 24, 2015
DAVOS, Switzerland —  On opening night at the annual gathering of the moneyed here, Russia’s state-owned bank VTB put on a lavish party, with dancers in gorgeous versions of Russian traditional dress, Russian-style nouvelle cuisine and raucous music by, among others, the Balkan film director Emir Kusturica.Poorly attended, it nevertheless had a purpose: to underline that, despite war in Ukraine, Western sanctions, tumbling oil prices and the weak ruble, business in and with Russia should carry on.VTB’s president, Andrei L. Kostin, trying for a sunny note, said in his welcome, “No rain, no rainbow.”Even so, more storm clouds loom for the Kremlin.For Russia, the event at Davos, a gathering of thousands of business figures, politicians, academics and other influential people that ended Saturday, made clear how much the sanctions imposed over the war in Ukraine have damaged Moscow’s ties with Europe and the United States. Also evident was its pursuit of Asia as a key alternative.AdvertisementRussian businessmen said privately that their meetings this year in Davos were almost exclusively with Chinese, Indian and Middle East partners or potential investors. The Europeans and Americans so strikingly absent from Mr. Kostin’s opening-night party were barely on the agenda.AdvertisementOne of Russia’s richest men, Oleg V. Deripaska, painted a grim picture.Appearing on a government television channel, Russia 24, from Davos on Thursday, Mr. Deripaska said Russia was “somewhere between 1993 and 1995” in terms of complex, acute economic problems. With irony, he added, “There is only one positive point: It is clear that it will be bad,” and that rosy forecasts had been completely overtaken. Asked if he had told Russia’s leaders that, he said he was too busy working. But he added, “The worst is yet to come.”Russia entered Davos defiant. Arkady Dvorkovich, a deputy prime minister, identified Europe and the United States, not lower oil prices, as Russia’s biggest problem.“Right now, there is major volatility, but it’s not going to last for long,” Mr. Dvorkovich said. He added that Russia would use its reserves to stabilize its banking system and make up for lost revenue.“The economy will slide, but it’s not going to last forever, even with sanctions,” he said. “We will find a way to grow.”By Friday, Russians admitted their pain. “We are not benefiting from sanctions; we are losing,” Mr. Kostin said at a Russia session.Aleksei L. Kudrin, the former finance minister, who still maintains good ties to the Kremlin, went further. “The most important problem for the government is trust,” he said. “Without structural reforms, we won’t have trust, and won’t be able to get out of this mess.”Nonetheless, the most senior Russian official present, Igor I. Shuvalov, the first deputy prime minister, insisted that President Vladimir V. Putin “enjoys massive support.” Invoking history going back to Catherine the Great, he suggested that while he and the other Russians in Davos might welcome democracy, Russia is simply not ready for it. And, he stressed, Russians always rally to a leader perceived to be under outside pressure.AdvertisementGradually, the session descended into a classic Russian argument about history among those on the podium, and then with a well-known critical journalist, Yevgenia M. Albats. The Russian Internet exploded in scorn after Mr. Shuvalov acknowledged earning handsomely from Russia’s shift from communism to capitalism, which he admitted had brought millions of his compatriots to ruin.Attendees from China, which Mr. Putin has pursued as an alternative to the now damaged ties with the West, looked on in astonishment.“I was rather surprised that the Russians differed with each other so strongly,” said Wu Xinbo, dean of international studies at Fudan University, who was on the podium.He echoed the Russians in saying China’s business community is flocking to Russia. Trade is expected to increase to $100 billion this year from $90 billion in 2014, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Li Daokui of Tsinghua University in Beijing, sharing a podium with Kirill A. Dmitriev, who heads Russia’s direct investment fund, suggested that Russia was less than a coveted partner.“The Russian economy is not doing well,” he said, noting projections of a 5 percent contraction this year on top of existing damage. Russia may be speeding up talks with China, he added, but “Russia should have done projects with Europe, with Eastern Europe, with other parts of the world.”At a party hosted by another Russian bank, Sberbank, a few veterans of European-Russian business appeared. German Gref, the bank’s head, explicitly thanked friends for their support.But the dearth of new business was plain. While big German firms have not shut down operations in Russia, they are not making new investments.That trend holds across Western Europe, said Michael Rake, head of the Confederation of British Industry.AdvertisementJohn Smith of Bain & Company, one of the few Westerners at the VTB opening party, recalled the heady days of helping to design Russia’s rough and ready plunge into capitalism. One prime goal then, he said, was to make the shift irreversible.But the conflict in Ukraine has already undone much, despite the distaste of Western business and bankers for sanctions. “Business hopes that common sense will prevail,” Mr. Rake said, expressing a common sentiment.Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, who has said Mr. Putin is testing the West over Ukraine, reiterated that sanctions would remain as long as Russia and its friends fought on.Over the past two decades, Russians and Ukrainians joined other emerged powers as fixtures at Davos, paying the high fees of the World Economic Forum, 250,000 euros and upward, or about $280,000, and adopting the perks of being global players.Last week, the partying could not mask the depth of their enmity and the high stakes in the conflict at Europe’s eastern borders.President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine dramatized his country’s state by holding up high what he said was a piece of shell-pocked metal from a bus where 13 civilians died when artillery struck on Jan. 10.The International Monetary Fund pledged undetermined additional funds for bankrupt Ukraine. Its new young ministers assured Western supporters that they really would root out corruption after 25 years of weak post-Soviet governance.Russian businessmen complained privately that the West was encouraging Ukraine to go after Russia and Kremlin-backed rebels in Ukraine’s east. Western backers of Ukraine cast the conflict in epochal terms. It pits Mr. Putin’s 19th-century vision against the modern world, they said.“The future of Russia will be decided by the success or failure of Ukraine,” said Carl Bildt, the former Swedish foreign minister and prime minister.Advertisement“History will judge the West in 2015 as much, or more, by what it does for Ukraine as by what it does to Russia,” said Lawrence H. Summers, the former United States Treasury secretary, now at Harvard University.Jack Ewing contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Snubbed by U.S. and Europe, Kremlin Looks to Asia for New Business Partnerships.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.