
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 24, 2015
A woman was killed on Saturday in Cairo after the police fired shotgun pellets at a handful of socialist activists marching to Tahrir Square with flowers to commemorate the hundreds of demonstrators killed there during the revolution that began on Jan. 25, 2011, witnesses said.The protester, Shaimaa al-Sabbagh, was shot at close range and died a short time later, according to a statement from the organizers of the march reported by Aswat Masriya, a local news site supported by the Thomson Reuters foundation.News photographs taken before the march was attacked showed the protesters holding a wreath of flowers and a banner that read: “The fourth anniversary of the martyrs who died during the January 25 revolution.”Egyptian activists shared graphic images of Ms. Sabbagh’s last moments on social networks, including local news photographs and witness video posted on YouTube by the state-owned Middle East News Agency.Photographs and video recorded before the police moved in seemed to show the protesters, including Ms. Sabbagh, standing peacefully outside the Air France-KLM office in Talaat Harb Square, near Tahrir. As officers charged at the protesters, guns drawn, shots rang out and Ms. Sabbagh fell to the pavement.
            Shaimaa El Sabagh, first protester killed hours before #Jan25 4th anniversary. #Egypt pic.twitter.com/9xX4A3mUh3 via @WafaaSalem 
#Egypt's regime was threatened by a woman holding flowers. RIP Shaimaa El-Sabag. pic.twitter.com/dSTo0rCn0e 
            Photo of police attacking a protest of about 20 protesters killing one woman Shimaa Sabagh #Jan25 #Egypt pic.twitter.com/7iWjtOpL3T 
            This is #ShaimaaSabagh .political activist. They killed her bec. They fear freedom. #Sisi #Moi #Egypt
pic.twitter.com/46murmpeMX 
            الشهيدة #شيماء_الصباغ بعد ضربها بالخرطوش من كلاب الداخلية 
#القصاص_قادم
#يسقط_يسقط_سيسي_مبارك pic.twitter.com/OIdJwW2OGb AdvertisementThe Cairene journalist who blogs as Zeinobia translated a firsthand account of the shooting posted on Facebook late Saturday by Osama Hamamm, a freelance photographer whose images of Ms. Sabbagh — crumpled on the pavement, alongside flowers, as the police charged in and protesters fled — stunned Egyptians.
            (3) When Osama Hamam (who tells this story) turns around, he sees Shaima on ground hit w/ birdshot in the face #egypt pic.twitter.com/ooalLsu8i7 According to Mr. Hamamm, the activists — from a party that had supported both the original uprising in 2011 and the protests that forced the Islamist President Mohammed Morsi from power in 2013 — were merely chanting the slogan “Bread, Freedom and Social Justice,” when the police arrived in the square.Advertisement“Suddenly the security forces fired several tear gas grenades and we were all amazed,” the photographer wrote. “I did not run. I found Shaimaa al-Sabbagh walking beside me, along with couple of protesters who did not run away. Suddenly we found birdshots being fired. I started running and taking photos quickly. When the birdshots stopped, I looked back and I saw Shaimaa al-Sabbagh falling down. I took a couple of photos of her. Then I saw her colleagues trying to make her stand and she did not come up. I saw the police coming and I had to run.”A spokesman for the Health Ministry, Hossam Abdel Ghaffar, confirmed the young woman’s death to Mada Masr, an independent news site, but suggested that Ms. Sabbagh had been killed during “clashes” between protesters and security forces.The killing of an unarmed woman, last seen peacefully holding a sign on a sidewalk in downtown Cairo, outraged activists and reminded some of the visceral images showing the fatal shooting of a young Iranian protester, Neda Agha-Soltan, in 2009.
            She was killed today by the Egyptian police during a peaceful march in downtown Cairo. Shaimaa el-Sabbagh. pic.twitter.com/OgTfCpY1ce #ACAB 
            This just concludes how far we've become after four years of the revolution. pic.twitter.com/6nAUbSLfyc The interior ministry denied that the police had shot Ms. Sabbagh, initially in a statement reported by Ahram Online, a state-owned news site, and warned Egyptians not to attend unsanctioned rallies that “terrorist groups” could infiltrate. A ministry spokesman, Hany Abdel Latif, insisted during a television interview late Saturday that the police had not fired any shots and the authorities had video of protesters carrying rifles.Those denials angered many opposition activists, who reminded their followers on social medianetworks that the initial focus of the 2011 protests, timed to coincide with the annual Police Day holiday on Jan. 25, was the impunity of the security forces.
            Now the police with the support of puppet media is trying to steer the public that "Ikhwan" or "some intruder" killed Shimaa not the police!        
            Murderers! pic.twitter.com/8j1PpBLqZU 
            The police shoot and kill people in broad daylight, are photographed doing it, then release statements claiming it was "infiltrators" #egypt 
            shoot the protestor, arrest the witnesses, blame the Brotherhood, unleash the media, promote the killer, shoot the protestor, repeat. #egypt We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »