By ALAN COWELLJAN. 24, 2015
LONDON —  It has consumed more than eight years of maneuvering, obstruction and a widow’s dogged legal campaign, fought often on a shoestring. But finally, on Tuesday, a public inquiry is set to begin its quest for an answer to the question that has driven the whole process: Why did Alexander V. Litvinenko have to die?On Nov. 1, 2006, Mr. Litvinenko, a former officer of the Soviet K.G.B. in self-exile in London and a vocal critic of President Vladimir V. Putin, sipped tea from a poisoned pot, took sick and died 22 days later. Only after his death did British scientists confirm that the poison was Polonium 210, a rare isotope manufactured mostly in Russia.From his deathbed, Mr. Litvinenko accused Mr. Putin of responsibility for ordering his murder, a charge the Kremlin leader has always denied. But when Robert Owen, an eminent British judge, opens the inquiry on Tuesday, it will be to start months of hearings that will paint a detailed canvas of Mr. Litvinenko’s life and death, and try to determine where responsibility lies among a flamboyant cast of potential players ranging from Russian state agencies to British spies to Spanish mobsters.For what was almost a perfect crime, the inquiry will offer an imperfect mirror. Reflecting the insistence of British officials that disclosure of some testimony would harm national security, many issues will be addressed in secret, and even parts of the judge’s final report will not publicly allude to some findings.AdvertisementBut for Mr. Litvinenko’s survivors, notably his widow, Marina, 52, a former ballroom dancer and aerobics instructor, and his son, Anatoli, 20, a student of politics, the inquiry will very likely be a watershed. Perhaps, Ms. Litvinenko said in one of a series of interviews, the inquiry will yield “a kind of finishing of what I have been doing for the last eight years.”Advertisement“I will have the official verdict,” she said. In a way, the surprising element is that it has got this far.Initially, the death of Mr. Litvinenko drew British protests. Diplomats were expelled from London and Moscow in tit-for-tat gestures reminiscent of the Cold War. Britain froze formal cooperation with Russian intelligence. But then, in 2010, the government here changed, and like President Obama, a new British prime minister, David Cameron, sought better relations with Mr. Putin.“We had the Litvinenko affair; we imposed the sanctions,” said Anthony Brenton, Britain’s ambassador to Moscow from 2004 to 2008. “The Russians didn’t crumble. Time rolled on, and we have serious other interests in Russia.”In British government circles, he said in an interview, “as the Litvinenko affair began to fade into history, so the argument for getting past the Litvinenko affair got stronger and stronger.”For its part, Moscow resisted the effort to illuminate a death that some British diplomats blame squarely on the Kremlin. The inquiry will also consider whether the poisoning stemmed from other parts of Mr. Litvinenko’s shadowy life after his flight from Russia, when he worked variously for the former oligarch Boris A. Berezovsky, Britain’s MI6 intelligence agency and Spanish investigators seeking to expose organized crime.Only days before the start of the inquiry, moreover, an audiotape unearthed by The Daily Telegraph newspaper was said to have been recorded by Mr. Litvinenko exactly one year before his death and purported to trace direct links between Mr. Putin and a fugitive Ukrainian crime boss suspected of selling arms to Al Qaeda.Citing constitutional constraints, Russia has refused to extradite one of its citizens, Andrei K. Lugovoi, to be questioned in Britain about murder charges. Mr. Lugovoi and a second Russian citizen, Dmitri V. Kovtun, were both present in the Pine Bar at the Millennium Hotel in central London’s Grosvenor Square when Mr. Litvinenko was poisoned, but both men have sought to flip the narrative, accusing him of trying to poison them.Russian prosecutors have sought to delay the inquiry, lodging 1,300 pages of Russian-language documents to bolster their own case concerning Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun. Finally, Moscow’s prosecutors, once accorded the status of “core participants” with special privileges at the inquiry, withdrew as the Kremlin dismissed Mr. Owen’s scrutiny as a sham because of its provisions for secret hearings.AdvertisementFor Ms. Litvinenko, who endured numerous ups and downs over the years, 2013 was “the most difficult year.”Mr. Berezovsky, once her main financial backer, had died in still ambiguous circumstances. Citing national security and other concerns, two senior British cabinet ministers, Foreign Secretary William Hague and Home Secretary Theresa May, had gone to significant lengths to restrict — or even block — public scrutiny of Mr. Litvinenko’s death.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For a single mother raising a teenage son, Ms. Litvinenko faced a tough call: If she lost one last battle to secure a public inquiry, she would face a bill from government lawyers for $80,000 that she did not have. She was relying, as she still does, on a legal team working for her pro bono.“I had three days to decide: to go or not go” ahead with an appeal, she said. “Nobody could tell me what to do. I am not a gambler. I don’t play the casino. I try to have something reasonable.”In the end, she concluded that she had to take the risk. “This is my personal cause. How can you rest or do nothing without feeling you have done everything you can?”Finally, in February last year, senior judges ordered Ms. May to reconsider her opposition to a public inquiry and, in July 2014, as Russia drew ever greater Western opprobrium over the crisis in Ukraine, the global pendulum swung in Ms. Litvinenko’s favor. Ms. May dropped her opposition to an inquiry.In a way, the inquiry will offer a denouement to a drama that has been building since 1993, when Ms. Litvinenko met her future husband in Moscow at a friend’s birthday party.As Mr. Litvinenko and his mentor, Mr. Berezovsky, cast themselves as whistle-blowers against corruption in the F.S.B., the domestic successor to the K.G.B., they made more and more enemies, including Mr. Putin, himself a K.G.B. alumnus. Their denunciations of the F.S.B. soon rebounded against them.AdvertisementSuspended from the F.S.B., Mr. Litvinenko was tried in early 1999 on charges related to allegations that he abused the powers of his office. When he was acquitted, masked officers in camouflage fatigues rearrested him on extortion charges. A year later, encouraged and soon followed by Mr. Berezovsky, he fled Russia for Britain, where both men secured asylum.Her husband’s flight into self-exile plunged Ms. Litvinenko into a world more familiar to readers of spy thrillers. “Sasha called me and told me I have to go to Turkey and meet him,” Ms. Litvinenko said, using the shortened name by which her husband was widely known. “It was the first time he told me, ‘Marina, prepare yourself not to go back to Russia.’ It was very devastating for me. I just could not believe it.”Six years later, at about the same time as her husband was sipping polonium-laced tea, Ms. Litvinenko was home preparing his favorite chicken dish to celebrate the anniversary of their arrival in Britain.Just weeks earlier, the family had secured British citizenship, and Mr. Litvinenko had told his son that the British crown “protects us, guards us.” But his wife could hardly have known that her life henceforth would be devoted to trying to illuminate the dark saga of her husband’s death.“This kind of activity is like a marathon,” she said. “You never know when you will need to be strong.”A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: After Long Legal Fight, Inquest Is Set to Begin in Death of Putin Critic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.