By ROD NORDLAND and ERIC SCHMITTJAN. 24, 2015
AMMAN, Jordan — At first glance the official slogan and emblem of the Houthis, who are now the dominant force in Yemen, does not offer much hope to American policy makers.It includes the words “Death to America, death to Israel, damnation to the Jews.” Houthis shout it when they march, wear it on arm patches, paint it on buildings and stick it onto their car windows. When pictured, those words are rendered in red, framed by “God is great” and “Victory to Islam” in green, on a white background.Sometimes the red words are shown dripping blood.But for all their harsh sloganeering, the Houthis may be a lot more moderate than it suggests, according to many diplomats and analysts who have followed them closely. They say it would be premature to dismiss them as Yemen’s Hezbollah, despite their alliance with Iran.While Obama administration officials in Washington insisted that counterterrorism operations in Yemen against Al Qaeda, including armed drone flights, would continue despite the Houthi takeover, there were indications that given the political turmoil some specific missions and training might be suspended, reduced or altered on a case-by-case basis.Advertisement“The capability is all still there, we’re just picking and choosing now,” said one senior United States official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of diplomatic sensitivities.AdvertisementOn Wednesday, Michael G. Vickers, the Pentagon’s top intelligence policy official, noted that the Houthis’ dominance had been growing over the past several months as they expanded their control since last September, but he said that has not interfered with American missions. “The Houthis are anti-Al Qaeda, and we’ve been able to continue some of our counterterrorism operations against Al Qaeda in the past couple months,” Mr. Vickers said.That optimism is remarkable considering that one of the Houthis’ key campaign points has been opposition to the United States’ use of drones in Yemen against Al Qaeda, a policy that had received the enthusiastic cooperation of the pro-American president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, who resigned on Thursday in protest against Houthi pressure on his government.Whether American policy makers will be able to continue their hunt for Al Qaeda in Yemen is an important issue, as the group’s local franchise, along with the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, poses the biggest terrorist threat to the United States, and it took responsibility for the attack this month in Paris on the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo.The Houthis are also believed to get financing from Iran, and concern about that led Saudi Arabia last year to cut off $4 billion in funding to the Yemeni government when the Houthis became part of it. The Houthis are dominated by the Zaydis, who are members of a sect that is an offshoot of Shiite Islam, the religion of Iran.That has made the Houthis bitter opponents of Al Qaeda, who consider all Shiite Muslims to be apostates — as do many Saudis. Since most Yemenis are Sunni Muslims, Al Qaeda has been able to capitalize on the Houthi rise to win more supporters who are worried about Houthi dominance.The Houthis have denied that they receive any Iranian financing, and they have also taken pains to play down their country’s sectarian differences, as well as bringing in supporters who are not from the Zaydi minority.
            In early 2014 Shiite insurgents known as Houthis consolidated control over Yemen’s Saada Province. In recent months, they have expanded their influence. In some areas, they have established checkpoints and have some control.        SAADA PROVINCEControlled by HouthisSparSely populated100 milesYEMENSanaAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.TaizSHABWA PROVINCEQaeda strongholdAdenSouthern Yemen was a separate country until 1990.  Rebels closed the country’s main port in Aden and shut the border between the north and south last week, raising  concerns about secession.Houthis have influenceor are able to operate.200 milesSparSelypopulatedYEMENSanaTaizAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.Detail belowSAADA PROVINCEControlled by HouthisYEMENSanaTaizSHABWAPROVINCEQaedastrongholdAdenAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.Houthis haveinfluence or areable to operate.JAN. 24, 2015
“The Houthis are not Hezbollah,” said Charles Schmitz, an expert on the group and a professor at Towson University, referring to the Iranian-supported group that dominates Lebanon and is actively fighting on behalf of President Bashar al-Assad in Syria. “They are domestic, homegrown, and have very deep roots in Yemen, going back thousands of years.”AdvertisementMr. Schmitz continued: “Last year they became the dominant military and national power, and there’s no doubt that was the result of Iranian support, not through weapons, which they take from the Yemeni military, but the key thing is the funding. The Houthis have the money, and it’s got to be coming from the Iranians. Does that mean they are going to do Iranian bidding? I don’t think so.”April Alley, a senior analyst for the International Crisis Group in Sana, said: “Theoretically there is quite a bit of common ground in Yemen between the Houthis and the U.S., particularly when it comes to security issues and Al Qaeda. But so far it’s not been enough to overcome the obstacles. The Houthis have their own limits in which they can engage the Americans given the political narrative they have propagated.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Israeli analysts have viewed the rise of the Houthis with concern, worrying that a pro-Iranian government in Sana could disrupt shipping lanes through the Red Sea, a vital passageway for Israel. “The fact that an ally of Iran basically now controls another Arab capital is of great concern to Israel,” said Jonathan Spyer, an Israeli international affairs analyst.But even some Israelis had a mixed reaction to the Houthi rise. “Sometimes we’re in a position that we don’t know what works for us better,” said Giora Eiland, a former Israeli national security adviser. “Any increase of the Iranian influence is bad for Israel. On the other hand, they are fighting organizations that are associated with Al Qaeda.”American officials had already reduced staffing at the embassy in Sana after the Houthis joined the government last year; that staffing is now going down to only a handful of diplomats, officials said. Only last Monday, for instance, an American Embassy vehicle was fired on by Houthi gunmen at a Houthi checkpoint in Sana; it was armored and no one was hurt. And as recently as Thursday, the Houthis organized a group of their militants to march through Sana, shouting their usual anti-American slogan.Christopher Stevens, an expert on international relations at Misericordia University in Pennsylvania, said too much attention had been focused on the Houthis’ opposition to drone strikes. “Instead of condemning them, let’s work closely to try to forge a stable government to fight the common enemy,” he said. “Maybe this is the time we move in to provide them the aid to do more on the ground and let them do it. At the end of the day defeating Al Qaeda has to be done by the people of the Middle East; this Whack-a-Mole approach is not going to work anyway.”There are still about 200 American military personnel in Yemen, including dozens of trainers as well as a small number of commandos who have been carrying out clandestine attacks against members of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, a senior American official said on Friday. The latest turmoil has not affected those troops or their mission, American officials said.A senior American military official said the United States military has established informal communication links with its Houthi counterparts, and this week has been using those channels to ensure there are no accidental clashes between American and Houthi personnel.There is evidence that within the Houthis’ own ranks, a debate has been underway on how the group would relate to the United States if it took power. “We think that Yemen’s relations with the United States should be in the cooperation framework, just like with any country,” Ali Al-Bukhaiti, a member of the Houthi party’s youth wing, said last year. “Our hostility is rather against U.S. policies that once are stopped, ours will stop, too.”Mr. Bukhaiti, however, resigned last week from the Houthis’ organization in protest of the movement’s actions leading to Mr. Hadi’s resignation.AdvertisementLast November, another progressive Houthi leader, Ali al-Emad, raised eyebrows when he made a rare visit to the United States. Addressing the Atlantic Council in Washington, he hardly seemed to be projecting moderation. The Houthi movement, he said, “welcomes international condemnation, as it confirms the group’s firmly Yemeni status.”A correction in this space last Sunday for an article on Jan. 25 about optimism among American policy makers about the Houthis, former rebels who are now the dominant force in Yemen, referred imprecisely to the attack on Charlie Hebdo, the satirical newspaper in Paris. Although Al Qaeda in Yemen claimed responsibility, and the two men who led the attack said they were working on behalf of the group, it has not been determined that Al Qaeda was behind the attack.Rod Nordland reported from Amman, and Eric Schmitt from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Mona El-Naggar and Shuaib Almosawa from Sana, Yemen; Kareem Fahim from Baghdad; and Jodi Rudoren from Jerusalem.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Experts See Signs of Moderation Despite Houthis’ Harsh Slogans.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.