By ANDREW E. KRAMERJAN. 24, 2015
DONETSK, Ukraine —  A barrage of rockets struck homes and a market in the Azov Sea port city of Mariupol in eastern Ukraine on Saturday, killing 27 people and wounding 97 others, the Interior Ministry said.It was the latest indication that after a relative lull last fall, the war has flared up again in eastern Ukraine, with lethal artillery strikes landing in both rebel- and Ukrainian-controlled regions.A leader of the Russian-backed rebels, Aleksandr Zakharchenko, has said his forces are now on the offensive, and on Saturday he said that an assault had begun against Mariupol, a strongly pro-Ukrainian seaside city with a prewar population of about 400,000 but now bulging with thousands of refugees from Crimea and elsewhere in eastern Ukraine.“We began our attack on Mariupol,” Mr. Zakharchenko said at a memorial for victims of a recent artillery bombardment of a bus stop in Donetsk. Both sides blame the other for that attack, and estimates of the number of dead are contested, ranging from eight to 13.AdvertisementMr. Zakharchenko said that separatist forces had also begun an attack on a road and railroad hub north of Donetsk, and that this attack and the assault on Mariupol were “revenge” for deaths in the war in Donetsk.In announcing the start of military operations against Mariupol, Mr. Zakharchenko did not claim responsibility for the rocket attack. Earlier Saturday, a spokesman for the Donetsk People’s Republic had denied that rebels were responsible for the strike, which hit near a Ukrainian barracks and also killed one soldier. But Secretary of State John Kerry on Saturday blamed the rebels for the Mariupol attack, condemning  the “horrific assault by Russia-backed separatists,” and calling on Russia “to end its support for separatists immediately.”AdvertisementArmed with what appeared to be new tanks and other heavy weapons from Russia, rebels in recent days captured the ruins of the Donetsk airport and their leaders say openly they are now on the march.Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Zurich.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: 27 Are Killed by Rockets in Ukraine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.