By MARTIN FACKLERJAN. 25, 2015
TOKYO —  In the public’s mind, the two Japanese hostages held by Islamic State militants have become inextricably linked: a pair of grim-faced figures who appeared last week in a video kneeling in orange jumpsuits next to a masked militant demanding a ransom for their lives.The fates of the two men became even more tightly bound over the weekend, when an image was released showing one holding what appeared to be a photograph of the other’s decapitated body, and the Islamic State announced on its Al Bayan radio station that it had killed one of the men. An Islamic State-affiliated radio station confirmed late Sunday that one of the hostages had been murdered.Yet the paths that led the two men to their joint captivity in Syria could not have been more different.The surviving hostage, Kenji Goto, 47, is a respected journalist who knew his way around conflict zones after having spent more than two decades covering them as a freelance television cameraman and the author of five books. He appeared initially drawn to Syria and Iraq by a lifelong idealistic zeal to cover the plight of the weak, and particularly refugee children.AdvertisementThe other man, Haruna Yukawa, 42, was a lost soul who had attempted suicide in 2008 and seemed to become unhinged by a string of setbacks in life, including bankruptcy and the death of his wife. Convinced that he was the reincarnation of a celebrated World War II-era female spy, he wandered into Syria in search of a fresh start in life. On his blog, he fantasized about gaining enough combat experience against the Taliban and Al Qaeda to one day work as a security adviser for Japanese companies in dangerous areas.AdvertisementInstead, he quickly got in over his head. Another Syrian rebel group briefly detained him before he was captured in August by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Almost improbably, the two Japanese men had crossed paths even before appearing together in last week’s ransom video. Indeed, the picture that emerges from accounts on the two men’s blogs, and from friends and family of both men, is that the more experienced journalist appeared to take the luckless and perhaps misguided Mr. Yukawa under his wing and felt responsible for him.After the militants captured Mr. Yukawa, Mr. Goto tried to win his freedom by making a highly risky trip into territory controlled by the Islamic State, which has conquered large parts of Syria and Iraq. Mr. Goto was apparently captured during that ill-fated rescue mission in late October. “He went flying over there to do whatever he could, to help and to save an acquaintance who had been detained first,” Mr. Goto’s mother, Junko Ishido, 78, said Friday, referring to Mr. Yukawa. She explained her son’s actions by saying he had always tried to help the weak.“Even before he could walk right, he would always, always treat those kinds of younger children with kindness,” she said. “He is a kind child, but also a child who burns with a sense of justice.”In what appears to have been his last video before heading into an area of Syria controlled by the militants, Mr. Goto seems to stoically accept the risks. Looking directly into the camera, he says that no matter what happens, he does not want anyone to blame the people of Syria.“It is a pretty dangerous trip,” Mr. Goto says, speaking first in his native Japanese and then in English. “If something happens, all responsibility is on me.”Mr. Goto’s calm resolve and strong sense of purpose are consistent with the details of him that emerge on the website of his tiny news agency, Independent Press. The agency that he started 19 years ago, and which sells news stories to television programs, says its mission is to cover “conflicts, refugees, poverty, AIDS and children.” In an interview last year on a religious website, he said he had converted to Christianity — uncommon in predominantly Buddhist Japan — because he was afraid of dying alone in a distant war zone.AdvertisementLittle is known of key aspects of his personal life. In public, he was strongly antiwar, speaking passionately about the plight of children in conflicts. His judgment and experience won the respect of some of the nation’s top journalists. “He is a veteran war journalist who can make split-second decisions about what is dangerous or not,” Akira Ikegami, a retired newscaster who is now a popular commentator, said in a newspaper interview last week. “I completely trust him.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The two men first met in April after Mr. Yukawa was detained by the Free Syrian Army, a relatively moderate rebel group, during his first trip into Syria. Mr. Goto negotiated Mr. Yukawa’s release, earning Mr. Yukawa’s gratitude. Three months later, just before his capture, Mr. Yukawa spent a week working as Mr. Goto’s assistant in Iraq, where the veteran journalist gave him survival tips.“My instinct tells me we will be lifelong friends,” Mr. Yukawa wrote in his blog. “It could only be fate that we met in Syria.”But much of his blog contains convoluted and sometimes bizarre soul-searching. The oddest passages were his description of his attempted suicide in 2008, when he castrated himself as a way to bleed to death. Quick action by his wife and doctors saved his life; he later wrote that, bereft of male hormones, he would live as a woman.He changed his given name to the feminine Haruna and became convinced that he was the reincarnation of Yoshiko Kawashima, a Manchu princess who became a spy for Imperial Japan and was known for wearing men’s clothes. Mr. Yukawa’s life took another big turn after the death of his wife from lung cancer. Early last year, he set off for the Middle East, telling friends and relatives that this was his last chance for finding success.“The experiences I gain on this voyage will change my life,” he wrote in his blog in April. “I will come back if the world decides it needs me.”Once in Syria, he posted videos of himself firing AK-47 assault rifles, and befriended a Japanese-Korean member of the Free Syrian Army. He was with the rebels when their position was overrun by Islamic State fighters, who posted a video of a captured Mr. Yukawa, bleeding from the face as he is interrogated.During the two-minute video, the fighters repeatedly ask Mr. Yukawa one question that he seemed incapable of answering: Why are you here?That same question has been posed by Japanese news media, which have been less sympathetic to Mr. Yukawa than to Mr. Goto. After the image of the decapitated body of Mr. Yukawa appeared, his father, Shoichi, 74, appeared in public to apologize for his son, saying he had caused trouble for both Japan and Mr. Goto.“My son said he is a sincere and kind person,” Mr. Yukawa’s father, said Sunday, referring to Mr. Goto. “He worried about my son and risked his life by going into the war zone. That pains me. I wish for his quick release and safe return.”Makiko Inoue and Hisako Ueno contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Japanese Hostages, as Different as Can Be, Linked by Fate in Syria.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.