By ADAM NOSSITER and MICHAEL R. GORDONJAN. 25, 2015
MAIDUGURI, Nigeria —  Maiduguri, the major city in Nigeria’s northeast, came under sustained attack from Boko Haram terrorists on Sunday, and officials here called it the group’s most audacious assault on the city to date.By early afternoon, the attackers had been beaten back, but not before dozens of soldiers had been killed, officials said. They said the insurgents had taken a major military base to the north of the city, sending about 1,400 soldiers fleeing into the bush.The attack on this city of more than two million people, a commercial and administrative hub, began late Saturday when the militants from the Islamist insurgency rushed in from at least two directions. Loud explosions could be heard in the center of the city, as well as small-arms fire and artillery in its suburbs. The attack was a significant thrust forward in a creeping campaign that began last summer to encircle Maiduguri, officials said.“Certainly this is the most serious attack yet,” said Kashim Shettima, the governor of Borno State, of which Maiduguri is the capital. “We faced a really existential threat.”AdvertisementA military curfew pushed all civilian vehicles off the streets, and by early evening the only sound in Maiduguri, a normally bustling metropolis of open-air markets and street-side stalls, was the call to prayer from the numerous mosques.AdvertisementBefore being repulsed, the insurgents again demonstrated the tactical mettle that has allowed them to gain control of territory for hundreds of miles around Maiduguri. They overwhelmed soldiers at one of the principal military checkpoints outside the city, arriving in buses as if they were ordinary travelers, Mr. Shettima said. “The soldiers were completely caught off guard,” he said.100 milesLake ChadNIGERCHADMongunoMaiduguriBORNONIGERIACAMEROONWEST AFRICAArea ofdetailNIGERIALagosGulf of GuineaBefore the soldiers realized who they were, the Boko Haram insurgents opened fire. “I believe they must have killed hundreds,” Mr. Shettima said as he tried to give an estimate of the military casualties. At the same time, the Islamists were attacking another position close to the city, straining the military’s resources in the area.“They are becoming more and more sophisticated by the day,” added Mr. Shettima, who said he feared another attack on the city. “They have essentially put the town under siege. They have cut the town off from all routes. They are continuously squeezing us into a very tight corner.”After the insurgents overwhelmed the soldiers, they moved to a checkpoint closer to the city. The military then called in warplanes, and officials said bombs dropped on insurgent positions turned the tide of the battle here, even as a town to the north, Monguno, was falling.A top federal police official, who was in Maiduguri after a presidential visit and asked not to be identified so that he could speak freely, said: “In the early hours of the day, the Boko Haram wanted to come into town. But by the grace of God, we have repelled them.”The top military official here declined to discuss the day’s events.The attack on Maiduguri coincided with a visit by Secretary of State John Kerry to Nigeria’s commercial capital, Lagos, for meetings with President Goodluck Jonathan and his challenger in the coming presidential election, Muhammadu Buhari, a retired general.Amid mounting friction between the two countries over how best to fight Boko Haram — the relationship is so strained that the Nigerians canceled an American military training program in December — Mr. Kerry said the United States was prepared to do more to help the faltering Nigerian military.AdvertisementBut he warned that the level of American support would be influenced by the determination of Nigeria’s politicians to carry out a fair and peaceful election on Feb. 14. American officials also fear that the Nigerian military has been infiltrated by Boko Haram, a claim angrily denied by the Nigerians.
                Maps showing the violent rise of the Islamist militant group that is waging a campaign of terror in Nigeria.            “Bottom line, we want to do more,” Mr. Kerry said Sunday. “But our ability to do more will depend to some degree on the full measure of credibility, accountability, transparency and peacefulness of this election.” His pointed warning came against a backdrop of campaign violence by supporters of the candidates and a history of electoral fraud and postelection killing.In Maiduguri, as the attack progressed on Sunday, witnesses reported seeing hundreds of residents fleeing the suburbs and rushing toward the city’s center. The witnesses also reported seeing some Nigerian troops moving away from the fighting, a response that is not uncommon when they clash with insurgents.Sabo Fari, a bicycle repairman who fled during the fighting in Maiduguri’s suburbs, said he had nearly been killed. “Bullets flew over my head,” Mr. Fari said. “My house shook severely. I took the risk. I directed the whole of my family to vacate the house.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The violence shook Maiduguri’s suburbs. “There’s a lot of gunshots and explosions,” said a top official at the city’s leading hospital who lives at the city’s edge. He asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to speak to reporters. “These boys are trying to come into town.”Officials with the humanitarian agency Unicef in Borno State said aid workers, including from the Red Cross, reported that six civilians and 40 insurgents had been killed and that 40 people had been wounded in the area near the Maiduguri airport. The death toll was likely to rise, and casualties in Monguno were expected to be higher, they said.Soldiers here were able to retake some of the military equipment that the insurgents had captured after a bloody assault on a military base and village this month in Baga. The soldiers seized an armored personnel carrier and a heavy artillery gun, said Mr. Shettima, the governor of Borno State.The insurgents attacked Maiduguri hours after Mr. Jonathan left the city after a campaign speech. Just before the president arrived, the militants attacked Kambari, a village barely three miles from Maiduguri, burning it and killing 15 people.In Nigeria, more than 200 schoolgirls have been held captive since last April. Some background information on the Islamist group that has been trying to topple the country’s government for years.Hundreds of thousands of people have been driven from their homes and at least 10,000 have been killed over the course of the Islamists’ insurgency, now stretching into its sixth year.AdvertisementMr. Shettima, who is also a leading member of the opposition party, All Progressives Congress, expressed exasperation over the attack by Boko Haram on Sunday. “It’s so sad,” he said. “If a genuine effort had been made, this thing could have been stopped a long time ago. It’s a ragtag army.”How the United States plans to help Nigeria regain the initiative against the insurgents remained unclear. Boko Haram’s abduction of more than 200 schoolgirls last spring provoked outrage in the United States and Europe. But a breakdown in trust between the United States’ and Nigeria’s militaries has hampered cooperation against Boko Haram, as have fears that giving heavy weapons to Nigerian forces could lead to human rights abuses.After a meeting with his British counterpart this month, Mr. Kerry said the attacks by Boko Haram constituted war crimes, and he asserted that the United States was planning a “special initiative” to counter the group.But Mr. Kerry has not provided details about what that initiative is, when it might be undertaken or how the cooperation between the two militaries might be improved.He said there was evidence that the militants from the Islamic State group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which has declared a caliphate in eastern Syria and northern and western Iraq, were trying to forge alliances with terrorist groups in Africa.“It is obviously a concern that they may try more aggressively to try to spread to countries in center and southern and other parts of Africa,” Mr. Kerry said. He added that there was no indication as yet that Boko Haram had formally affiliated itself with the Islamic State.Adam Nossiter reported from Maiduguri, and Michael R. Gordon from Lagos, Nigeria.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: In Bold Push Forward, Islamist Militants Attack a Major Nigerian City.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.