By MONA EL-NAGGARJAN. 25, 2015
SANA, Yemen —  A number of lawmakers trickled into Parliament on Sunday morning, just in time for an emergency meeting to address the resignation of Yemen’s president last week. Minutes later, they walked back out, after hearing that the session had been called off.“Members aren’t allowed in, and no one will attend,” Yehia al-Matari, a member of Parliament, told another official over the phone. Mr. Matari explained that Abdul-Malik al-Houthi, the leader of a Shiite-led rebel group now in control of most security and state institutions, appeared to be calling the shots.Another lawmaker, Mohamed Saleh Ali, offered a different explanation. According to Mr. Ali, the meeting was canceled partly because the president of Parliament was traveling to Saudi Arabia, which sees the Houthis as an extension of Iranian influence and has cut off nearly all aid to the Yemeni government.“We’re used to this, postponing a day, or two or three,” Mr. Ali said, calmly. “It’s not a big deal. This is how it is in Yemen.”AdvertisementPower in Yemen is largely centered in the hands of individuals rather than institutions, and national identity often competes with tribal and sectarian allegiances. The Houthi-led takeover, which forced the resignation of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi on Thursday, is part of a broader structure of shifting alliances and warring interests that are now being negotiated behind closed doors, political analysts and officials say.AdvertisementOn Saturday, two Houthi representatives met with Jamal Benomar, the United Nations envoy to Yemen, who had been employing a kind of shuttle diplomacy to chart a way out of the standoff. As soon as the Houthis left, Mr. Benomar moved to a different room for his next appointment. But no one appeared to be inching any closer to a real solution.
            In early 2014 Shiite insurgents known as Houthis consolidated control over Yemen’s Saada Province. In recent months, they have expanded their influence. In some areas, they have established checkpoints and have some control.        SAADA PROVINCEControlled by HouthisSparSely populated100 milesYEMENSanaAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.TaizSHABWA PROVINCEQaeda strongholdAdenSouthern Yemen was a separate country until 1990.  Rebels closed the country’s main port in Aden and shut the border between the north and south last week, raising  concerns about secession.Houthis have influenceor are able to operate.200 milesSparSelypopulatedYEMENSanaTaizAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.Detail belowSAADA PROVINCEControlled by HouthisYEMENSanaTaizSHABWAPROVINCEQaedastrongholdAdenAreas where Al Qaeda is able to operate.Houthis haveinfluence or areable to operate.JAN. 24, 2015
“There are many parties here in this equation, and they all have different interests, different incentives,” Mr. Benomar said.The Houthis, who fought to establish themselves as the dominant force on the ground, now want to see their street might translated into political capital and are demanding crucial leadership positions.But internal disagreements exist. Some Houthis are willing to work with the majority party of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, but other, older members of the group experienced years of persecution and violence under his government and fear that he could make a comeback if his son, Ahmed Ali Saleh, became president.“It was already very hard to convince people not to go after him for revenge,” one member of the Houthi revolutionary committees said, referring to the former President Saleh. He did not want to be identified because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.Mr. Houthi, he said, “had to talk to some of his supporters, one by one, and beg them to forget the past.”The Houthis stormed Sana, the capital, in September with the help of Mr. Saleh, who still wields power through tribes and army units that have remained loyal to him even after he was forced out of power in 2012.AdvertisementMuhammed al-Faqih, a member of Mr. Saleh’s public relations office, said Mr. Saleh had not facilitated the Houthi takeover. Instead, Mr. Faqih said, Mr. Saleh took an impartial stance. But that effectively gave the Houthis a green light because they knew they would not encounter resistance from Mr. Saleh’s forces.Since Monday, videos have surfaced — both professional and amateur — showing the violence unfolding between the Yemeni Army and Houthi rebels in the capital, Sana.Mr. Saleh and the Houthis also shared a common enemy: Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar, a top army commander who had led military campaigns against the Houthis in the north for many years under Mr. Saleh but then helped push Mr. Saleh from power.According to Nabil Abdel Rab, who manages the majority party’s website, Mr. Ahmar fled to Saudi Arabia the day the Houthis entered the capital.“Ali Abdullah Saleh is now the No. 1 force in Yemen,” Mr. Abdel Rab contended, explaining that the Houthis had cleared out Mr. Saleh’s enemies and undermined Yemen’s current leadership. “Now, between the Shiite Houthis and the Sunni opposition, Saleh or his son will look like the only middle-ground solution.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At this stage, the Houthis, powerful but wary, are reassessing their prospects for alliances. But their swift victories have reignited separatist demands in southern Yemen. Alarmed by the Houthis’ expansion, the separatist movement in the south has also started to seize territory. It is openly working with Al Qaeda, also present in the south, to assert its independent identity.“It creates a huge pool for recruitment,” Mr. Benomar said. “Al Qaeda is benefiting from this, and that is frightening.”Not far from Parliament, Abdallah Nasser, 21, was selling stickers with portraits of Yemen’s leading political figures: Mr. Houthi, the elder Mr. Saleh and his son. The stickers of Mr. Saleh’s son had been marked up because they were the most popular, Mr. Nasser said.But with respect to Mr. Hadi, it appears that Mr. Nasser’s customers have just moved on.“No one ever asks for him,” Mr. Nasser said.A version of this article appears in print on January 26, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Shifting Alliances Play Out Behind Closed Doors in Yemen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.