Luigi Tomba, 49, is the associate director of the Australian Center on China in the World at the Australian National University in Canberra. In his new book, “The Government Next Door: Neighborhood Politics in Urban China,” Mr. Tomba, a native of Italy who first went to China in 1988, challenges the conventional wisdom that a property-owning middle class is helping to foster civil society in China. Instead, his research leads him to conclude that the privatization of housing has strengthened the grip of the Communist Party.In an interview, he described the new housing developments as part of a state project to foster consensus by creating enclaves of status and morality, where residents often reproduce the state’s language and broader goals.What got you interested in this topic?In the early 2000s, people were discussing the rise of a middle class in China. I was interested in finding this mythological beast. So I went to Beijing and lived in some of the new commercial developments, especially one in eastern Beijing. What I found was different from what I was expecting. They weren’t apart from the state, but had been big beneficiaries of state policies. I wasn’t sure they were really a new middle class, but rather a new property-owning class.
They benefited because state housing had been sold off to its residents at a very low price. In the past, people in cities often had housing provided by their assigned place of employment, or work unit. When it was privatized, they got their housing very cheaply. So perhaps they were thankful.Yes, that was the process. In the late 1980s, state work units began to sell their apartments to employees who were living in them, and that gave many the capacity to enter the nascent real-estate market during the 1990s. Many other subsidization policies followed, but most of them continued to favor the same groups of people with a longstanding relationship to the state.So when the work unit housing was privatized, people were no longer directly dependent on the government for housing. Didn’t this lead them to have more autonomy over their lives?
Yes, the state granted them autonomy. Residents of these new compounds could organize and elect their own homeowners committees and didn’t have to interact directly with the grass-roots level of party control, the juweihui — residents committees — or the jiedaoban — street committees. In fact, it’s like that today. Some residents of these compounds can’t find the local street committee office because they don’t need the subsidies and services the government provides. But the expectation was that this autonomy would lead to some sort of broader challenge to the existing ideas of the party. This didn’t happen.And yet homeowners associations were established and people sometimes filed lawsuits together. That seemed like civil society.Yes, there were a lot of conflicts between homeowners and developers and management companies, but protests were mostly contained within the compounds. Almost all of these big residential compounds are gated. As long as they stayed inside the gate and protested there, that remained a form of mobilization acceptable to the state. The moment they left the compound, they could be arrested. That was one thing I noticed.And then you noticed that residents were not only not challenging the state, but actually adopting its language. Right. The language was often the same being used by the government. That was the first revelation to me, that they were echoing the government’s language. I was in Beijing and I wondered if Beijing was a one-off, so I went to Chengdu and found very similar behavior.What kind of language was that? Can you give an example?To justify their activism, homeowners often referred to the importance of maintaining social order, to self-responsibility, and to the middle class as being the “cornerstone” of a stronger China. Ideas of the nation were also very common, and that defending the rights of consumers and homeowners was crucial to build a stronger nation.But couldn’t this be seen as co-opting the government’s language? Maybe they didn’t really believe that? Perhaps they were just using it strategically to achieve goals?A lot of people are dismissive of party propaganda. But I think sometimes we need to take things at face value rather than passing judgment on what people “really” mean. My neighbors did use this language strategically. But when you look at the expressions they used, they were not just using the slogan of the day, they were buying into ideas that were rooted in their long-lived experience and that generate governing practices they can refer to. They grew up with it. It’s actually much deeper and much more spread across society for one to simply dismiss it as strategic language.Some argued that the actions of homeowners were not only important to improve things in the housing development, but also to advance the idea of moral and responsible communities, as in, “If all communities were like us, China would be a much greater country.” That sort of language wasn’t only necessary to shield them from repression. They could have just referred to specific real estate policies instead. So I felt it meant something.Another term you mention quite a bit in your book is suzhi, or quality. Outsiders often laugh at this. How can people be of “high” or “low” quality? But it clearly has a profound meaning for some people in these communities.Yes, this language forms their life practices. They mean it when they say they want their kids to mix with kids of a similar “quality,” and not with migrant kids, etc. This language does create very significant practices on the ground and is another of those arguments for residential segregation that is both promoted by the government and realized in everyday practices among homeowners.This could just be snobbery.
Yes, status and material things matter. Where you live is crucial. It’s where your kids go to school, what sort of people they’ll marry.But status in China has a lot to do with the spiritual — jingshen. It’s not enough to be a wealthy person, especially in a place where you’ve gone from being a highly egalitarian society to a highly unequal one. Becoming a better citizen or a high-quality citizen is important to these people. It’s important also for their businesses, or for their careers.Why do morality and moral categories matter so much to these new property owners? Morality matters especially to people who have changed their social status so quickly. They’ve become wealthier in a very short time. They have more capacity to consume, to achieve certain goals, but that’s not enough to obtain status. Especially not in a country like China.The material and the spiritual are part of a long tradition in China’s political culture. With the recent return of a Confucian rhetoric in the ideology of the government, almost all decisions of the government are coated with moral language that also affects the individual understanding of what a “good” citizen is.One needs to be part of a moral world that defines one’s ability to contribute to society. It can come from education, behavior or beliefs, and is not simply created by wealth. It is more than just propaganda. It really matters to people.For example in Shenyang, there was a housing development with some people from the public sector and others who’d made their money through private enterprise. One side thought the others were corrupt, while the others accused them of being of low quality and without morals. Paths to status are contested, but they are deeply attached to understandings of morality.I was interested in how you described that, while the government has retreated from the big middle-class housing compounds, it’s very present in lower-class ones.If you think of it from the government point of view, what they want is to privatize services. So if the services, like security or management, can be provided privately, that’s fine and efficient for local governments struggling to balance their budgets. But whenever there’s a need for governing, the government is very much present. We’d be kidding ourselves that this privatization of governance will lead to less governing. It will not.Tell us about the rust belt city of Shenyang and its district of Tiexi, which was once a major area of state-owned heavy industry and now has high unemployment.
It was different because they were living in very dire situations, but also bound to the government. The government’s language here wasn’t about consumption and rights, but about “saving the working class,” and residents, who were former state workers, were riding these statements and calling on the government to put its wallet where its mouth was. They justified their dependency on government subsidies with the historical contribution they had made to China’s socialism.So both at the high and low end there was an alignment of the language used by residents and the one promoted by the government. And residential spaces were crucial to create this rhetoric.