AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam NossiterMAIDUGURI, Nigeria — It was the kind of onslaught many feared.This city of more than two million, the most important in northern Nigeria, has endured many fierce assaults from Boko Haram militants during the course of their uprising, which began here nearly six years ago.The militants have bombed markets and schools, blasted their way into prisons, attacked the military air base and left parts of the city littered with corpses. But on Sunday, in perhaps their most audacious assault yet, Boko Haram militants appeared to attempt an invasion of Maiduguri, with hundreds attacking from two directions.The Nigerian military, taken by surprise, had to call in warplanes to bomb the militants and push them back to the surrounding areas they have long controlled.“It was serious fighting here,” said Ali Mohammed, a road construction worker, gesturing across the highway toward the burned shops in the Djimtilo suburb.“Not small,” he said, adding that he had observed “400 Boko Haram” fighters before fleeing.“They put all fire over there,” he said, pointing at the shops, about 15 of them. Some of the insurgents wore Nigerian Army uniforms, he said, making it difficult to distinguish them from the regular soldiers.While some semblance of normalcy resumed on Monday, the assault underscored the deep vulnerability of Maiduguri, which the Nigerian authorities have been unable to buttress despite a sustained and often brutal campaign against Boko Haram, the Islamist extremist group that has overrun towns and villages across the region.“Life must continue,” said Clement Bako, the manager of the leading mobile telephone company’s office here. Maiduguri had “become accustomed to the sound of gunshots,” Mr. Bako said, acknowledging nonetheless that Sunday’s attack was unusually serious.“It’s what we are used to hearing,” he said. “You get up at night, you hear shootouts between the Boko Haram and the soldiers, and you say, ‘This is normal,’ ” Mr. Bako said, noting that this could seem “strange, bizarre” to those unaccustomed to the way of life here.In some ways on Monday, it seemed as though the assault 24 hours earlier had never happened.Fleets of tricycle taxis plied the city’s dusty roads, while pale green neem trees hung listlessly in the 90-degree heat in the old colonial district and small boys wearing blue caftans and traditional green caps cycled slowly back and forth to school. The tricycle taxis — yellow, motorized and covered — have replaced motorbikes, which were banned three and a half years ago after terrorist hit squads repeatedly used them for drive-by shootings.Explosions and gunfire could still be heard in Monday’s early hours. But later on, that did not deter shack vendors from selling oranges and sweets or keep shoppers from the pungent Monday Market, with its spices, raw meat and dried fish from nearby Lake Chad. A dense herd of longhorn cattle deliberately made its way down Lagos Street, a commercial thoroughfare. The authorities lifted a curfew.The residents here take some pride in this coolness: daily existence under a constant threat, inevitable attack, quick removal of the bodies and speedy return to normalcy.“This is what has been happening,” explained Stephen James, a police officer guarding Government House on Monday afternoon. “We can’t do it any other way,” said Mr. James, whose police T-shirt said he was a member of an antirobbery “Crack Squad” (“We crack them,” Mr. James said, smiling).Maps showing the violent rise of the Islamist militant group that is waging a campaign of terror in Nigeria.He acknowledged, though, that Sunday had been a day out of the norm. “Very, very different,” Mr. James said. “They tried to disturb us,” he said, referring to Boko Haram. “They found it very difficult, though.”The attack was a costly one, on both sides. A local reporter counted more than 100 bodies, most of them probably Boko Haram members, at the morgue. The state governor said “hundreds” of soldiers had been killed, though there was no way of knowing exactly how many. The military here does not disclose its actual casualty numbers, and the bodies of soldiers are not taken to the local morgue.Among the remaining signs of the fighting were spent cartridges and the burned shops on the main road out of town. The scene was a familiar lineup of charred mud-brick walls and twisted corrugated iron, the militants’ calling card in this region.But this was not simply a day of defeat for Boko Haram: The group captured an important military installation in Monguno, a town just north of Maiduguri, chasing away 1,400 soldiers and raising fears that it could regroup for a fresh assault on the city.Even after the group’s defeat at the edge of Maiduguri, soldiers and insurgents exchanged gunfire Sunday evening around the well-guarded airport — a tempting strategic target whose loss would be a disaster for the government.The residents here do not trust government security forces to protect them and have taken up arms themselves, banding together as the “Civilian J.T.F.,” or “Joint Task Force.” They have had some success in rooting out the Islamist militants, though many residents believe that the city remains infiltrated by Boko Haram. Groups of Civilian J.T.F. were at the ready all over town on Monday, armed as usual with sticks and cutlasses.Life seemed placid in the heat. But citizens here know how suddenly that can change.“It’s normal today, but we don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow,” Gerba Nassiru, 25, a member of Civilian J.T.F., said while buying sweets at the edge of the colonial district.videoAdvertisement