
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 26, 2015
The killing of Shaimaa al-Sabbagh, a peaceful protester whose body was riddled with shotgun pellets on Saturday in Cairo, was condemned in an unusually frank editorial published Monday on the front page of Al Ahram, the flagship state newspaper in Egypt, and signed by its chairman, Ahmed Sayed el-Naggar.Ms. Sabbagh was shot in front of witnesses and the cameras of several journalists when police officers suddenly fired at marchers carrying flowers to Tahrir Square to mark the fourth anniversary of Egypt’s Arab Spring uprising. Images of the attack on the protest, and of Ms. Sabbagh’s colleagues trying to evade arrest to save her, reverberated online, transforming the 31-year-old mother’s death into a new symbol of police impunity.
#شيماء_الصباغ اتقتلت و هى فى مسيرة شايلة إكليل ورد

ملعون اى حد يقبل او يبرر ده pic.twitter.com/SpIUgHnQYp She was mourned by hundreds of protesters at her funeral in Alexandria, her home city, on Sunday, four years to the day after Egyptians took to the streets in 2011 — Police Day in Egypt — to voice their anger at the brutality of the security forces.
            Shimaa Elsabbagh carried away for burial at #Alexandria's Manara cemetery. Where Khaled Said is also buried. #Egypt pic.twitter.com/u3VMD90e85 Egyptian social networks filled with tributes to Ms. Sabbagh, including video of her joyously singing during the 2011 uprising.
            Hundreds of mourners bid killed socialist activist farewell in Alexandria: VIDEO http://t.co/EYkkf0aQzy pic.twitter.com/W4dpofuQ4Y 
            Cairo, Thursday: women's protest stand in Talaat Harb on the spot where Shaimaa was killed https://t.co/34KP67abtA Although the police initially denied responsibility, and suggested that an unseen Islamist gunman might have fired the birdshot, the Ahram chairman, Mr. Naggar, wrote that the news footage and accounts of witnesses “clearly indicate the killer, the misuse of power and a failure to implement the law,” according to a partial translation of the Ahram editorial from The Guardian.The burden of ensuring that justice is served by prosecuting Ms. Sabbagh’s killer, Mr. Naggar added, “rests on the shoulders” of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who was elected to protect Egyptians “from the abuse of power.”Sarah Carr, a British-Egyptian journalist in Cairo, drew attention on Monday to video of the episode from a local news site that appeared to show shots being fired in Ms. Sabbagh’s direction as uniformed and plainclothes police officers charged at the demonstrators and she collapsed to the pavement.
            video showing the mb/khaled ali/aliens killing shaymaa el sabbagh while dressed in riot police uniform https://t.co/qQ92xdrTu3 An earlier version of this post misstated Shaimaa al-Sabbagh’s age at death. She was 31, not 32.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »