By MERNA THOMASJAN. 26, 2015
CAIRO —  A court on Monday handed down what officials said was Egypt’s first criminal conviction for the practice of female genital mutilation, sentencing a doctor to more than two years of hard labor for committing manslaughter while performing the procedure on a 13-year-old girl.Female genital mutilation, usually a process of fully or partly removing the clitoris, was outlawed here in 2008, but remains widespread and widely accepted. More than 90 percent of Egyptian females between the ages of 15 and 49 have been subjected to the procedure, according to Unicef.The victim in the case was Suhair el-Batea, a girl from a small village in the Nile Delta near the city of Mansoura who died after being subjected to the procedure in June 2013.At a trial in Mansoura last year, her doctor, Raslan Fadl, told a lower court that he had only treated her for warts and that she had died of an allergic reaction.AdvertisementHer father, whom prosecutors accuse of ordering the procedure, declined to press charges and backed up the physician’s account. Last November, the Mansoura court acquitted the doctor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Monday, however, an appeals court in Mansoura overturned that ruling. The court sentenced Dr. Fadl to two years in prison for manslaughter and three months for committing female genital mutilation. Ms. Batea’s father was given a suspended sentence of three months.AdvertisementVivian Fouad, an official of the state-run National Population Council, said in an interview that her organization and others had persuaded prosecutors to appeal the acquittal because of the apparent collusion between the doctor and the family, both of whom sought to settle the case.Ms. Fouad said her organization had trained more than 300 prosecutors to “understand the scientific, medical, historical and cultural context” of the practice, stressing that it constitutes an act of violence against women and has no basis in religion or Islam.“We used Suhair’s example as a case study,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Egyptian Is Convicted of Genital Mutilation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.