By STEPHEN CASTLEJAN. 26, 2015
BIRMINGHAM, England —  The year after opening a small restaurant here in 1977, Mohammed Arif spent two weeks in his native Pakistan, where he saw spicy, aromatic curries being cooked and served, sizzling, in the same dish.“It just came into my mind that I could take this idea back,” said Mr. Arif, whose thought gave life to a new dish — the Balti, a curry usually made of meat, chicken or prawns, combined with vegetables and a spicy sauce, and cooked over a high heat.Mr. Arif’s recently refurbished restaurant, Adil’s, is thought to be the place where the first Balti curry was served in 1978, and lies in a colorful immigrant area of Birmingham where bustling shops sell South Asian food, spices and clothing.More than 35 years later, at a time when tensions over immigration, assimilation and religious and ethnic differences seem to be growing ever sharper, this adaptation of Pakistani cooking to British tastes is a symbol of culinary cross-fertilization in one of Britain’s most multicultural cities. Most customers at Balti restaurants are non-Asian — a tasty retort to the much-mocked reports that areas of Birmingham, and of a number of other European cities, had become “no-go zones” for anyone but strict Muslims.The area around Adil’s is now known as Birmingham’s Balti Triangle. Restaurants in other cities have their own recipes, and precooked Balti meals occupy supermarket shelves.AdvertisementBut does that make Birmingham’s Balti one of Britain’s traditional specialties?That question is being pondered by European Union officials. They are now debating whether Birmingham Balti should be recognized and registered alongside famous European foods like Italy’s Neapolitan pizza and its mozzarella cheese, and Spain’s jamón serrano.AdvertisementThe British government wants European recognition. “Let’s hope the popular Birmingham Balti recipe follows in the footsteps of our other iconic foods like the Cornish pasty in achieving protected status,” said Liz Truss, Britain’s secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, referring to a traditional savory pie that has won a related European status.Curry is “a great part of the U.K.’s food heritage, along with fish and chips and pork pies,” Ms. Truss said.She is not the first British politician to make such claims. In 2001, Robin Cook, who was then foreign secretary, described chicken tikka masala as “a true British national dish.” With its spicy, but creamy, orange-colored sauce it was, Mr. Cook said, a perfect illustration “of the way Britain absorbs and adapts external influences.”
            This dish, believed to have been first served in Britain in 1978, is inspired by South Asian cooking.        Balti curry is generally built on a base of quickly sauteed tomatoes and cilantro, into which the cook places diced chicken, chiles, garam masala, garlic and ginger. A little bit of fenugreek and paprika comes in at the end, along with a scattering of cilantro leaves.
The dish is inspired by South Asian cooking, and falls into the same category as chicken tikka masala, katsu curry and, for that matter, General Tso's chicken. It's a westernized take on another nation's cuisine, and best consumed with (and after) many pints of lager. JAN. 26, 2015
Both politicians have a point since Britain, India’s former colonial overlord, has had a long love affair with food inspired by the subcontinent, but adapted to palates unaccustomed to hot spice. Even small British towns generally have an Indian restaurant and takeout, and Indian-influenced food features in everyday staples like sandwiches.Balti emerged at a time when curry was well established here. (Britain’s oldest Indian restaurant, Veeraswamy, opened in London in 1926.) By the 1980s, such food was found all over the country, but was often eaten by late-night diners, their taste buds dulled by an evening’s drinking. Many restaurants, according to Mr. Arif, “just put it on a plate and microwaved it.”Eating Balti in Birmingham was, and remains, a different experience. Usually it is consumed not with a knife and fork, but with large naan breads dipped into hot wok-style cooking pots made from thin-pressed steel.During the 1980s, Birmingham’s Balti restaurants were basic places, usually with glass tabletops, and, in line with Muslim beliefs, did not serve liquor (though most allowed customers to bring their own, and still do).AdvertisementCooked in less than 10 minutes over a high heat and in vegetable oil, Birmingham Balti usually contains less cholesterol than curry recipes using ghee, a sort of clarified butter.This is hardly health food, however. It tastes simple but full of flavor, spicy but not fiery, oily but not too heavy. Mr. Arif ascribes its success to the fact that it is “fresh cooking, and people like the fact that it is served sizzling.”In the kitchen at Shabab restaurant, on Birmingham’s Ladypool Road, the owner, Zafar Hussain, demonstrates the cooking technique over a fierce flame. One of his helpers rolls out a large naan bread and then, with an unexpected flourish, pulls out a pillow that is the perfect size to shape the bread, and then places it carefully into a hot, circular tandoori oven.“We get visitors from all over the world,” Mr. Hussain said. “Balti has a distinctive taste because it is cooked in a unique way.”Each restaurant has its own sauce, but ingredients include turmeric, fenugreek, cumin, garam masala and coriander (jokingly known here as “Pakistani Viagra” because of its supposed aphrodisiac qualities).There is debate over the origin of the name Balti, one theory being that it was derived from a South Asian term for “bucket” because at large gatherings on the Indian subcontinent, food was sometimes served from buckets. Another is that it refers to a mountainous area of northern Pakistan, known as Baltistan. Mr. Arif said the name was invented because it was easier to pronounce than the Pakistani cooking pot known as a karahi.Andy Munro, adviser to the Birmingham Balti Association, has led the campaign to gain the European quality mark known as T.S.G., which stands for traditional specialty guaranteed, and is one of three programs intended to protect European agricultural products and foodstuffs.If successful, restaurants will be able to use the designation as a proof of authenticity and a quality guarantee, providing they cook according to a set of rules. These would apply only to Birmingham Balti, Mr. Munro said. Balti meals prepared elsewhere, or those not identifying themselves with the city, would not be affected, providing they did not describe themselves as “Birmingham Balti.”AdvertisementThe European Commission, the executive body of the 28-nation bloc, says its deliberations are continuing, and Mr. Arif, 62, who came to Britain in the late 1960s, said he welcomed the bid for European recognition. He said he had some personal regrets that he did not exploit Balti more commercially.“This was my brand,” he said, “but I never really bothered about it.”But some have doubts about the Balti phenomenon, including one of the country’s best known cooks and cookbook authors, Madhur Jaffrey, who pointed to uncertainty over the origin of the term Balti, and to questions about its authenticity.“That kind of dish does not come out of South Asia,” she said. “This is a dish created for the West by the West.”The popularity of Balti may be “phasing out,” Ms. Jaffrey said. “I don’t see the name that much anymore.”Mr. Munro describes Ms. Jaffrey’s criticism as “culinary arrogance” and questions her concept of authenticity.In fact, they agree that there are big differences between Birmingham Balti and food served in Pakistan, which is normally cooked in clay (not steel) dishes and over a lower flame.Yet Mr. Munro argues that this is what makes Birmingham Balti a unique “fusion food,” one that is easy both on a Western palate and, thanks to the heat at which it is cooked, on the British digestive system.“I have had a couple of thousand Baltis,” he said, “and I have never had an upset stomach.”A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Push Over, Cornish Pasty: Balti Curry Seeks a Place in British Culinary Lore.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.