AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini Sengupta and Anne BarnardUNITED NATIONS — A hushed room of diplomats listened intently as a man who called himself Adnan described his escape from Mosul, Iraq, when the Islamic State laid siege to the city in 2014: As a gay man, he told them via videolink from Lebanon, he knew he would be killed, and that even members of his family would not be sorry.Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, who organized the meeting, hailed his testimony as part of her government’s efforts to raise the plight of gays and lesbians at the Security Council. But even as she did so, Adnan’s hopes for a new life in the United States came in for a rude awakening. Case workers vetting his refugee claim told him that although he was an ideal candidate for resettlement in the United States — a gay man at high risk of persecution — he would have to wait for at least a year.The reason: American immigration officials had stopped coming to Lebanon to interview potential refugees from Iraq and Syria, because the United States Embassy compound outside Beirut was being renovated, and they considered no other location safe enough to house immigration officials for the night.The paradox did not escape him. “I am eligible to speak at the Security Council and not eligible to travel to the U.S.A.,” Adnan said in an interview in Lebanon a few weeks later. He uses a pseudonym because he does not feel safe in Lebanon.Adnan’s predicament highlights the many bureaucratic hurdles and security concerns that make refugee admissions to the United States so tortuously slow, even as pressure mounts on the Obama administration to increase the number of refugees it accepts from the world’s widening war zones.The Obama administration has promised a gradual increase in the total refugees it resettles — from a current ceiling of 70,000 each year to 85,000 next year and 100,000 in 2017. That falls far short of what refugee advocates are demanding, but American officials say even the current goals will not be easy to pull off.“It’s a stretch,” said Anne C. Richard, the assistant secretary of state for population, refugees and migration. “It’s going to take lot of effort, a lot of cooperation.”It is United States policy to accept the most vulnerable of those fleeing war and persecution abroad — torture victims, widows with children, and religious or sexual minorities, like Adnan, who face heightened risks. But the White House is under intense scrutiny to ensure that terrorists do not slip in with refugees, so the process for vetting and admitting refugees takes up to two years, requiring several rounds of background checks across a network of intelligence agencies, plus a face-to-face interview to check if an applicant has a valid refugee claim.At least 18,000 Syrians and 55,000 Iraqis are in the pipeline, having been vetted by the United Nations and now waiting to have their cases examined by the United States — Adnan among them. About half are children.They are part of what the United Nations calls a historic global displacement, with nearly 60 million people forced to flee their homes because of war and persecution. Hundreds of thousands, including Syrians and Iraqis, have poured into Europe in recent months in the Continent’s worst refugee crisis in decades. Germany alone has pledged to accept 800,000 refugees.Ms. Richard said she sympathized with calls to take more, but found those unrealistic. “My heart is completely with them,” she said of refugee advocates, adding that the Obama administration was looking at how to streamline the process “and move it faster without cutting corners on security.”In Lebanon alone, there are more than a million refugees, mostly from Syria; by local law, they are unable to work, and most are slipping into poverty.For those waiting to come to the United States, the delays in Lebanon are compounded by a Department of Homeland Security rule. Because of what a department official vaguely described as “the security situation in Lebanon,” visiting immigration officers can stay and work only inside the United States Embassy compound, which is undergoing a major face-lift. Those are the most stringent security restrictions in Lebanon, where other Western governments allow their diplomats to live in apartments in Beirut.Because of the renovations, the last time Homeland Security officers conducted interviews in Lebanon was in September 2014, the official said.“They will resume in the near future,” Ms. Richard said by phone from Washington, “but I don’t know exactly when.”Among those waiting is the family of Ara Agop Baljian, Armenian Christians from Syria who fled Aleppo in September 2012 when their neighborhood suddenly became a front line in the war between government and rebel forces.“Fighters and soldiers were all around our neighborhood,” his wife, Karloine Aywabian, 31, said. “We had to leave because of the risk of getting killed by a random gunshot or during one of the exchanges of shelling.”The couple, their three children and Mr. Baljian’s mother found shelter in a Beirut neighborhood with other Armenians. They were told they were ideal candidates for resettlement in the United States: It was hard to imagine that, as members of a religious minority, they could go home to Aleppo anytime soon, and they had relatives in Southern California who were willing to help them adjust.Still, it took two years for American officials to process their paperwork. The final hurdle remains the coveted face-to-face interview. They have waited for one since December 2014. It has grown harder and harder, the couple said, to make ends meet on the under-the-table wages that Mr. Baljian earns as a jeweler’s assistant.“A few days ago, a man called saying they will call soon,” he said in late September. “But nothing yet.”The United Nations refugee agency in Lebanon has stopped making resettlement referrals to the United States, because it does not want people to wait indefinitely for an American official to come to Beirut to conduct an interview.Refugee advocates say the delays also explain why some people risk their lives and pay smugglers to help them sail to Europe. “Nothing happens with their case for two years, and then they get on a boat,” said Becca Heller, director of the International Refugee Assistance Project, which helped Adnan file his papers for resettlement in the United States.“It’s hard to advise people against that,” Ms. Heller said.So far, fewer than 2,000 Syrians have been resettled in the United States. By comparison, nearly 20,000 Iraqis have come to the United States over the last year, in part because a special category of refugee slots has been reserved for those who have worked with American government or aid agencies in Iraq.Adnan is a former medical student, and he speaks perfect English. In Mosul, an Islamic State recruiter came for him last year. He knew that Adnan was gay and told him that he could either join the group’s ranks or die. Adnan refused.Home was no longer safe. His father did not know of his sexuality until the Islamic State outed him, and was so incensed that he threatened to hand Adnan to the group himself. Adnan escaped to Lebanon in August 2014. He waited eight months to receive a certificate from the United Nations refugee agency qualifying him as a candidate for resettlement abroad. He has not received any relief in months — funding cuts have forced the United Nations to slash benefits in recent months — and he has been working odd jobs, sometimes as a waiter, other times as a medical assistant. He blogs about gay rights under the pseudonym Taim. He has grown increasingly worried about his safety in the conservative community where he is living and waiting.“They are thinking about us as numbers, cases, statistics,” he said. “Each one of us is an individual with his own life, his own feelings. We lost everything, and we are wasting days of waiting for the unknown. Wasting our youth.”Somini Sengupta reported from the United Nations, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. Maher Samaan contributed reporting from Beirut.Advertisement