By THOMAS FULLERJAN. 26, 2015
BANGKOK — The most senior United States diplomat to visit Thailand since the military seized power in May called on Monday for the lifting of martial law and delivered harsh words to the junta.The envoy, Daniel R. Russel, the assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, said in an interview that he had been sent by the Obama administration to tell the military leaders that the United States would not “paper over problems” and that he had told the junta it was losing credibility.The United States was critical of the coup in May, but it has also sought to preserve the essentials of its relationship with Thailand, one of its oldest allies in Asia, including a longstanding military association.Mr. Russel’s message to the junta on Monday, which he described as “blunt” and “tough,” was Washington’s most detailed criticism of the overthrowing of the country’s elected government and the curtailment of civil rights and speech that followed.Advertisement“Thailand is losing credibility in the eyes of its international friends and partners by not moving more quickly to end martial law, to restore civil rights and to ensure that this effort to engineer a new constitution and hold elections is not purely a top-down affair,” Mr. Russel said.AdvertisementMr. Russel’s visit came three days after the junta ramped up its prosecution of Yingluck Shinawatra, the former prime minister whom a court forced to step down two weeks before the coup and who is one of the main protagonists of a decade-long power struggle that has deflated Thailand’s economy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The retroactive impeachment of Ms. Yingluck on Friday and the announcement that she would be charged with criminal negligence over a signature agricultural policy have been interpreted as a hardening of the military’s stance against her movement, which has won every election since 2001 but is deeply resented by the Bangkok elite.Ms. Yingluck was warned by the military that she would be detained if she held a news conference on Friday after the impeachment vote, according to a statement posted by her lawyer on Facebook.The Thai Foreign Ministry issued a statement late Monday hailing “a long relationship” of more than 180 years with the United States and said it had advised Mr. Russel of the government’s “reform procedures.”In the interview late Monday, Mr. Russel also appeared to warn the Thai government that it would probably retain its “Tier 3” status, the lowest ranking in the State Department’s annual assessment of how countries handle the issue of human trafficking.“Unless there is real, measurable results to point to, I don’t know how you can say that the situation has gotten better yet,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Thailand: U.S. Envoy Criticizes Junta.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.