By ISABEL KERSHNERJAN. 26, 2015
JERUSALEM — Damián Pachter, the first journalist to report the suspicious death of an Argentine prosecutor, has fled to Israel, saying that he feared for his life in Argentina.In an account published on Monday in the Israeli newspaper Haaretz, Mr. Pachter said he concluded late on Friday that he was being followed by an Argentine intelligence officer who “wore jeans, a jeans jacket and Ray-Ban sunglasses,” and decided to leave the country immediately. He said that he flew to Israel by way of Montevideo, Uruguay, and Madrid.“They are using their security forces to chase me,” Mr. Pachter told reporters at Ben Gurion airport in Tel Aviv when he arrived Sunday evening. “I just had to move fast and quick, as fast as I could.” Mr. Pachter added in the televised remarks that he held Israeli citizenship.Working for the English-language Buenos Aires Herald, Mr. Pachter was the first to report, based on information from a source he did not name, that the prosecutor, Alberto Nisman, was dead, and that he had died in suspicious circumstances. Mr. Nisman was found Jan. 18 in his Buenos Aires apartment, dead from a gunshot wound to the head, on the day before he was scheduled to testify before lawmakers about the 1994 bombing of a Jewish center and its aftermath, a case with major political implications.AdvertisementMr. Nisman, 51, had been investigating the bombing for a decade, and had leveled serious accusations: that Iranian officials had planned and financed the attack; that Hezbollah, Iran’s ally in Lebanon, had carried it out; and that the president of Argentina, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, and her top aides had conspired to cover up Iran’s involvement as part of a deal to supply Iranian oil to Argentina.AdvertisementMr. Pachter reported the news about his death in a series of posts on Twitter, first that there had been “an incident” at Mr. Nisman’s home, then that he had been found in his bathroom in a pool of blood.At first, Argentine officials said evidence at the scene suggested suicide, but within days that conclusion was withdrawn and officials were saying that an ousted spymaster was involved.Mr. Pachter seemed to have first become alarmed about his own safety on Friday, when a colleague pointed out a report by the state news agency, Télam, attributing a Twitter message to him that he said he had not written. He took the report to be “a kind of coded message,” he said. Later he spotted the man in sunglasses, sitting nearby as he waited for a friend in a gas-station cafe outside the city.“When an Argentine intelligence agent is on your tail, it’s never good news,” Mr. Pachter wrote.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After he left Argentina, he said, the Twitter feed of the Argentine presidential palace posted the details of the airline ticket he had bought.“Argentina has become a dark place led by a corrupt political system,” he added. “I still haven’t figured out everything that has happened to me over the past 48 hours.”Jorge Capitanich, Argentina’s cabinet chief, defended the publication of Mr. Pachter’s movements on the official Twitter account. At a news conference on Monday morning, he said, “If a journalist says that he feels threatened, it’s important to publish his whereabouts.”Télam, the national news agency, denied on Monday that it had ever “alluded to a fake tweet.”Julio Cobos, an opposition politician, criticized the state-run airline, Aerolíneas Argentinas, for releasing the information about Mr. Pachter’s ticket, saying that doing so might have constituted a crime.Jonathan Gilbert contributed reporting from Buenos Aires.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.