By FLOYD WHALEYJAN. 26, 2015
MANILA — At least 43 police officers in the southern Philippines were killed during an attempt to capture one of Southeast Asia’s most wanted terrorism suspects, police and government officials said on Monday.The raid resulted in the largest single loss of life by Philippine police officers in recent history and was the first breach of a more than yearlong cease-fire with Muslim rebels under a fragile peace deal with the government. The fighting also killed an undetermined number of rebels and most likely killed the terrorism suspect, officials said on Monday.Early Sunday morning, 392 police officers from the elite Special Action Force, which is trained in the use of high-powered weapons and special tactics, conducted a surprise raid in the small town of Tukanalipao, on the restive southern Philippine island of Mindanao. The operation was designed to capture Zulkifli bin Hir, a Malaysian national and a senior leader of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorist network who also goes by the name Marwan, said Leonardo Espina, the acting chief of the Philippine National Police.The clash with the police involved fighters of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the largest Islamic rebel group in the country, which signed a landmark peace agreement with the Philippine government last year. The violence prompted concerns that the agreement, which was designed to end more than four decades of violence, could be in jeopardy.AdvertisementThe Moro Islamic Liberation Front had not been informed of the police operation, which triggered a series of firefights between government forces and rebels, said Mohager Iqbal, a peace negotiator for the rebels.AdvertisementInterior Secretary Mar Roxas called the incident a “misencounter” between government and rebel forces and said the operation would be investigated to determine whether proper procedures were followed to avoid conflict with the rebels under the cease-fire pact.“We are hopeful and confident that this will not derail the peace talks,” he said during a briefing Monday on the incident.“As we have explained, this was not directed at M.I.,” he said, using the initials for the rebel group. “This was directed against a very, very specific high-profile terrorist bomber who was in the area.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Teresita Deles, the government’s chief peace negotiator, said that cease-fire monitors were in the area attempting to prevent any further fighting.“I think it’s clear that our cease-fire mechanisms, while they were not used to prevent the problem, are certainly being used to resolve the problem, to bring it to containment,” Ms. Deles said after a Senate hearing on Monday on the peace agreement.Philippine officials said Monday that they believed Mr. Zulkifli was killed in the operation, based on photographs of the bodies at the scene and the statements of operatives in the area. DNA samples were being taken from the body believed to be that of Mr. Zulkifli in order to verify that he was killed.Mr. Zulkifli is on the F.B.I. list of most wanted terrorists, which identifies him as a member of Jemaah Islamiyah’s central command. The United States has offered a $5 million reward for his capture or killing.“Marwan is a high-value target because he is a teacher, assembler, propagator of bombing techniques,” said Mr. Roxas, who added that the suspect was believed to have been involved in high-profile recent bombings in the Philippines.Philippine military officials said in February 2012 that an early morning airstrike on Jolo Island had killed Mr. Zulkifli. Malaysian intelligence officials disputed the report, saying they believed he was wounded but still alive. The Philippine police have maintained since the 2012 attack that Mr. Zulkifli was killed.AdvertisementOn Monday, the Philippine police and military were searching the area of the firefight for survivors or additional bodies, Mr. Roxas said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.