Beijing historic courtyard topples down for illegal digging of basement by local congress deputy pic.twitter.com/baIQVropbw— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) January 28, 2015Updated, 5:28 a.m. ET| With land at a premium in Beijing, one enterprising resident attempted to greatly expand his residence, with disastrous results. The owner of a courtyard house in the Chinese capital dug down 60 feet, roughly equivalent to a five-story building, but the illegal excavation was too much for the aboveground structures or adjoining street to support, according to local news reports.Part of the residence collapsed on Saturday, and a pit more than 30 feet deep opened up in the roadway. Fifteen people living in four neighboring homes had to evacuate because of the damage, China National Radio reported.  The owner, Li Baojun, who is chairman of a Jiangsu Province business conglomerate and a representative to the municipal people’s congress in the eastern city of Xuzhou, had been warned by the authorities in July about illegal construction on the residence, The Beijing Morning Post reported.
In 2010, three construction workers from Henan Province collapsed while working below ground at the courtyard and later died in a nearby hospital, according to local news reports. The deaths of the three men probably was caused by a lack of oxygen or by poisonous gas, The Beijing News reported at the time. The property had recently been purchased, and the new owner had torn down the old structures and began a major rebuilding project, the newspaper said.The value of land in Beijing’s city center has spurred waves of illegal renovations, with residents adding boxy rooms atop centuries-old homes and sometimes tearing down entire courtyards to replace them with multistory concrete housing blocks. The city has periodically tried to crack down on haphazard demolition and construction, but it has been unable to thwart the drive of many residents of its historic lanes, or hutong, for bigger, more modern structures.The courtyard at 93 Deshengmennei Street, in a neighborhood of famous old homes between the lakes of Xihai and Houhai, is one of the most extreme examples of such illicit home improvement. The construction began as early as 2010, although the courtyard was listed for protection as a historic structure, The Beijing Morning Post reported.“When the workers said they planned to dig several stories, we were quite alarmed,” one neighbor told the newspaper. Neighbors said they had warned urban management officers about the vast underground digging but got little response. A representative of the local government said the work had not received the necessary approval from the local planning department or cultural committee, The Beijing Morning Post reported.