By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLDJAN. 27, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  Four months after the abduction of 43 rural college students shook the nation and set off a political crisis, Mexico’s attorney general on Tuesday officially declared the students dead, saying confessions and forensic evidence supported the theory that their bodies were incinerated near a garbage dump.The attorney general, Jesús Murillo Karam, delivered a detailed account of the case that did not divert much from what was previously known. Yet he went beyond hints that the students had been killed to declare that after an “exhaustive, serious” investigation, “the evidence allows us to determine that the students were kidnapped, killed, burned and thrown into the river.”Mr. Murillo Karam, in what appeared to be an effort to convince an increasingly skeptical public that investigators had solved the crime, showed photographs of charred remains, snippets of videotaped confessions and the crime scene. He also disclosed that nearly 100 people had been arrested, 39 confessions obtained and thousands of fragments of human remains recovered.Over somber music, he played a short video account of the night of the crime, based on what investigators had learned.AdvertisementThe case has led to a series of mass protest marches, most recently on Monday, and raised doubts about the rule of law in Mexico. It has helped send President Enrique Peña Nieto’s approval ratings plummeting to levels not seen by a Mexican president in two decades.AdvertisementThe president has promised to revamp local policing and adopt measures to address widespread impunity, but analysts have said he also does not wish a security crisis to define a term that he had hoped would be devoted to improving a slowing economy and buffing Mexico’s image.In a speech shortly before Mr. Murillo Karam spoke, Mr. Peña Nieto suggested it was time for the nation to move on, even as the public harbors doubts.“In this sorrowful, tragic and painful moment in the history of Mexico, we can’t be trapped. We can’t be stuck there,” he said. “We have to give it attention. There has to be justice. There has to be punishment for those who were responsible for these regrettable acts, but we have to take the course of continuing to assure that Mexico has a better future.”The students, from Escuela Normal Rural Raúl Isidro Burgos, a rural teachers college in Ayotzinapa, about an hour’s drive from Acapulco, had gone to another city, Iguala, on Sept. 26 to collect money and steal buses to use in a protest march in Mexico City. But the mayor, José Luis Abarca, who has since been arrested, ordered the police to detain the students, and they were turned over to a drug gang known as Guerreros Unidos, Mr. Murillo Karam said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said Felipe Rodríguez Salgado, who was arrested Jan. 15 and identified as a leader of Guerreros Unidos, told investigators that he had been ordered to get rid of the students because they had been infiltrated by a rival gang, Los Rojos. Some of the students were singled out as infiltrators, but the attorney general left unclear why all of the students had been killed and not just the suspected rivals.Mr. Murillo Karam added that no evidence had emerged to suggest that any of the students had been involved with Los Rojos.The students were rounded up and brought to a site near the dump. Some were interrogated but kept telling their abductors they were students before they were killed, Mr. Murillo Karam said.Despite the recovery of thousands of pieces of remains, a sophisticated laboratory at the University of Innsbruck in Austria that Mexico enlisted in the investigation could only positively identify one student, Alejandro Mora. The rest of the remains taken to the lab were too damaged to be identified and would need further testing, he said.AdvertisementMr. Murillo Karam also addressed suggestions that the fire could not have been intense enough to destroy the bodies, saying it had been made from tires, diesel and wood and had burned for days in a ravine near the town dump of Cocula, Mexico. The ashes were then bagged and thrown into a river.Human rights groups and parents of the missing students have accused the government of being slow to investigate and of mishandling the case. The parents have vowed to continue to look for their children, and have said they mistrust the authorities and do not believe their account.Melitón Ortega, the father of Mauricio Ortega, 17, one of the missing students, said that the parents had not been informed of the new evidence that the government presented on Tuesday.Elisabeth Malkin contributed reporting from Mexico City.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico Officially Declares Missing Students Dead.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.