By DOUGLAS DALBYJAN. 27, 2015
DUBLIN — The police in Northern Ireland, tongues firmly in cheek, have issued a missing-person appeal to the public after a statue of a Celtic god of the sea was stolen from a remote mountainside.The police are working on the assumption that the human-size statue of the god was cut from its plinth and stolen by religious extremists offended by idolatry. A five-foot wooden cross inscribed “Thou Shalt Not Have False Gods Before Me” stood in its place until the police took it down as evidence.The fiberglass-and-steel statue of the god, Manannan Mac Lir, was installed only last year, as part of a walking trail with sculptures, and had become a popular tourist attraction. The police said they believed that it was removed from the Gortmore viewing point on Binevenagh Mountain near Limavady in County Derry around Jan. 21.In Irish mythology, Manannan Mac Lir was the first ruler of the Isle of Man.In the missing-persons report, the police described Manannan Mac Lir as “a well-known, six-foot-tall striking local male with an athletic build.”Advertisement“He has shoulder-length hair held back with a headband and has a beard,” the report continued. “We have concerns for his health in this weather, as he is bare-chested with only a thin shawl held at the neck with a decorative clasp to keep his top half warm. Evidence at the scene suggests he has injuries to his feet.Advertisement“He is a very striking fella so if you have seen him please let us know,” the police report concluded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The statue was made by John Darren Sutton, who has worked on the “Game of Thrones” television series, which is filmed partly in Northern Ireland.Mr. Sutton told the BBC that it would have taken a number of men with disc grinders several hours to remove the figure. Although valued at 10,000 pounds, about $15,000, the statue had been a labor of love and would not have been worth stealing for the materials, he said.“It took me months and months to make, and five or six men to carry it up there and install it,” he said. “It was very heavy and would have taken a long time to remove.”He told The Derry Journal: “I don’t think whoever did this is interested in selling it on, because you can’t melt it down. I hope it can be found and it’s not too badly damaged.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.