By MONA EL-NAGGARJAN. 27, 2015
SANA, Yemen — The Houthi rebel group that has seized control of Yemen’s capital said on Tuesday that separatist forces in the south were responsible for the impasse preventing an end to the political crisis convulsing the country.Some forces in the south are taking provocative steps, the group’s leader, Abdel Malik al-Houthi, said in a televised speech that seemed to echo with frustration. “This country is for all of us and can fit all of us,” he said.Mr. Houthi proposed new talks, and his group released a presidential aide seized 10 days ago as a good-will gesture. But there was no indication that his speech signaled an easing of the crisis in Yemen, the Arab world’s poorest country and an incubator for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.If anything, Mr. Houthi’s half-hour criticism of the southern separatists’ ambitions could drive them further away.AdvertisementThe Houthi movement, a Shiite group with Iranian backing, opposes Al Qaeda but also objects to the strong United States influence here. Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, Yemen’s pro-American president, resigned along with his cabinet, leaving the country leaderless and divided.AdvertisementThe United States has relied on Mr. Hadi as a counterterrorism partner in its drone-strike campaign against Al Qaeda, and there were reports last week that his resignation had led to a suspension of that effort, which American officials denied. But the crisis did prompt the State Department to curtail work at its embassy in Sana, which closed to the public except for consular emergencies.
                Annotated maps showing the Houthi rebels’ drive south, U.S. airstrikes and historical divisions.            Alarmed by the Houthi advance and the ensuing power struggle, the southern separatist movement, Heraq, asserted its demand for independence by seizing control of territories and raising its own flag over some government buildings.On Monday, in a sign that the United States intended to pursue its drone strikes in Yemen regardless of the political crisis, three suspected Qaeda fighters were killed in a C.I.A. drone attack, American officials said.“The crisis in Sana is between forces that we consider to be occupiers,” said Ali al-Quthairi, a spokesman for a council composed of groups in the south fighting for independence. “We lost all hope for building a true civil state in Sana.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, Mr. Quthairi said, the southern drive for independence has been partly hampered by internal power struggles. Northern and southern Yemen were separate countries until 1990.Mr. Houthi’s speech followed days of closed negotiations. The Houthis, who have established themselves as the dominant force on the ground but have no presence in Parliament, pushed to form a power-sharing presidential council that would lead the country through a period of transition. The majority party of former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who still wields influence, angled for a constitutional framework that would make the head of Parliament a transitional president. And the separatists in the south, where Al Qaeda is strongest, insisted on seceding.Unlike in his last speech, Mr. Houthi stopped short of making heavy-handed threats. Instead, he called for a meeting in Sana on Friday to hold talks among the forces.The Houthis also released Mr. Hadi’s chief of staff, Ahmed Awad bin Mubarak, who had been abducted on Jan. 17.Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Houthis Blame Separatists in Yemen for Stalemate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.