AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod NordlandAMMAN, Jordan — In the hostage crisis unfolding in Jordan, the country’s so-far steadfast support for the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State may yet become collateral damage.Popular anger over Jordan’s role in the coalition bombing campaign in Syria burst into the open in recent days when it appeared that the fate of a captured Jordanian fighter pilot was taking a back seat to that of a Japanese journalist, Kenji Goto, also being held hostage by the militants.When a video that appeared to be of Mr. Goto surfaced online Tuesday, he was shown holding a photograph of the Jordanian pilot. Mr. Goto said they would both be killed by the Islamic State militants on Wednesday if Jordan did not give in to their demand to release an attempted suicide bomber from prison.The extremists seemed to be offering Mr. Goto his freedom in the deal, while all they were offering the pilot, First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh, was his life, if that.“I only have 24 hours left to live, and the pilot has even less,” Mr. Goto said in the videotape posted on Islamic State-linked Twitter accounts, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, an organization that tracks jihadist propaganda. “Any more delays by the Jordanian government will mean they’re responsible for the death of their pilot, which will then be followed by mine.”A terse Jordanian military communiqué noted that the Islamic State was not offering the pilot’s freedom, “despite the fact they are threatening to kill both hostages together.”The deadline of the latest threat was due to expire Wednesday afternoon, Jordanian time.There was no official confirmation that the video released Tuesday was from the Islamic State, but its format resembled a video released of Mr. Goto over the weekend that the militants later confirmed was theirs. That video announced the death of another Japanese hostage.Lieutenant Kasasbeh became the first coalition soldier to be taken prisoner by the Islamic State and, if killed, would be the first coalition fighter to have his life taken in the international intervention, which began with a bombing campaign in August. Three American soldiers have died from accidents and non-hostile causes, none of them in Syria.Many Jordanians have started saying that the fight with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, should not have concerned them in the first place. “This is not our war against ISIS,” said Hind al-Fayez, a member of Parliament. She added that if Lieutenant Kasasbeh “was an Israeli soldier or an American, everyone would be talking about his release, but he’s not.”The fate of the 26-year-old pilot had transfixed Jordan even before it was linked to that of Mr. Goto. Handsome and personable, Lieutenant Kasasbeh was well-regarded by the American military members who worked with him. He comes from a powerful tribe in the city of Karak, raising the domestic political risks in the case. King Abdullah visited Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s family the day after his plane went down in late December. The militants later disseminated humiliating pictures of the lieutenant, naked from the waist down, that caused widespread anger in Jordan. A cloak of secrecy dropped over the case in Jordan, but his family said it had been expecting Lieutenant Kasasbeh to be released in exchange for Sajida al-Rishawi, who was convicted and sentenced to death in 2006 for her role in an attack on Amman hotels in 2005 that killed more than 57 people and is known locally as Jordan’s 9/11. (While three co-conspirators died, including Ms. Rishawi’s husband, her explosive vest failed to detonate.) But last week, the extremists changed their demands for Mr. Goto’s release, saying he could go free in exchange for Ms. Rishawi — but making no mention of Lieutenant Kasasbeh.“That’s exactly what they wanted to do, put Jordan in an impossible position,” said a well-connected Jordanian official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because officials have been banned from commenting on the case publicly. Making the deal to release the Japanese journalist would undermine popular support in Jordan for the war against the Islamic State. Not making it would probably cost both men’s lives and also hurt support. “It’s a win-win for the Islamic State,” the official said.Complicating matters, Japan is one of Jordan’s biggest aid donors and has promised $150 million to help the huge number of Syrian refugees in the country.Bassam al-Manaseer, head of the international affairs committee in Parliament, said the war against the Islamic State was not Jordan’s and warned of a strong backlash if the country made any deal for the Japanese hostage’s freedom that did not include the release of Lieutenant Kasasbeh. Like many Jordanians, Mr. Manaseer did not challenge the idea of making a swap that gave Ms. Rishawi her freedom so long as the pilot was set free.King Abdullah has been a strong supporter of the international coalition against the Islamic State. His country is one of six Arab nations fighting with the United States in Syria, and one of only four Arab states engaging in airstrikes.Domestic criticism of that has been muted, in part because of the frequent jailing of those who criticize Jordanian policy, but that changed in recent days.On Tuesday night, a crowd of several hundred in Amman chanted slogans criticizing the king, a crime, and supporting Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s release. Japanese and Jordanian officials said they were working together to win the safe release of both men. Mr. Goto’s latest message was addressed to his government and his wife. “Tell the Japanese government to put all their political pressure on Jordan,” he said. “Any more delaying tactics will simply see both of us getting killed.”Among the protesters on Tuesday were Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s father and mother. “When he joined the air force, I expected him to defend Jordan, but not to go fight in another country,” his mother said. “This is not our business being there.”Ranya Kadri contributed reporting from Amman, Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon, and Martin Fackler from Tokyo.Advertisement