By JIM YARDLEYJAN. 27, 2015
ATHENS —  From the makeup of his cabinet to an early warning sent to the European Union over Russia policy, Greece’s new prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, on Tuesday signaled a sharp shift in direction for Greece as he unveiled the first government led from the far left in the country’s modern history.Two days after he ousted Greek’s conservative government in an emphatic election victory, Mr. Tsipras, 40, assembled a new, streamlined cabinet dominated by members of his radical-left Syriza party, among them academics, labor activists and human rights advocates.His most closely watched selection was his new finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, an economist and avid blogger who has described Europe’s austerity policies as “fiscal waterboarding.”European leaders began to send their congratulations on Tuesday after a mostly chilly initial response to the victory by Syriza, which is demanding a renegotiation of the tough terms of Europe’s 240 billion euro bailout of Greece.AdvertisementChancellor Angela Merkel of Germany wished Mr. Tsipras “much strength and success,” if also noting that “you are taking office in a difficult time in which you face great responsibility.”AdvertisementMr. Tsipras quickly demonstrated that Europe must not treat Greece as a weak junior partner. His government on Tuesday denounced a European Council statement in which European leaders blamed Russia for the escalating violence in Ukraine and raised the prospect of new economic sanctions.In its own statement, Mr. Tsipras’s office said the European statement had been issued “without the consent of Greece.” The prime minister also complained by telephone to Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s foreign policy chief.Mr. Tsipras has been a sharp critic of European sanctions against Moscow and has displayed past good will toward Russia, a sentiment common among many Greeks.President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia sent Mr. Tsipras a congratulatory telegram on Monday, the day he was sworn into office, while that same day, Mr. Tsipras met with the Russian ambassador in Athens.Having a Greek prime minister with a strongly dissenting view on Russian sanctions could greatly complicate European Union foreign policy, which has benefited from a German-led unanimity among heads of state on confronting Mr. Putin.Further sanctions cannot be approved without a unanimous vote from the leaders of European Union member nations, and Mr. Tsipras might find sympathetic partners in countries like Hungary or Slovakia, which dislike sanctions but generally go along.Political analysts in Athens interpreted Mr. Tsipras’s early warning shots as clever political positioning, given that his government will soon open negotiations with the country’s European creditors over the punishing bailout provisions. Showing that he could complicate European goals in Ukraine may give him leverage in his economic negotiations, analysts said.Advertisement“He’s maneuvering all the time,” said Stelios Kouloglou, a political commentator who last year ran an unsuccessful campaign with Syriza for the European Parliament. “But he has a main direction.”That direction is forcing Europe to ease the bailout’s tough, belt-tightening conditions, which have crippled the Greek economy and contributed to rampant joblessness, foreclosures and shuttered businesses.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Political opponents have warned that Syriza’s leftist roots would infuse Mr. Tsipras’s government with a populist, radical agenda.Costas Karagounis, a spokesman for New Democracy, the defeated conservative party, warned that some cabinet members had “expressed dangerous views” on economic growth and privatization.But the broader public reaction to the new government seemed to be one of elation, if also concern about the future.Mr. Tsipras worked assiduously in the weeks before Sunday’s elections to reassure Greek voters that he was not a wild-eyed radical but would defend Greek interests and reverse the most punitive aspects of the bailout conditions.“Syriza is a new reality in a new Europe,” said Panagiotis Kouroumplis, the country’s new health minister, in an interview. “We don’t want to disintegrate Europe. We believe there will be voices who will listen to Syriza.”He added, “What is most frustrating to citizens is they see wealth being created in Europe, but that wealth is being distributed to just a few, instead of equally.”Mr. Kouloglou, the political analyst, predicted that the new government would steadily target the oligarchical businesses that have dominated the Greek economy and enjoyed close political ties to past governments — and which actively opposed Mr. Tsipras’s campaign.Advertisement“He has no reason to pay them back or to make a compromise,” Mr. Kouloglou said. “He was not given a gift, and he is not obliged to give a gift back.”In assembling the new cabinet, Mr. Tsipras streamlined the number of ministries, but he did create a new one to fight corruption, led by the former head of Greece’s anti-money-laundering authority.He also gave the job of defense minister to Panos Kammenos, the leader of the small, center-right party Independent Greeks, with which Syriza formed a coalition to achieve a parliamentary majority.Even as many Greek leftists winced at Mr. Kammenos’s holding such a prominent position, some analysts saw the move as further evidence that Mr. Tsipras was more a dealmaker than a leftist ideologue, and that his party’s primary focus would be the formidable tasks of confronting Europe over the bailout and reviving the Greek economy.“Today, Syriza is not a left-wing party,” said Mr. Kouroumplis, the health minister. “It is, first of all, a patriotic party, which believes in peace, democracy and social justice. We demand the right to live in dignity.”Of Greece’s creditors, he added, “They should know that they are dealing with proud people.”Dimitris Bounias and Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Greece’s New Left-Wing Cabinet Signals Willingness to Confront E.U. Over Policies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.