By ALAN COWELLJAN. 27, 2015
LONDON —  Offering new details after years of official silence, a public inquiry into the death of Alexander V. Litvinenko, a former K.G.B. officer and vitriolic critic of the Kremlin, opened on Tuesday with a lawyer for his widow saying that the trail of evidence would lead “directly to the door” of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.“The murder was an act of unspeakable barbarism that inflicted on Alexander Litvinenko the most painful and lingering death imaginable,” the lawyer, Ben Emmerson, said. “It was also an act of nuclear terrorism on the streets of a major city, which put the lives of numerous other members of the public at risk.”Mr. Emmerson was speaking after Robin Tam, the counsel for the inquiry, disclosed new evidence to suggest that Mr. Litvinenko, who died of radiation poisoning in 2006, had been the target of two attacks, not just one, using the rare isotope polonium 210, and that one of his accused killers had boasted of having a “very expensive poison.”“The startling truth, which will be revealed by the evidence in this inquiry, is that a significant part of Russian organized crime is organized directly from the offices of the Kremlin,” Mr. Emmerson said, adding, “Vladimir Putin’s Russia is a Mafia state.”AdvertisementMr. Litvinenko “had to be eliminated — not because he was an enemy of the Russian State itself or an enemy of the Russian people, but because he had become an enemy of the close-knit group of criminals who surround Vladimir Putin and keep his corrupt regime in power,” said Mr. Emmerson, representing the widowed Marina Litvinenko. He cited investigations by Mr. Litvinenko into organized crime gangs in Russia and Spain.AdvertisementThe inquiry into his death on Nov. 23, 2006, is being led by a senior British judge, Robert Owen, who indicated on Tuesday that hearings could last about 10 weeks and would cover Mr. Litvinenko’s life before and after he fled Russia in 2000 to seek asylum with his family in London.As he opened the inquiry, Judge Owen said the hearings would deal with “matters of the utmost gravity,” including assertions in British government documents that there was evidence of Russian state involvement.He said that he would conduct a “full and independent” inquiry, although parts of it would be done in secret to protect national security, and that the two main suspects identified by the British authorities, Andrei K. Lugovoi and Dmitri V. Kovtun, would be invited to testify by video link from Russia. British prosecutors have accused them of bringing polonium from Moscow to London.The British authorities have said Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun were with Mr. Litvinenko on Nov. 1, 2006, when he drank tea in a hotel bar, close to the United States Embassy in London. Hours later, Mr. Litvinenko began to vomit, and he died 22 days later. Only after his death was it made known that he had been poisoned with polonium.Mr. Kovtun and Mr. Lugovoi have denied killing Mr. Litvinenko, accusing the former K.G.B. officer of seeking to poison them. British prosecutors have sought the extradition of Mr. Lugovoi, a former K.G.B. bodyguard, but the Russian authorities have refused to hand him over, citing constitutional constraints.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Laying out his broad narrative of events, Mr. Tam, the counsel for the inquiry, said the hearings would have to consider whether Mr. Litvinenko’s death was linked to his activities as a whistle-blower in Russia in the late 1990s — when he denounced the F.S.B., the domestic successor to the K.G.B., just as Mr. Putin was taking over as head of the organization before becoming prime minister and then president.Mr. Tam also said there was scientific evidence that Mr. Litvinenko had been poisoned twice with polonium, and died only after ingesting a second, larger dose on Nov. 1, 2006, in a bar at the Millennium Hotel in Grosvenor Square.In the weeks leading to that event, Mr. Tam said, Mr. Lugovoi visited London on two occasions and Mr. Kovtun once. The two men were with Mr. Litvinenko, Mr. Tam said, at a meeting at a private security company’s offices where traces of polonium were later found.AdvertisementScientists who examined Mr. Litvinenko’s hair samples after his death found evidence that he had ingested polonium at around that same time — two weeks before the meeting at the hotel where he was believed to have been fatally poisoned.Mr. Tam also said the inquiry would call a witness from Hamburg, Germany, to testify in return for anonymity. Mr. Kovtun once worked in Hamburg, where he sometimes visited his ex-wife.During a meeting in Hamburg with a former co-worker shortly before he flew to London on Nov. 1, 2006, Mr. Kovtun boasted that he had “a very expensive poison” and asked if his ex-colleague knew a cook in London to administer it in food or drink, Mr. Tam said.The former co-worker obtained a phone number for a cook, and telephone records showed that someone who gave his name as Dmitri called the cook on Nov. 1, 2006, from a cellphone owned by Mr. Lugovoi, potentially suggesting a direct link between Mr. Kovtun, Mr. Lugovoi and the purported conversation in Hamburg.Since Mr. Litvinenko’s death, Mr. Lugovoi, a wealthy businessman, has become a member of the Russian Parliament and a television celebrity in Russia.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: British Begin Inquiry Into Death of Ex-K.G.B. Officer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.