Calamity comes through the mouth, warns a Chinese saying. And for Pu Zhiqiang, one of China’s most prominent human rights lawyers, calamity has come in 28 passionate, scathing remarks that the police say he made on the Internet.A selection of Mr. Pu’s postings on Sina Weibo, China’s once vigorous microblog service, has spread on the Internet and among human rights advocates, giving the first clear insight into the police’s grounds for charging him with three crimes: provoking disturbances, inciting ethnic hatred and inciting the splitting of the country. (Mr. Pu also faces a separate charge of illegally obtaining personal information.)“Pu Zhiqiang has acknowledged that he wrote most of these postings, but there are a few that he doesn’t remember so clearly and can’t be sure of,” Shang Baojun, one of Mr. Pu’s two defense lawyers, said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Shang said that a document circulating with Mr. Pu’s 28 comments was authentic but added that he and his fellow defense lawyer, Mo Shaoping, were not involved in releasing it on the Internet. The 28 Weibo posts are the prosecutors’ sole evidence against Mr. Pu on the three speech-related crimes, Mr. Shang said.“This is all I saw of evidence in the case files,” he said.“Some of the comments are a bit crude and harsh, and some of the language may be a bit rough, but he was making comments about public figures and incidents,” Mr. Shang said. “But this should be within the scope of free speech protected by the law. There’s nothing that could be called a crime here.”Mr. Pu was detained last May and formally arrested and charged by the police the following month. He has rejected the charges against him, and his lawyer, Mr. Shang, said prosecutors were still considering whether they had enough to indict Mr. Pu.Mr. Pu is a burly man given to jokes, and his baritone voice — sardonic, mischievous and laced with salty Beijing street vernacular — echoes in the messages.“Great, glorious, correct China!” Mr. Pu wrote in one post from September 2012. “What good can I say about you? You’re a bedbug, you’re a fly and you’re also a dung beetle! What the hell are you?! Bah!”A student leader during the protests of 1989, Mr. Pu took up many contentious cases about press rights and political dissent. He has represented the artist Ai Weiwei as well as Communist Party officials demanding redress for torture they suffered during investigations on corruption charges.The selection of Mr. Pu’s comments assembled by investigators also offers insights into the ruling Communist Party’s abiding fears over its history, legitimacy and the country’s territorial unity, which have driven an intense crackdown on dissent.Mr. Pu mocks propaganda extolling the party’s beloved model soldier Lei Feng; laments policies in the western region of Xinjiang, where ethnic violence has deepened; and raises the idea of turning China’s top-down state into a looser confederation. Here is a selection of Mr. Pu’s comments, which excludes any that he said he might not have written.On Lei Feng:One of the biggest lies of the past 60 years is Lei Feng, he swindled me for 20 years! He pandered to his promoters, his diary was a collective concoction. His allowance of seven or eight renminbi a month turned into hundreds of renminbi in donations. It was either corruption or it was a scam. (June 8, 2013)On Xinjiang and ethnic violence, including an attack on March 1, 2014, by Uighurs, the mostly Muslim, Turkic-speaking people native to Xinjiang, at the train station in Kunming, in southwestern China, that killed 31 people:If you say Xinjiang belongs to China, then don’t treat it as a colony, don’t act as conquerors and plunderers, striking out against any and all before and after, turning them into the enemy. This is an absurd national policy. (May 7, 2014)The Kunming incident was too brutal, the attackers’ sins were grievous. If you say Xinjiang is producing terror, now I believe it, but this is effect, not cause. The deaths and injuries were utterly horrendous, the repercussions too grave. You tell me that you bear no responsibility for the savagery of the Xinjiang independents, then I’m not satisfied. (March 2, 2014)On China’s political system:The successes and mistakes of reform and opening up are there to see, but political system reform has gone from standstill to going backwards, so every natural disaster becomes a man-made one, and every natural disaster is magnified. The ordinary people have had enough, and it’s tough for the authorities to hang on. Well, don’t just do a few trial direct elections in counties and towns, copy the other side of the Strait [i.e. Taiwan]: reclassify [the eastern Chinese province of] Fujian as a co-province of Taiwan. (Aug. 15, 2011)Frankly, when patriot-scoundrels treat me as a traitor, that’s no slur. I didn’t choose Communist Party rule, it never sought my approval as one of the ruled, I just had to unconditionally take it — there’s no sense in that. I believe that governing the mainland divided in several pieces would be much better than grand unity without law or reason. Divided government wouldn’t be chaos. (Nov. 3, 2013)