The release of Canadian diplomatic cables from 1989 has offered new detail on the deadly crackdown on protesters in Beijing that year. The cables describe the killing of unarmed civilians, rumors of widespread executions and fears that the Canadian Embassy in Beijing could be overrun by the Chinese military if it sheltered protest leaders wanted by the government.But perhaps the most explosive assertion — that the top level of China’s leadership sought to transfer money to Switzerland — has raised questions among scholars of the period. The Swiss ambassador cited in the cable has denied that any such discussion with Chinese leaders took place.The cables were released under Canada’s Access to Information Act and first reported this week by Blacklock’s Reporter, an online publication based in Ottawa.
Like the classified American diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks starting in 2010, some of the Canadian memos reveal important and previously undisclosed details. But they are also the earliest impressions of chaotic events, and thus contain rumors and inaccuracies. The confidential memos outline the violence of the period, as hundreds and possibly thousands of people were killed in the military crackdown. But some also focus on widespread official corruption, which was one of the driving issues behind the protests.“The Swiss Ambassador, himself an ‘Old China Hand,’ told us that over the past few months every member of the Politburo Standing Committee has approached him about transferring very significant amounts of money to Swiss bank accounts,” read one cable cited by Blacklock’s Reporter. “For obvious reasons, he has urged us to guard this information with the utmost care.”The ruling Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee is the top echelon of political power in China. In 1989 its five members included both hard-liners such as Li Peng, seen as a driving force behind the crackdown, and liberals like Zhao Ziyang, who expressed sympathy for the protesters. Deng Xiaoping, considered the paramount leader at the time and described in one cable as “Emperor Deng,” was not a member of the Standing Committee but still wielded great influence. After the June 3-4 crackdown, the Standing Committee was reshuffled and expanded. Mr. Zhao was purged and spent the rest of his life under house arrest.Erwin Schurtenberger, the Swiss ambassador to China from April 1988 to April 1995, said that stringent political controls meant that he and other foreign envoys never had such access to high-level figures before or during the 1989 crisis. In an email interview he wrote that the assertion that he was approached to discuss transferring funds abroad “sounds absurd.”“How would or could anybody of this top elite group contact a foreign envoy, given the tight controls?” Mr. Schurtenberger wrote. “To assure you: Nobody of the ruling elite or anybody else had contacted me in this context.”Earl Drake, who was the Canadian ambassador to China in 1989, said in a telephone interview that he did not sign the cable that cited the Swiss ambassador and may have been temporarily recalled to Ottawa at the time it was sent from Beijing.“I knew the Swiss ambassador, but he never discussed that with me,” Mr. Drake said. “I really can’t comment.”