By MICHELLE INNISJAN. 28, 2015
SYDNEY —  One of the two hostages who died during a 17-hour siege of a downtown Sydney cafe by a lone gunman in December was killed by police bullet fragments, a coroner’s inquest into the siege and the police assault that ended it was told on Thursday.In his opening statement, Jeremy Gormly, a lawyer assisting the coroner, said that the assault on the Lindt Chocolate cafe began after a police marksman saw the gunman, Man Haron Monis, shoot the manager, Tori Johnson, 34, in the back of the head, killing him instantly. The hostage, Katrina Dawson, a lawyer, “was struck by six fragments of a police bullet or bullets, which ricocheted from hard surfaces into her body,” Mr. Gormly said. “One fragment struck a major blood vessel. She lost consciousness quickly and died shortly afterwards.”The seizure of the restaurant and 18 hostages in central Sydney by a gunman who claimed to be acting on behalf of the Islamic State stunned Australia.SYDNEYLindt Chocolate Café,location of hostage takingLindt Chocolate Café,location of hostage takingSYDNEYDEC. 14, 2014
Mr. Monis had walked into the restaurant about 8:30 a.m. on Dec. 15. He ordered chocolate cake and tea, and happened to encounter a lawyer who had represented him in a previous case. He then asked to speak to the manager, Mr. Johnson, and demanded that the restaurant’s doors be locked. He pulled out a pump-action sawed-off shotgun and forced some of the 18 people in the cafe to hold a black flag with white script against a window.Advertisement“Mr. Monis claimed in the cafe that his actions were an attack on Australia by the Islamic State,” Mr. Gormly told the inquest. “Apart from holding people up with a gun, he claimed, falsely as it turned out, to have bombs in his control.”Advertisement“It seems he had not established any contact with Islamic State before the siege, though someone claiming to be from Islamic State adopted Mr. Monis’s actions and his siege after his death,” Mr. Gormly added.The inquest was also told that Mr. Johnson was forced to call the police. Telling his captives that he had a bomb in his backpack, Mr. Monis, an Iranian immigrant who had successfully sought political asylum two decades before, warned he would shoot them in order to be taken seriously.
CreditPeter Parks/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images        Police helicopters hovered over streets that had been buzzing with Christmas shoppers and tourists. Special police units swarmed into Martin Place, as other officers sealed off public transportation and evacuated surrounding buildings, including the Reserve Bank of Australia, the New South Wales State Parliament and the Opera House.During the 17 hours in the restaurant, Mr. Monis fired five shotgun cartridges, the first after some of the hostages escaped, and the second, about 2:15 a.m. on Dec. 16. Mr. Monis forced Mr. Johnson to kneel on the floor and shot him at close range.The police marksman, positioned to watch Mr. Monis, reported the shooting. At that, heavily armed officers charged the building, shooting out glass doors and windows, setting off grenades that replicate the sounds of heavy gunfire along with brilliant flashes of light. In the melee that followed, Mr. Monis fired a number of rounds at hostages and the police. He was cut down by police gunfire, but ricocheting police bullet fragments also hit Ms. Dawson, 38. Three other hostages and a police officer were also hurt.The inquest, which will attempt to determine how the siege came about, Mr. Monis’ state of mind and the police response, will also examine why Mr. Monis, who had an extensive criminal record and was known to be deeply troubled, was not under surveillance despite a conviction for harassing the families of Australian servicemen who had been killed in Afghanistan, sexual assault charges and a pending case involving the death of his wife.The inquest was adjourned after the opening address. Mr. Gormly said evidence was still being gathered and new hearings have not yet been scheduled.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Police Bullets Killed a Hostage in Sydney Cafe Siege, Inquest Is Told.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.