AdvertisementSupported byBy William NeumanCARACAS, Venezuela — The whole thing had the feel of a Cold War defector drama — Caribbean style.President Nicolás Maduro referred menacingly to traitors withering in a hell of solitude. Others spoke of calumny and betrayal and hinted at an assassination. They were responding to reports that a former aide to the powerful head of the National Assembly and Hugo Chávez, the country’s late president, had fled the country and was cooperating with American narcotics investigators.The scandal broke this week when two newspapers, El Nuevo Herald, of Miami, and ABC, of Spain, reported that Leamsy Salazar, a military officer whom they identified as the chief of the security detail of Diosdado Cabello, the National Assembly leader, had left Venezuela for the United States, where he was cooperating with drug investigators. Citing unnamed sources, the newspapers said that Mr. Salazar had implicated Mr. Cabello as a top drug trafficker. Venezuelan government officials quickly condemned the reports, calling them part of an international conspiracy against the country’s leftist government, but one of the officials appeared to confirm at least part of them.Without naming Mr. Salazar, Pedro Carreño, a legislator in the government’s United Socialist Party, said on Tuesday that “a citizen who carried out security duties with the presidential guard and later with Comrade Diosdado Cabello” had “deserted from the armed forces in December and appears in the United States as a protected witness to defame, insult and subject to public scorn the president of the National Assembly.”In a speech on Tuesday, Mr. Maduro charged that “imperial hands” were behind the allegations against Mr. Cabello.“You know that whoever tries to mess with Venezuela dries up and whoever betrays their country dries up forever,” Mr. Maduro said, employing a term used here for someone who dies as a result of spells or curses. “Whoever betrays the revolution, a hell of solitude awaits him, a hell of defeat, of isolation, of repudiation.”Then on Wednesday, Mr. Cabello spoke about Mr. Salazar in an interview with a Colombian radio station, Blu Radio.He said that Mr. Salazar had worked with Mr. Chávez and that after Mr. Chávez died in March 2013, Mr. Salazar joined his staff. He denied that Mr. Salazar headed his security detail.Mr. Cabello did say, however, that last June he noticed that Mr. Salazar no longer would look him in the face and so he had him transferred.“He deserted and decided to leave Venezuela and turn over his dignity to the American imperialists,” Mr. Cabello said, adding, “This is part of the infamy, of the calumnies, the war that all of us comrades who are part of the revolution have been subject to.”He went on to question whether Mr. Salazar might have somehow been involved in the death of Mr. Chávez, who had terminal cancer. Mr. Maduro has previously suggested that Mr. Chávez’s illness might have been induced by enemies, saying that the United States government might have developed the capability to use cancer as a weapon.“We don’t think it was him who did something to make the commander die, but what if he did?” Mr. Cabello said.The United States has long held that top Venezuelan officials are involved in narcotics trafficking.On Wednesday, a spokesman for the American Embassy in Caracas as well as a spokeswoman for the Drug Enforcement Administration in Washington refused to say if Mr. Salazar was cooperating with investigators.Advertisement