
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
JAN. 28, 2015
As images of President Obama and the first lady, Michelle Obama, with the new Saudi leader, King Salman, circulated online after their brief visit to Riyadh on Tuesday, commentators, observers watching from afar, seized on the fact that Mrs. Obama had not covered her hair during the audience with the new monarch.Reports that some Saudi bloggers had expressed anger at the first lady’s supposed show of defiance — in refusing to honor the Saudi custom that compels women in the conservative kingdom to wear headscarves or full-body cloaks — were followed by a chorus of online praise for Mrs. Obama. They were joined even by one of the president’s most avid critics, Senator Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican who perhaps hopes to succeed him.
            Make no mistake: Michelle Obama just made a bold political statement in Saudi Arabia http://t.co/7zrV404Mgt 
            THANK YOU @MichelleObama for refuse to wear a head scarf for dignity of women in S.Arabia
#Michelle_Obama_NotVeiled pic.twitter.com/HVr1cjQCLi 
            Kudos to @FLOTUS for standing up for women & refusing to wear Sharia-mandated head-scarf in Saudi Arabia. Nicely done http://t.co/TlSw4Qc9KQ However, as a number of journalists better informed about diplomatic protocol in the kingdom tried to explain, female visitors, including previous first ladies and senior officials from the United States and the leaders of other nations, have met Saudi royals, including kings, for years without covering their hair.
@simeonkerr they don’t enforce abaya at that level, even @USEmbassyRiyadh female officials don’t have to wear abaya during such visits        
            For those asking, no, @FLOTUS is not wearing a headscarf. Western women (including this one) often don't in Saudi Arabia        
            will be on @LBC just after 8pm discussing the media storm over Michelle Obama's lack of headscarf in #Saudi - spoiler alert: storm in teacup        
            I don't understand the commentary on Michelle Obama's lack of scarf on Saudi tarmac as if she's a revolutionary pic.twitter.com/eIB6dtDsAW News photographs showed that other female members in the American delegation — including the former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader — also met the king without headscarves.Archival photographs of other prominent women visiting members of the royal family in years past illustrated that this was nothing new.AdvertisementAhmed Al Omran, a Saudi journalist and blogger alert to the dangers of Internet-sourced reporting, tried to correct the flow of false information on Twitter. Given that there are millions of Saudi Twitter users, he noted, reports citing just 1,500 complaints about Mrs. Obama’s attire this week could hardly be used as evidence of a broad-based backlash.
            Saudi has millions of Twitter users. When a few hundred of them talk about something, that's not a backlash. It's hardly a flicker.        A look at the new king’s popular Twitter account showed that, although he is accustomed to meeting Saudi women who cloak their hair, he is also quite used to meeting female Western officials with uncovered hair — like Anne Patterson, the United States assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany.
            نيابة عن الملك، الأمير سلمان يفتتح أعمال السنة الثالثة من الدورة السادسة لمجلس الشورى. pic.twitter.com/aSusu2euai 
            الأمير سلمان يستقبل مساعدة وزير الخارجية الأمريكي لشؤون الشرق الأدنى آن باترسون ويستعرض علاقات التعاون بين البلدين. pic.twitter.com/jgL1RYpdDL 
            الأمير سلمان يلتقي المستشارة الألمانية انجيلا ميركل ويبحث معها القضايا المشتركة على هامش قمة العشرين بأستراليا. pic.twitter.com/UkiZDV7Crg Other rumors about the visit, that Saudi television had blurred out images of Mrs. Obama and that she had ostentatiously frowned the entire time, also spread online despite clear visual evidence that they were untrue.
            Rumor #Saudi TV blurred out Michelle Obama's face at airport reception not true. 
video below
https://t.co/fbJIWQVuek pic.twitter.com/anZ9Xf8wz6 We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »