By ALISON SMALEJAN. 28, 2015
BERLIN —  The anti-immigrant group that spawned large rallies and counterprotests around Germany announced a leadership exodus on Wednesday, just a week after its founder was forced to step down when photos of him posed as Hitler circulated on social media.The group, known as Pegida, the German acronym for Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamization of the West, sprang up in the fall with only a few hundred followers. This month, as many as 25,000 people showed up in Dresden for its weekly marches, while tens of thousands of others have turned out across Germany to counter its anti-immigration message.But as the Pegida movement — and the backlash — swelled, and interest in its rallies picked up, the group’s leadership crumbled under increased scrutiny, and the nascent movement may be waning.A statement on Pegida’s website said its spokeswoman, Kathrin Oertel, needed a “timeout” from the barrage of media attention that has accelerated since the rallies picked up followers and national and international interest. Thomas Tallacker, another member of Pegida’s leadership and a former member of the City Council in Meissen, near Dresden, needed to devote himself more fully to his struggling business, the statement added. German news media reported that three more of the movement’s leaders had resigned.AdvertisementHajo Funke, a political scientist who studies right-wing extremism in Germany, said the resignations spelled “the beginning of the end” of Pegida. “You cannot keep a movement together when the leadership is at odds with each other and does not know what it wants,” he said.In Dresden, an estimated 25,000 protestors took to the streets to protest Germany’s immigration policies.Pegida’s leadership structure is murky, and though the statement did not explain how, it said that new leaders would be chosen in the coming days.Lutz Bachmann, the movement’s founder, stepped down last week after a photo posted on Facebook showing him posed as Hitler was strewn across the front pages of German newspapers and recirculated on social media.AdvertisementThe group, which attracts a motley mix of far-right-wingers, xenophobic populists and ordinary Germans who feel neglected by the government, has repeatedly denied that it has any ties to the Nazi movement.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Bachmann, who did not answer calls to his mobile telephone on Wednesday, told the newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung that Ms. Oertel had been threatened by a left-wing, anti-Nazi movement in Dresden.Besides Dresden, the only other city where Pegida has had a considerable presence was Leipzig, where some 7,000 anti-immigration marchers faced off last week against a larger crowd of opponents. The movement has been seen as an affront to Germany’s message of tolerance, and it has drawn the attention of the German establishment, including Chancellor Angela Merkel.The movement will not hold a rally next Monday, a spokesman for the Dresden city government told the German news agency DPA.In the statement on its website announcing the two resignations, Pegida said, “It is not a matter of personalities, but our cause — and that is good and right,” rendered in capital letters.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: German Anti-Immigrant Leaders Resign.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.