By ALAN COWELLJAN. 28, 2015
LONDON —  Andrei K. Lugovoi, a Russian entrepreneur and former K.G.B. bodyguard accused of poisoning Alexander V. Litvinenko with radioactive polonium 210, was quoted Wednesday as saying the charges that Russia was behind the killing were “nonsense.”“Such evidence simply does not exist because Russia wasn’t involved,” Mr. Lugovoi told The Associated Press at his office in Russia’s Parliament, where he became a lawmaker after the death in London on Nov. 23, 2006, of Mr. Litvinenko, a former K.G.B. officer and bitter opponent of President Vladimir V. Putin. “Second, even if somebody had produced it, then I can only say that it’s a fake and speculation.”His remarks were published as an oft-delayed public inquiry into Mr. Litvinenko’s death entered a second day in London. On Tuesday, Ben Emmerson, a barrister representing the widowed Marina Litvinenko, said the trail of evidence would lead “directly to the door” of Mr. Putin.The inquiry, which is set to last around 10 weeks and will be conducted at least partially in secret, will explore such areas as the involvement of Russian state agencies and British intelligence services in Mr. Litvinenko’s death. At the time of his death, Mr. Litvinenko and his family had just acquired British citizenship.AdvertisementMr. Litvinenko’s lawyers have said that he worked in some capacity for MI6, Britain’s overseas spy agency, for several years after seeking asylum in Britain in 2000, and had investigated links between the Kremlin and organized crime.AdvertisementBritish prosecutors say Mr. Litvinenko was poisoned on Nov. 1, 2006, the same day that he met with Mr. Lugovoi and an associate, Dmitri V. Kovtun, a former Soviet Army officer described at the inquiry as a deserter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Straightaway a waiter came up to us,” Mr. Litvinenko said in the hospital, according to a transcript read Tuesday by the counsel to the inquiry. “There was already a teapot on the table and I poured some tea out of the teapot, although there was only a little left on the bottom and it made just half a cup. Maybe about 50 grams. I swallowed several times but it was green tea with no sugar and it was already cold, by the way.“I didn’t like it for some reason,” Mr. Litvinenko said. “Maybe in total I swallowed three or four times.” Dr. Nathaniel Cary, a government pathologist who helped conduct a post-mortem examination of Mr. Litvinenko soon after his death, spoke at the inquiry Wednesday and said a medical analysis supported Mr. Litvinenko’s account.“It appears Mr. Litvinenko ingested a large quantity of polonium 210 on or around Nov. 1, 2006, largely if not wholly by oral ingestion, rather than by inhalation,” Dr. Cary said.He described the isotope as “the smoking gun in the case. It shows you what happened.”Because of “very hazardous” levels of radiation in Mr. Litvinenko’s body, Dr. Cary said, the examination after his death “has been described as the most dangerous post-mortem examination ever undertaken in the Western world, and I think that is probably right.” Physicians wore two protective suits, gloves and specialized hoods with air pumped in through a filter, he said.Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun have denied the murder charges.Craig Mascall, a detective inspector with Scotland Yard’s counterterrorism unit, told the inquiry Wednesday, “There are still two people wanted for the murder of Mr. Litvinenko, and that’s Mr. Lugovoi and Mr. Kovtun.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Suspect in Killing of Putin Foe Calls Accusations ‘Nonsense’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.