By ANDREW ROTHJAN. 28, 2015
MOSCOW —  North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, plans to visit Moscow this May in his first trip abroad since assuming power in 2011, a Kremlin spokesman announced on Wednesday.The announcement from the spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, came amid a strengthening in ties between the two countries, even as North Korea remains isolated and has seen a chill in relations with its closest ally, China.“The North Korean leader’s participation has been confirmed, and we are getting ready for his arrival,” Mr. Peskov said in remarks carried by the Interfax news agency.North Korea has not confirmed the trip, which is scheduled for May 9, coinciding with the celebration of the 70th anniversary of the defeat of Nazi Germany.AdvertisementIf Mr. Kim attends, it would be another indication of the two countries’ increased importance to each other. North Korea is depending on Russia and China to fight off efforts at the United Nations Security Council to recommend that the International Criminal Court examine North Korea’s human rights abuses. And although China is the major investor in the North, Russia has also has invested in the country’s weak economy.AdvertisementRussia, meanwhile, has been increasingly looking to Asia for friends as its own relations with the West, and particularly the United States, have soured.A trip to Russia would also provide the world a clearer look at Mr. Kim, who has met few high-level international officials since coming to power with the death of his father in late 2011. He met a senior Chinese Party official in Pyongyang in 2012. Since then, the only prominent foreigner known to have met Mr. Kim is Dennis Rodman, the former N.B.A. star from the United States.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Russian authorities have said that about 20 state leaders have agreed to attend the May celebration. President Obama and President Park Geun-hye of South Korea have not said yet if they will attend.The North has been in a standoff with the United States and the South over its nuclear program and its human rights record.In a speech on Jan. 1, Mr. Kim said he was willing to meet Ms. Park if the mood was right. Ms. Park has since said that she is ready to meet Mr. Kim “without preconditions” but has urged the North to show “sincerity” by abandoning its nuclear weapons development. The Koreas have since been unable to start a dialogue on a summit meeting.The crisis in Ukraine and Russia’s annexation of Crimea have deeply politicized the commemorations of World War II events.Mr. Putin declined to attend the 70th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz this week because he was not invited personally. At a celebration in Moscow, he warned of attempts to “rewrite history.”President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine, at Auschwitz, called “on the world not to allow the replay of the tragic events,” accusing Russia of aggression.Choe Sang-Hun contributed reporting from Seoul, South Korea.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: North Korean Plans to Visit Russia in May.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.