By EDWARD WONGJAN. 28, 2015
BEIJING — Fifteen Communist Party officials in central Tibet who were accused of taking part in separatist activities last year have been punished for violating party discipline, the Chinese news media reported on Wednesday.The officials in the Tibet Autonomous Region, which includes the capital, Lhasa, provided intelligence to the “Dalai Lama clique” and took part in activities that “would harm national security,” according to an article by China News Service, an official agency, that was published by several major news outlets, including Global Times, a populist newspaper, and the website of People’s Daily, the main party newspaper. The report cited officials with the party Commission for Discipline Inspection of Tibet.The report said there had been six cases of party members and civil servants violating party discipline and 45 officials who had abandoned their posts or neglected their duties. Those 45 officials were being “severely punished,” the report said, citing Wang Gang, a party discipline official.It was unclear from the report to what degree the cases of these officials overlapped with the 15 cases involving separatist activities.AdvertisementThe report said the officials had assisted a Tibetan independence organization. China often accuses the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, of secretly advocating for Tibetan independence, though the Dalai Lama has insisted he supports only true autonomy for the region. He fled to India in 1959 and lives in a Himalayan hill station above the town of Dharamsala.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Chinese News Service article said the Tibet region’s party Commission for Discipline Inspection received 1,494 complaints last year from residents about misbehaving officials, an increase of 132 percent over the number in 2013. Of those, 329 cases have been investigated, an increase of 161 percent over 2013, the report said.A total of 240 people have been dealt with in some manner for violating “eight-point” rules issued in 2014 that were aimed at maintaining party discipline, the report said.AdvertisementThe central government and the local authorities have been increasing the presence of security forces across Tibetan areas of China since 2008, when a mass uprising took place throughout the region. In recent years, scores of frustrated Tibetans have set themselves on fire to protestChinese Communist Party rule. The rate of self-immolations slowed for a period, but there has been a resurgence recently in Tibetan areas of Sichuan Province. More self-immolations have taken place in Sichuan and Qinghai Provinces than in the Tibet Autonomous Region, which is more tightly controlled.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: China: Party Officials in Tibet Punished.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.