By DAN BILEFSKY and MAÏA de la BAUMEJAN. 28, 2015
PARIS — In a bid to stop the flow of disaffected youth to the battlefields of Syria and Iraq, the French government on Wednesday released a graphic two-minute video showing clips of executions, wounded children and crucifixions that tells potential recruits that the glory promised to them is a lie.The video, which appears on an Interior Ministry website, Stop Djihadisme, raises what the government believes are the top arguments made by the Islamic State terrorist group and other jihadist recruiters and turns them upside down, point-counterpoint style. It is meant to blunt the appeal of such recruiters, many of whom disseminate their messages through Facebook and online videos.“You are told: ‘Sacrifice yourself at our side, you will defend a fair cause,'” the video says. “In reality, you will discover hell on earth and you will die alone, far from your home.”At another point, it says: “You are told: ‘Come start a family with one of our heroes.’ In reality, you will raise your children in war and terror.” More than 350,000 people have already watched the video on a video-sharing website, Dailymotion.AdvertisementThe website was introduced on Wednesday, three weeks after terrorist attacks at the Paris offices of the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and at a kosher supermarket in the city that killed 16 people, including four taken hostage at the market. Both attacks, along with the fatal shooting of a French policewoman, were committed by Muslim extremists who said they were fighting on behalf of the Islamic State or Al Qaeda in Yemen.AdvertisementAlso on Wednesday, a provocative French comedian, Dieudonné M’bala M’bala, whose perceived expression of solidarity with the supermarket gunman led to his detention on charges of condoning terrorism, stood trial in criminal court in another case, over a comment he made lamenting that a prominent Jewish journalist did not die in “the gas chambers,” prosecutors said.Mr. M’bala M’bala has become an emblem in France of the struggle of upholding the secular republic’s commitment to free speech while maintaining public safety and preventing hate crimes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That tension was once again laid bare after the recent terrorist attacks in Paris, when Mr. M’bala M’bala was arrested for comments suggesting that he sympathized with Amedy Coulibaly, the extremist who killed the hostages at the supermarket. “Tonight, as far as I’m concerned, I feel like Charlie Coulibaly,” he wrote on Facebook, invoking the slogan “Je suis Charlie,” meant to show solidarity with the Charlie Hebdo cartoonists who were killed.The case that went to trial on Wednesday, in which Mr. M’bala M’bala is accused of inciting racial hatred, dates to 2013, when footage of him taken by a hidden camera was broadcast on France 2, including his comment about the journalist, Patrick Cohen. The comment prompted a police investigation and a government ban of his show. France has stringent laws restricting racist speech; if found guilty, he could face one year in prison and a fine of 45,000 euros, or about $51,000.Mr. M’bala M’bala has been charged nearly 40 times with violating anti-hate laws. In the past, he has sought to circumvent restrictions imposed on him by turning to the Internet and to social media, where he has accumulated a large and loyal following.Mr. M’bala M’bala denies that he is an anti-Semite and has cast himself as a trenchant voice against the establishment. Referring to the recent publication of a cartoon of the Prophet Muhammad by Charlie Hebdo, his defenders say the legal cases against him reflect a double standard by which it is acceptable to insult Muslims but not Jews. However, some legal experts counter that while Charlie Hebdo heaps scorn on all religions, Mr. M’bala M’bala has targeted a specific group, Jews, and that has made him more vulnerable to legal complaints.In the weeks after the attacks in and around Paris, the French authorities have moved aggressively to rein in speech supporting terrorism, including using a new law that allows harsh penalties against those found guilty.A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: French Video Tries to Blunt Jihad’s Allure Among Youth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.