By ROD NORDLAND and RANYA KADRIJAN. 28, 2015
AMMAN, Jordan — The Jordanian government agreed on Wednesday to release a convicted terrorist in exchange for the freeing of an air force pilot captured by Islamic State militants in Syria a month ago, according to a statement released on Jordanian state television just before a deadline set by the extremists.The militants had threatened to kill the pilot and a Japanese journalist they are holding hostage if the deadline was not met, according to a video attributed to the Islamic State. The Jordanian statement made no mention of the fate of the journalist, although Japanese officials have said they were working with the Jordanians to try to free the two men.“Jordan confirms that it is completely prepared to release the prisoner Sajida al-Rishawi if Moaz al-Kasasbeh is released and his life is intact,” the statement said, referring to the terrorist and the pilot.The militants later gave the Jordanians until sunset on Thursday to bring Ms. Rishawi to the Turkish-Syrian border, or the pilot would be killed immediately, according to a new audio message attributed to the captive Japanese journalist.AdvertisementJordan’s foreign minister, Nasser S. Judeh, said on Twitter, “We’ve asked for proof of life of our hero al-Kasasbeh, that he’s safe and healthy, but we did not get it.”AdvertisementThe Islamic State has yet to confirm the authenticity of the video, released Tuesday, but it follows a similar format to one posted over the weekend and claimed by the extremist group. In the video, a man who says he is the Japanese journalist, Kenji Goto, presents the militants’ ultimatum, demanding Ms. Rishawi’s release in exchange for his own. Mr. Goto said that both he and the pilot would otherwise be killed, but he did not indicate whether the extremists had also proposed releasing the pilot.The minister of state for media affairs, Mohammad Momani, “confirmed that the priority of Jordan from the start of the crisis was to insure the life of our son the pilot Kasasbeh,” state television reported.The fate of the pilot has riveted Jordan in recent weeks and has fed criticism of Jordan’s decision to join the American-led coalition against the Islamic State.The father of the pilot, a first lieutenant, had appealed on Wednesday for King Abdullah II of Jordan to free Ms. Rishawi, a would-be suicide bomber, in exchange for the release of his son in an unusually public outpouring of anger toward the Jordanian authorities.The father, Youssef al-Kasasbeh, broke weeks of silence, requested by government officials, to make the demand at a demonstration calling for Ms. Rishawi to be exchanged for Lieutenant Kasasbeh.Ms. Rishawi was one of four suicide bombers who attacked three hotels in Amman, the Jordanian capital, in 2005, killing more than 57 people; her explosive vest did not detonate, and she was soon captured and later sentenced to death.“Who is Sajida to us?” Mr. Kasasbeh said on Wednesday at a demonstration of several hundred in support of his son. “Sajida is a burden on us, let them release her. I am asking for the release of Sajida and all the prisoners, and the return of Moaz to us.”AdvertisementMany of the demonstrators shouted slogans critical of the government and of Abdullah. While such conduct has led to arrests in the past, the authorities stood by without intervening. The protest began late Tuesday night and continued into the early morning hours, when Mr. Kasasbeh made his comments.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Wednesday night, protesters and relatives from the pilot’s hometown, the central Jordanian city of Karak, gathered at the gates to the royal palace in Amman, chanting slogans critical of Abdullah, such as, “You coward, you friend of the Americans.”The king responded by inviting the pilot’s parents and wife into the palace to discuss the case, and they left several hours later, saying they had been greatly reassured, but declining to discuss what Abdullah had told them.Family members said they had heard the deadline for Ms. Rishawi’s release had been extended to Thursday morning, but there was no immediate confirmation of this from Islamic State sources.Lieutenant Kasasbeh comes from a prominent family and a large tribe from. Jordanian officials were concerned enough about his relatives’ reaction that Abdullah visited them a day after the pilot’s capture, on Dec. 24.The pilot is the first prisoner from the American-led coalition to have been taken by the Islamic State since the coalition began airstrikes against the militants. Jordan is one of four Arab countries participating in the Syria strikes.The video released Tuesday was posted on Twitter accounts used by the extremists, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist organizations.As recently as Tuesday afternoon, the pilot’s father had refused to discuss his son’s case, saying the government had asked him to let it handle the matter in confidence. He said concerns that the Japanese journalist would be released but that his son would not prompted his change in stance.“Why should we negotiate for a Japanese? We care about our own son,” he said.In Tokyo, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe called the extremists’ latest threat a “despicable act.”“Within this extremely severe context, the government of Japan is requesting cooperation from the government of Jordan to bring about the early release of Mr. Goto,” Mr. Abe said on Wednesday in Tokyo. “This policy will remain unchanged going forward.”Martin Fackler contributed reporting from Tokyo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.