By FLOYD WHALEYJAN. 28, 2015
MANILA —  President Benigno S. Aquino III of the Philippines tried to distance himself Wednesday from a botched counterterrorism raid that left 44 elite police officers dead on Sunday and jeopardized a landmark peace deal with rebels in the country’s south.During a nationally televised speech, Mr. Aquino said he did not specifically authorize about 400 police officers from an elite commando unit to conduct the raid early Sunday in a remote part of the island of Mindanao to capture a top terrorism suspect.“ ‘Can we proceed with the mission?’ ” I don’t think I was ever asked that question,” Mr. Aquino said, without specifying who had ordered the operation that killed the suspect, Zulkifli bin Hir, a senior leader of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorist network.The raid was conducted near areas controlled by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, with whom the government signed a cease-fire agreement last year. The rebel group’s chairman, Al Haj Murad Ebrahim, said Wednesday that his group had not been informed of the operation ahead of time, as is required under the deal with the government, and that his fighters were acting in self-defense when they fired on the police.AdvertisementImages of the dead police officers circulating on social media have fueled debate over the raid, and threaten to scuttle the deal that ended more than four decades of violence. Some former military and police officials are calling for a full-scale military offensive against the rebels.AdvertisementThe government has responded by calling for calm, announcing an investigation of the raid as it took swift action against two senior police officials involved. The spokesman for the national police, Wilben Mayor, was relieved of duty on Wednesday, a day after the head of the unit that conducted the operation, Getulio Napeñas, was removed.In his speech on Wednesday, Mr. Aquino acknowledged that there had been poor coordination of the raid among the police, the military and the rebels. He said that he expected the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to assist with the government investigation and to help identify the rebels who were involved in the gun battle with the police.Other groups, including the smaller Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, who are opposed to the deal with the government, were also involved in the fighting, he added.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some lawmakers have called for retribution and the surrender of insurgents involved in the clash, which killed a handful of rebels.“The only way forward,” Senator Ralph Recto said in a statement released Wednesday, is for the Moro Islamic Liberation Front “to surrender their men who were responsible for the killing of the policemen.”Several influential lawmakers in the Philippines have withdrawn their support for a bill that would formalize the agreement signed in March, which would give a degree of autonomy to Muslim communities in the southern Philippines and would allow local governments to keep a greater share of tax revenues from the resource-rich area.“This incident has tremendous political implications for the peace process,” Rommel C. Banlaoi, executive director of the Philippine Institute for Peace, Violence and Terrorism Research, said by telephone. “Some legislators have already withdrawn their support for the draft legislation, and there are other politicians calling for a halt to the debate on the law.”Because of the delicate nature of the operation — the attempted capture of an international terrorism suspect — only a few government officials were informed of the raid, Mr. Banlaoi noted. The resulting confusion set off rumors and a public backlash.On Tuesday, Chief Justice Maria Lourdes P. A. Sereno made a rare public statement, calling for continued support for the peace process.Advertisement“A call for war and retribution should never be made lightly and should remain always a final option,” Chief Justice Sereno said. “It should certainly not be made in the heat of the moment and in the face of, as yet, unclear facts and confusing narratives.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Leader Says He Did Not Endorse Raid in Philippines.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.