By ELISABETTA POVOLEDOJAN. 29, 2015
ROME —  Shortly before voting began in Parliament on Thursday to elect Italy’s new president, a flash mob gathered in the cold rain outside the Quirinale, as the presidential residence is called.The small, bedraggled group, donning masks of their candidate and tossing confetti, had come to support the unlikely candidacy of Giancarlo Magalli, a popular television presenter whose name has circulated on social media to succeed Giorgio Napolitano, 89, who resigned this month citing his advanced age.It mattered little that Mr. Magalli has no chance of winning. His supporters see him as a protest candidate — “an icon of Italian malcontent,” as Federico Spini, a computer engineer who works at Rome’s Third University, put it. “We want them to know that things aren’t right.”Nevertheless, the Italian president will be elected the usual way: a secret ballot among 1,009 lawmakers and regional delegates that leaves considerable room for all manner of back stabbing, horse-trading and surprises. Even before the start of the voting, which is expected to last at least three days, the speculation and intrigue were underway.AdvertisementNo one party has enough votes to push through a candidate, and the winner is likely to emerge out of a compromise between Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s Democratic Party and the center-right opposition led by the former prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi.AdvertisementOn Thursday, Mr. Renzi formally backed Sergio Mattarella, a constitutional court judge and former lawmaker from his party.But conventional wisdom has it that, as with papal conclaves, those who enter into the first vote as favorites emerge defeated. True to form, supporters of Mr. Berlusconi, whose antipathy for Italy’s judiciary has long been a leitmotif of his political platform, rejected Mr. Mattarella outright.As expected, the first round of voting did not produce a winner. The parties of Mr. Renzi and Mr. Berlusconi — the two largest in Parliament — cast blank ballots, and a handful of other candidates supported by other parties fell far short of gaining enough ballots.The early jostling reflected the ways the election has historically been used to consolidate the hierarchy of power within Parliament. Already, various candidates, including former Italian leaders like Romano Prodi and Giuliano Amato, have been effectively vetoed, leaving the presidential field wide open.“Presidential elections are always where showdowns occur,” said Sabino Labia, a journalist and the author of a 2014 book about the history of presidential elections. Though some 40 potential candidates have emerged so far, he said, the winning choice “will have to overcome many obstacles,” successfully navigating “the various wars being fought within each political party.”For Mr. Renzi, who has been facing growing dissent from within his own Democratic Party, the election has the potential to expose his weakness, should his candidate not receive the necessary backing. The victory of the Syriza leader Alexis Tsipras this week in Greece has already roused the fervor of Mr. Renzi’s challengers in his party.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Starting Friday, there will be two rounds of voting a day until someone is elected, and political commentators said that Mr. Renzi’s position will weaken with every new round.“Renzi needs to close this quickly because the longer it goes, the more insidious it will become for him, both within his party and within the government, with a strong risk of laceration,” said Gino Scaccia, a constitutional rights professor at Luiss Guido Carli University in Rome. Mr. Renzi “has to show that he can keep his party and coalition united,” he said.AdvertisementItaly has had 11 presidents — Mr. Napolitano served part of an unprecedented second term — since 1948. It is a post that serves as the guarantor of the Constitution and exercises several crucial functions to ensure political stability including dissolving Parliament, calling new elections, naming the prime minister and rubber-stamping the cabinet.The president is the arbiter of national unity, often a mediator for improbable political alliances and occasionally within single political parties, which are often fractious and split among different positions.The president also appoints judges to the constitutional court, as well as senators for life, and he or she — though there has never been a female president — has the right to grant pardons.Some have suggested that Mr. Berlusconi, who is serving a sentence for tax fraud and cannot run for public office for two years, was fishing for absolution. But political analysts have said that as the president is representative of national unity, any new head of state would be hesitant to alienate a large part of the electorate that feels Mr. Berlusconi got what he deserved.Appeals have come from across the political spectrum for the election of a president who is above the political fray, with respected international standing and the freedom to make decisions independent of political pressures.Debate has also focused on the role the president should play in the country’s political life.The current constitutional rules are vague enough that presidents have a lot of leeway, and Mr. Napolitano was an active — his critics would say too active — participant during his tenure. For example, he named the economist Mario Monti as prime minister to replace Mr. Berlusconi during the eurozone crisis in 2011.But reforms under discussion to change the electoral law and the makeup of Parliament are leaning toward reinforcing the executive branch, which could create potential conflict in the case of a decisive president. “The temptation might be to choose a president that wouldn’t be characterized as a leader,” Mr. Scaccia said.But even that calculation is no guarantee. “The impression I have is that when you’re in the position of president,” Mr. Scaccia said, “above political responsibilities to any one party, even sheep can become lions.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.