AdvertisementSupported byBy Kareem FahimBAGHDAD — Some of the men were shot on their doorsteps, their bodies left crumpled in the streets. Others were lined up, led to a field and killed there. Their relatives, ordered to stay in their homes, heard the gunfire. At least 72 people from a majority Sunni village in eastern Iraq were methodically singled out for slaughter this week, according to witnesses and local Sunni leaders, who said the victims were killed by Shiite militiamen who were supporting Iraqi security forces.A spokesman for Iraq’s prime minister said Thursday that the government was investigating the claims. Some local security officials in Diyala Province have asserted the victims were militants killed in battle by the security forces, denying that sectarian executions had occurred. But witness accounts suggest that is what happened in the village of Barwanah starting on Monday. Several survivors described seeing a column of troops drive into the village that afternoon, quickly followed by a convoy of militia fighters. The militiamen started calling out specific names of people they were seeking, then began killing.The murders are a potentially explosive descent into the kind of sectarian violence that led many Iraqi Sunnis to lose all trust in their government and its militia allies, even before the jihadists of the Islamic State began their rapid advance through much of northern Iraq last summer.In recent months, the new, Western-backed government of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi has urgently sought to regain the trust of Iraqi Sunnis, calling the effort an integral part of the campaign to defeat the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.But the government’s conduct of the war has only deepened distrust in some Sunni areas, as Shiite militias, many with Iranian backing, and Kurdish forces have helped to lead the fight against the Islamic State after the Iraqi security forces broke and ran.There have been multiple reports of revenge killings in the wake of militia advances in parts of Iraq, creating a troubling counterpoint to widespread accounts of Islamic State atrocities in the areas they control.The Iraqi military and its allies have steadily gained ground against the Islamic State in Diyala Province, pushing in recent weeks to declare the province liberated from the militants. Barwanah was filled with refugees from fighting surrounding it in recent months, including from the nearby village of Sinsil, a stronghold for the Islamic State, according to local officials. In the days before the killings on Monday, there had been intense clashes around Barwanah. The village was “a no-man’s land between ISIS and the security forces,” said Abdullah Musa al-Jabouri, a local tribal leader. The Iraqi security forces and militias had sustained heavy casualties, residents and officials said.But the killings did not occur in the heat of battle, according to five witnesses in Barwanah. An Iraqi Army convoy came to the village about 3 p.m. on Monday, with soldiers reassuring residents that all was well, the witnesses said.Then, 15 minutes to a half-hour later, another column of vehicles arrived, some of them bearing the insignia of Shiite militias, the witnesses said. Three witnesses said the soldiers left before the militiamen arrived, while another said the army was present during the killings. The militiamen started asking for identity cards and said they were looking for residents displaced from other areas, including Sinsil.Abdullah Hassan watched from his roof as they arrived, he said, and was stunned when they fired warning shots at him and told him to come down or they would kill him. The militiamen checked his ID card and ordered him to go back into his house. “Then I started hearing the calling of the names, and the gunfire,” he said. After the militiamen left, Mr. Hassan said he found his uncle’s body on the village’s main street, where there were at least 10 other bodies.As the gunmen arrived, Ahmed al-Jabouri, 24, called his cousin Shuaib Kadoori, who is from Sinsil and was staying next door, to warn him, Mr. Jabouri said in an interview. Mr. Jabouri heard the militiamen knock on his cousin’s door. When Mr. Kadoori answered, and the gunmen had confirmed his identity, they shot him, Mr. Jabouri said. Other men were separated from their families before they were shot. A 42-year-old man who gave his name as Abu Ahmed said he was among dozens of people who were lined up in the streets and asked to show their ID cards. Some in the group were let go, but roughly dozens of others were taken away, with the gunmen assuring them that they would fine, Abu Ahmed said. “We heard shooting,” he said. Later, residents found bodies in a field.A local security official, Abdullah Ameer al-Zadi, initially denied that a massacre had taken place, saying that the army and affiliated militias, responding to attacks from Islamic State militants in Barwanah, had killed only militants.Another local military official, though, said that Shiite militias, stinging from recent losses in another battle, had carried out the killings in revenge. Mr. Abadi has ordered an “urgent” investigation of the violence, to be led by a senior cabinet member, according to his spokesman. And on Thursday, the United Nations envoy to Iraq, Nickolay Mladenov, joined calls by Sunni leaders to hold the attackers accountable.“It is the responsibility of the government to ensure that all armed forces are under its control, that rule of law is respected and that civilians are protected in all areas of the country, including those areas recently liberated from ISIL,” Mr. Mladenov said in a statement.After the killings on Monday, Ahmed al-Jabouri said they went to army officers and demanded to know why the military had allowed the violence to occur. The officers insisted the dead were jihadists, but said of their own allies: “They are militias. We cannot control them.”Falih Hassan contributed reporting.Advertisement