By ROBERT D. McFADDENOCT. 10, 2015
Geoffrey Howe, a Conservative British cabinet minister who advanced Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s tough economic and foreign policies in the 1980s, but who resigned and hastened her downfall with a stinging attack on her government in its final days, died on Friday at his home in Warwickshire, England. He was 88.The cause appeared to be a heart attack, his family said in announcing his death.Prime Minister David Cameron, like Mr. Howe a Conservative, described him in a statement as someone “who loved his politics and never stopped giving strong and sound advice.” Mr. Cameron also called Mr. Howe “the quiet hero of the first Thatcher government.”But Mr. Howe was also remembered for his dramatic dissent in the House of Commons in 1990 on what was then a burning issue: How much sovereignty should Britain surrender to join Europe’s burgeoning economic, monetary and political union? Mrs. Thatcher, who opposed European federalism in general, drew the line at a common currency, saying the value of the pound sterling should not be set by a European central bank.Mr. Howe argued that only full participation with the European community could restore Britain’s declining influence in the world. His dissent capped growing discontent with Mrs. Thatcher and was widely regarded as the crucial event that precipitated her withdrawal as prime minister. But she, too, had a point. Britain never adopted the euro and retains the pound sterling, the world’s oldest currency still in use.AdvertisementIn a half-century in public life, Mr. Howe was one of Britain’s best-known leaders, an owlish, low-key Tory who came of age in a postwar era of strikes, unemployment and inflation. He devoted much of his career to reforming a stagnant economy, restraining unions and rejuvenating Britain’s status as a world power. His efforts were only partly successful, and he never achieved his ambition to be prime minister.AdvertisementBut he was solicitor general and minister for trade and consumer affairs in Prime Minister Edward Heath’s cabinet in the early 1970s, and chancellor of the Exchequer and foreign minister in the Thatcher government from 1979 to 1990. Knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1970, he was a member of the House of Commons for nearly 25 years, and concluded his career with decades in the House of Lords as a life peer.Unlike the confrontational and imperious Mrs. Thatcher, Mr. Howe had little charisma or flair for public speaking. In Parliament, he droned through budget and policy speeches, a roly-poly avuncular man with shaggy white hair. Critics called him “Mogadon Man,” after a popular tranquilizer, and a Labour Party leader once mocked his docile debating style by likening it to being “savaged by a dead sheep.”But Mr. Howe was a deft lawyer and negotiator, valued by leaders he served. After Conservatives won power in 1970, he wrote a law banning strikes without union leadership approval and providing 60-day cooling-off periods in strikes involving national interests. His inability to head off a coal miners’ strike forced a national three-day workweek in 1974 to conserve electricity, and the Conservatives were replaced by a Labour government.Mr. Howe returned to the cabinet after Mrs. Thatcher assumed power in 1979. Reversing a postwar British consensus on a welfare state, she and her economy chief cut income taxes, especially for the rich; doubled levies on goods and services; cut spending for housing, education and social programs; created tax-free enterprise zones; and deregulated businesses.“Mr. Howe’s route is simple and ambitious,” The Economist said. “And horribly hard. It involves the abandonment of the public sector as the prime engine of Britain’s economic growth and its replacement by private initiative.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Painful as the measures were for Britons generally, the economy improved over the next decade. Inflation was lowered and unemployment remained high, but the recession eased. The government undercut unions, whose memberships and strikes declined.Mrs. Thatcher named Mr. Howe foreign secretary in 1983. By then, her government had aligned itself with the Cold War policies of President Ronald Reagan. It tripled Britain’s nuclear strength by buying submarine missile systems from America, and negotiated a deal with China to surrender Hong Kong in 1997.But Mrs. Thatcher’s antipathy to a European union finally alienated Mr. Howe. The immediate sticking point was a European mechanism to set exchange rates as a precursor to a common currency. She believed it would harm Britain’s economy, but Mr. Howe said she was jeopardizing Britain’s future in Europe.AdvertisementTensions led to a 1989 cabinet shuffle. Mrs. Thatcher named John Major foreign secretary and demoted Mr. Howe to the largely ceremonial post of deputy prime minister. Mr. Howe, the last holdover from the original 1979 Thatcher government, quit the cabinet on Nov. 1, 1990.Two weeks later, he attacked Mrs. Thatcher’s European policies in Parliament.“I have done what I believed to be right to my party and my country,” he said with uncharacteristic passion, and urged fellow Conservatives to join him in abandoning her. “The time has come for others to consider their own response to the tragic conflict of loyalties” — to Mrs. Thatcher and to Europe — “with which I have myself wrestled for perhaps too long.”Mrs. Thatcher listened stony-faced.Public opinion ran heavily against her, and Conservative challengers closed in. Two weeks after Mr. Howe’s speech, Mrs. Thatcher was replaced by John Major. Nicknamed the “Iron Lady,” she had been Britain’s first woman prime minister, and the longest-serving of the century.Richard Edward Geoffrey Howe was born in Port Talbot, Wales, on Dec. 20, 1926, to B. Edward and E. F. Thomson Howe. His parents were lawyers and he grew up in relative affluence in a depressed coal-mining district. He attended Winchester College, a prep school, where he took up politics and spoke for women’s rights. After graduating in 1945, he served three years as a British Army officer, then studied law at Cambridge University. He graduated in 1952 and practiced law in Wales.In 1953, he married Elspeth Rosamund Morton Shand. She survives him, as do the couple’s children, a son, Alec, and two daughters, Amanda and Caroline. After two losing tries, he won a seat in Parliament in 1964 and for decades represented constituencies near Liverpool and London. He retired from the House of Commons in 1992 and was made a life peer as Baron Howe of Aberavon.In his memoir, “Conflict of Loyalty” (1994), he expressed admiration for Mrs. Thatcher, but regret for hardships imposed on ordinary Britons. “Our principal mistake,” he wrote, “was to give less sympathy and understanding than we should have done to those who faced the upheaval.”Katrin Bennhold contributed reporting from London.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 11, 2015, on Page A28 of the New York edition with the headline: Geoffrey Howe, 88, Dies; Hastened Thatcher’s Fall .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.