By MAÏA de la BAUME and DAN BILEFSKYJAN. 29, 2015
PARIS —  Police officials in the southern French city of Nice questioned an 8-year-old boy who is believed to have made comments in school defending the gunmen who killed 17 people in terrorist attacks in and near Paris this month, a senior regional police official confirmed on Thursday.The questioning of the boy, which occurred Wednesday, grabbed headlines across the country and spurred a debate on social media and elsewhere about whether France’s desire to combat terrorism was tipping over into hysteria. Since the attacks, France has moved to enforce tough new laws against the incitement of terrorism, fueling tensions between free speech and public order.The boy was identified as a Muslim by the French National Observatory Against Islamophobia. His name was not released because he is a minor. The authorities said he first aroused notice at his school after he refused to observe the minute of silence honoring the victims of the Paris attacks, according to Fabienne Lewandowski, the deputy director of security in the Alpes-Maritimes department. She said the boy later lashed out at the journalists of Charlie Hebdo, the satirical newspaper that was targeted in the attacks, and defended the terrorists, who were killed by the police on Jan. 9.“The boy told his schoolteacher: ‘We must kill the French. I am with the terrorists. Muslims have done well. The journalists deserved to die,’ ” Ms. Lewandoski said.AdvertisementUnder French law, people younger than 13 cannot be criminally charged. But Ms. Lewandowski said that the school’s principal had filed a complaint with the police last week after the boy’s father went to the school and made “offensive and threatening comments” to the head of the parents’ association.AdvertisementThe boy and his father were summoned to a police station and interviewed together by officers on Wednesday, officials said.French officials have moved aggressively to prosecute those suspected of making statements glorifying terrorism in the wake of the terrorist attacks. Dieudonné M’bala M’bala, a provocative humorist, is to stand trial in February after he was accused of supporting one of the terrorists behind the attacks. He had written on Facebook, “Tonight, as far as I’m concerned, I feel like Charlie Coulibaly.” He was referring to the popular slogan of solidarity for the slain Charlie Hebdo cartoonists — “Je suis Charlie” — and to Amedy Coulibaly, one of the gunmen of the Paris attacks who killed a policewoman and later four people in a kosher supermarket.French judges also sentenced a 28-year-old man to six months in prison after he was found guilty of loudly expressing his support for the attackers as he passed a police station in Bourgoin-Jallieu, in eastern France. A 34-year-old man who hit a car while drunk and subsequently praised the attackers when he was questioned by the police was sentenced to four years in prison.Such moves have fanned concerns among civil liberties advocates who say that the country may be pursuing policies, including racial profiling of Muslims, that undermine civil law. Prosecutors say that as many as 100 people are under investigation for making or posting comments that support or try to justify terrorism.“The fight against terrorism should not give way to collective hysteria,” the French National Observatory Against Islamophobia said in a statement.Ms. Lewandowski, the Alpes-Maritimes official, said the school principal had been justified in contacting the police because the boy’s words reflected an alarming message that he might have been hearing at home.This month, Christiane Taubira, the French justice minister, sent a note to prosecutors, urging them to take tough action against anyone who glorifies terrorism or acts in ways interpreted as racist or anti-Semitic.AdvertisementLast week, French officials also announced new measures to reinforce secular values at French schools after some students refused to observe a moment of silence after the attacks. Under the new measures, classroom activities would include the singing of “La Marseillaise.”Separately, Fritz-Joly Joachin, a Frenchman of Haitian origin who was arrested in Bulgaria several weeks ago and has been linked to the attackers, was extradited to France on Thursday, Agence France-Presse reported. He has denied any knowledge of the attackers’ plans.The debate over the satirical cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad published by Charlie Hebdo also continued to reverberate on Thursday. In the Indian city of Mumbai, an editor of an Urdu newspaper, Avadhnama, was arrested on Wednesday for the paper’s decision to reprint one of the cartoons in its Jan. 17 edition.Suhasini Raj contributed reporting from New Delhi.
 A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: French Police Question Boy, 8, After Remarks on Paris Attacks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.