AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod Nordland and Joseph GoldsteinKABUL, Afghanistan — He was well-known around his hometown, Kunduz, as the big-hearted, half-blind janitor who worked at the Doctors Without Borders hospital, swabbing the blood of war wounded from its tiled halls.On the Friday before last, Najibullah Momand had volunteered to remain on duty despite the heavy fighting taking place around the city because his grandfather lives near the hospital and he could stay with him and get to work more safely than most.Najibullah had a genetic eye disease that forced him to drop out of school in the eighth grade, so he was thrilled when four years ago he got the relatively well-paying janitorial job at the hospital run here by Doctors Without Borders.That Friday his father, worried about intensified fighting between government forces and the Taliban who had taken over the city earlier in the week, called him on his cellphone. “Please come home, son,” he said.“Come on, Dad, the situation is always getting worse,” he responded. “I must help our people.” Najibullah, 26, was 6-foot-3 and fit, with dense black hair, and so good-looking that a woman on his block once boldly approached his father, Mohammad Ajmal Momand, and asked if he was married. When he said he was, she volunteered to be his second wife; Najibullah said he was happy with just one.His two children, Mujib, 4, and Sahar, 18 months, were both born with only about 30 percent sight, the same condition as their father, but it is potentially correctable with surgery. The Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz was only a trauma unit, treating war victims, so Najibullah saved his money and took his children to Pakistan for the first of a series of eye operations. Both children now wear thick corrective lenses, and have regained some vision.As fighting intensified in the Kunduz area, and the aid group expanded its 92-bed hospital to 150 beds in response, Najibullah’s mother worried about the psychological effect of his job, seeing all the constant carnage, as well as the danger in being at what had become a front-line hospital in a war zone.“This man would clean up the mess of hundreds of war victims, and the doctors were very happy with him,” said Mr. Momand, a schoolteacher. “He was always telling his mother, ‘Mom, if I die serving my people in this job, I will be a martyr.’ ” That is not the consolation a mother necessarily wants, so he also told her that under the Geneva Conventions, hospitals would not be attacked. In the long, bloody history of Afghanistan’s present war, it had never happened, he told her.The Pentagon said Saturday it would make “condolence payments” after an airstrike on a hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan. Here are some other examples.He did worry that the Taliban might bomb the hospital because they seemed less inclined to follow international rules, Mr. Momand said, but he did not tell his mother that. He never dreamed the Americans would do such a thing. That Friday, speaking on the phone with his father, Najibullah said he was sorry he could not get home, not because he was worried about the danger, because he had a present for his daughter. “I bought a nice pair of flip-flops for Sahar,” Najibullah told his father, as Mr. Momand recalled the conversation later. “I can’t wait to bring them to her; she’ll be so excited. Please kiss her and Mujib for me, and tell them Daddy will be home soon.”It was a relatively quiet evening, probably the quietest since the Taliban took over Kunduz five days earlier. Najibullah’s brother Naqibullah, 20, was also on duty; as a porter, his job was to push gurneys around carrying patients between the wards, many of them separate buildings, and the main building, where most of the medical treatment took place.Earlier that day, five members of a family had been wounded in crossfire as they tried to flee Kunduz in their car. There were three children and their two parents, all with gunshot wounds. Blood was always in short supply, and both brothers were Type O, making them universal donors, so when the doctors asked, Najibullah racked his mop in the wheeled pail and Naqibullah locked the brakes on his gurney, and they rolled up their sleeves to donate blood for two of the children, girls 14 and 2. The 14-year-old died shortly after, but the 2-year-old held on.“We have been serving in this hospital with all our heart,” Naqibullah said. He admired his older brother, he said, for persevering at work despite his disability, his goal to earn enough to take his children to Pakistan for more eye treatment — “to bring light to their eyes and their life,” as the brother put it.Najibullah and Naqibullah were both still on duty, together in a corridor of the main building, “when the first boom happened,” Naqibullah said. It was 2:08 a.m. Oct. 3. “Everyone was just screaming. It was a disaster.” Both brothers pitched in, helping to carrying the wounded into the basement shelter. After one explosion, Naqibullah took pieces of shrapnel in his leg and back, and ended up on a gurney himself. Somewhere along the way he lost track of Najibullah.He remembered seeing two doctors lying dead in the main building, which was hit in five separate bombing runs, according to Doctors Without Borders. Another doctor died while his colleagues were operating on him, using a desk as an operating table. “I didn’t have time to help my brother,” Naqibullah said. “I didn’t know what happened to him. The bombing continued until 3 a.m., and then I found out.”Mr. Momand spoke about what happened next with difficulty, weeping uncontrollably at times. “Since the Americans say they can see a nine-inch nail on the ground from their planes, then how is this not a war crime?”He is particularly angry with the acting governor of Kunduz, Hamdullah Danishi, who continues to try to justify the incident by claiming that the Taliban provoked the airstrikes by firing from the hospital grounds. Doctors Without Borders, also known by its French initials, M.S.F., denies that and says all of the surviving members of its 100-member staff on duty at the time have confirmed that there were no armed Taliban in the hospital or its compound that night.Examples of large civilian casualty incidents in Afghanistan caused by the United States military.“Was my son a Talib? Was he serving the Taliban or serving his countrymen?” the father asked.Until the bombing began, there was not even any serious gunfire in the vicinity of the hospital, according to the country director of Doctors Without Borders, Guilhem Molinie, other than a single stray bullet fired into the hospital compound about 11 p.m. Friday, three hours before the bombing started.“We pay tribute to those M.S.F. staff who, while watching their colleagues die and with their hospital still on fire, carried on treating the wounded,” said the group’s president,  Dr. Joanne Liu. “We pay tribute to those who died in this abhorrent attack.”Late Saturday, the Pentagon announced that the American military headquarters in Kabul would work with those injured in the Kunduz hospital attack, and with families of those killed, to determine “appropriate payments” as an expression of condolences.“The Department of Defense believes it is important to address the consequences of the tragic incident at the Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan,” said Peter Cook, the Pentagon press secretary. “One step the department can take is to make condolence payments to civilian noncombatants injured and the families of civilian noncombatants killed as a result of U.S. military operations.”Mr. Cook said payments could also be made to repair the hospital.Among the dead was Najibullah — janitor, father, son, brother, husband, and one of  at least a dozen staff members of Doctors Without Borders who died. Among the 10 patients who also died in the attack was the 2-year-old girl to whom Najibullah had donated about a pint of blood.Mr. Momand went to the burned-out hospital the next day to try to find Najibullah’s body, but all he came home with was two handfuls of ashes that might have been his son.Ahmad Shakib contributed reporting from Kabul, and Najim Rahim from Kunduz, Afghanistan.Advertisement