By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLDJAN. 29, 2015
MEXICO CITY — A gas refueling truck exploded outside a maternity and children’s hospital here on Thursday, killing three people, two of them babies, and leaving dozens injured in the destruction of nearly the entire building.Babies cried in the rubble, as neighbors rushed to pull them to safety. Mothers sobbed as they searched for their children. In all more than 70 were injured, including 22 sent to other hospitals with serious injuries. Emergency service officials said as many as nine babies were among those most gravely hurt.The explosion occurred as about 110 people in the city-run Hospital Materno Infantil Cuajimalpa were being evacuated after a leak was discovered as the truck was filling tanks in the kitchen area.A 25-year-old nurse and two babies — one three weeks old and the other six months old — were killed, the authorities said. Rescue workers continued their search of debris into the night.AdvertisementA cellphone video made by a witness showed a huge fireball suddenly erupt as a fire truck parked outside the grounds.AdvertisementClemente Mendoza Arias, who lives a block from the hospital, heard a loud boom and rushed out, and found the hospital in ruins. He and neighbors tore through oxygen masks, IV tubes and debris as they tried to rescue people trapped between the buckling walls of the hospital.“The neighbors were the first to help,” he said.Sarahi Bobadilla, who scrambled out of a morning shower to help after feeling the earth shake from the blast, joined neighbors in helping to rescue three women and three babies.Another resident, Ángel Alcántara, told the newspaper Reforma that he and others heard the explosion and ran out to help.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We took out two nurses and four newborn babies,” he told the newspaper.Television images showed the hospital with a collapsed roof, walls stripped to the metal frame and piles of broken concrete slabs, in scenes that to many recalled the devastating 1985 earthquake.Mayor Miguel Ángel Mancera said the explosion occurred around 7 a.m. because of a faulty gas delivery truck hose. Gas truck workers discovered the leak and called for firefighters, who arrived just as the blast occurred.Such explosions area a frequent occurrence in Mexico, where gas for furnaces is most often delivered by truck because of a lack of an underground pipe system. The gas is usually a mix of liquefied propane and butane, but it was unclear what kind the hospital was receiving.In May 2013, a tanker truck went out of control on a highway and exploded in a Mexico City suburb, killing 27 people in a poor neighborhood, including 17 members of one family.The company involved in the hospital blast, Gas Express Nieto, says it has 1,000 trucks spread across 80 percent of the country to deliver liquid propane gas to households. Mr. Mancera said the three workers from the company at the hospital would be detained; all were injured, including one seriously.A similar accident involving the hose from a Nieto gas truck killed three people in the city of Queretaro in July 2014, according to local media.AdvertisementThere was no immediate comment from the company on the hospital explosion.An earlier version of this article omitted the given name of the Mexico City mayor. He is Miguel Ángel Mancera.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Gas Explosion Destroys a Hospital in Mexico.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.