By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEJAN. 29, 2015
GENEVA — With more than one in 10 of the world’s children living in areas affected by armed conflict, the United Nations children’s agency said Thursday that it is struggling to deal with “a new generation of emergencies.”Natural disasters, fast-spreading epidemics and conflicts “are stalking children in ways we have never seen before,” Afshan Khan, Unicef’s director of emergency programs, said in a statement accompanying an appeal for financial support.Among the biggest emerging challenges, Ms. Khan said, is the growing recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. Previously confined to a few countries, it is “becoming the new normal,” Ms. Khan said.The agency is asking for $3.1 billion, one-third more than it did last year, with the goal of helping 62 million children in 71 countries.AdvertisementHumanitarian agencies are now being asked to address more than sudden natural disasters and a few protracted crises. “What we’re seeing now is countries that were previously middle income are falling into conflict, and with devastating impact on children,” Ms. Khan said in an interview, citing Syria, Ukraine and Nigeria as examples.AdvertisementThe number of conflicts “has increased exponentially,” she said. Humanitarian agencies, which were geared mainly to deal with crises on a country-by-country basis, are increasingly being asked to respond to the wider regional impact of conflicts.Nearly one-third of Unicef’s 2015 appeal is for Syria, where 5.6 million children have been caught up in the civil war. “An entire generation of children are in danger of understanding violence as a normal way of life,” Ms. Khan.The agency has helped rehabilitate schools in areas controlled by the government and providing learning materials to areas under the control of opposition armed groups. It has also bolstering support to host communities in the neighboring countries that have received Syrian refugees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Unicef earmarked half a billion dollars to support efforts to combat Ebola in West Africa in the first half of the year, financing community care centers and addressing the needs of more than 10,000 children who have lost one or more of their parents.It also sought $32 million for Ukraine, where one-third of the more than five million people displaced by fighting were children, and some $26.5 million for Nigeria, where attacks by Boko Haram have displaced more than a million people in the northeast.“If you ask what is the big change, it’s that the new normal is a real, systematic violation of children’s rights, with impunity, limited accountability and a limited set of international institutions, norms and standards that can protect those kids,” Ms. Khan said.Unicef allocated close to one-third of its planned spending to protection and education. “It’s not enough to help children survive,” Ms. Khan said. “We’ve also got to help children be the citizens that can rebuild their countries and restore peace.”She said: “We are increasingly facing a crisis of protection that cuts across national boundaries that is often driven by armed groups and insurgents. I don’t think we’re anywhere near properly resourced for that.”Competition for donations is severe. In 2014, Unicef raised little more than half the $2 billion it sought from donors, Ms. Khan noted. “We are really stretched this year to reach our targets,” she said.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Unicef Seeks More Aid for ‘New Generation’ of Crises.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.