By CHOE SANG-HUNJAN. 29, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea repeatedly but unsuccessfully pushed for a summit meeting with the former South Korean leader Lee Myung-bak, demanding a huge aid package, including $10 billion in cash, as an incentive, Mr. Lee says in a memoir to be published next week.Mr. Lee, president from 2008 to 2013, says in the book that he rejected the overture, which began in 2009, because he wanted to break the pattern of rewarding the recalcitrant government in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, simply for agreeing to talk.“The North believed that the South Korean president always wanted an inter-Korean summit with Chairman Kim Jong-il, but I thought we should correct this North Korean belief before we could improve South-North relations,” Mr. Lee says in his 800-page memoir, titled “The Times of the President.”Chapters of the memoir were made available to members of the news media on Thursday. The book, which Mr. Lee wrote with the help of former aides, contains his perspectives on some of his government’s secret dealings with the North that have been little reported.AdvertisementMr. Lee says the North first suggested a summit meting with him when Kim Jong-il, then the country’s leader, sent a delegation to Seoul, the South’s capital, in August 2009 to the funeral of a former president, Kim Dae-jung.AdvertisementKim Dae-jung, who was president from 1998 to 2003, had held a summit meeting with Kim Jong-il in Pyongyang in 2000 and pursued political reconciliation and economic exchanges on the divided Korean Peninsula.For his efforts, the South Korean leader was awarded the 2000 Nobel Peace Prize. But his reputation was tarnished when it was later revealed that his office had prodded the Hyundai conglomerate into sending $450 million to North Korea shortly before his trip to the North.Mr. Lee, a conservative, came to power in 2008 vowing to end the “sunshine policy” of Kim Dae-jung and his liberal protégé and successor, Roh Moo-hyun, the president from 2003 to 2008. In 2007, Mr. Roh and Kim Jong-il held a second inter-Korean summit meeting, which also resulted in South Korea promising sizable economic aid to the North.The North’s proposal to Mr. Lee in 2009 went nowhere because it stuck to its old ways in demanding large shipments of rice and chemical fertilizers, Mr. Lee says in the book. South Korea also wanted a North Korean commitment to discussing the dismantling of its nuclear weapons program with Mr. Lee, a precondition the North had never fully embraced, he writes.But Mr. Kim, the North Korean leader, continued to send his wish for an inter-Korean meeting through China’s prime minister at the time, Wen Jiabao, Mr. Lee says.Officials from both Koreas even discussed a possible summit meeting during secret talks in late 2009. But the negotiations again faltered after the North demanded a hefty price: 100,000 tons of corn, 400,000 tons of rice, 300,000 tons of chemical fertilizers, $100 million worth of aid for road construction and $10 billion as seed money for an economic development bank North Korea wanted to open, Mr. Lee says.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After its proposal was repeatedly rejected, North Korea torpedoed a South Korean Navy ship in March 2010, killing 46 South Korean sailors, Mr. Lee says. The North denied involvement in the attack, but Mr. Lee cut off most trade with North Korea as retaliation.Amid high tensions, the two Koreas still searched for an opportunity to improve ties, but the North continued to demand compensation while refusing to take responsibility and apologize for the maritime attack, he says.AdvertisementInter-Korean relations spiraled further downward after North Korea launched an artillery attack on a South Korean border island in October 2010, killing four people.Even then, the North reached out to the South, with a North Korean envoy making a secret visit to Seoul, but Mr. Lee says he refused to meet with him. The envoy was later executed by the North for his failing to strike a deal, Mr. Lee says.Kim Jong-il died in December 2011, bequeathing the stewardship of his country to his son Kim Jong-un.North Korea did not immediately comment on Mr. Lee’s memoir.A version of this article appears in print on January 30, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: Ex-Leader Reveals North’s Cash Request.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.