By GARDINER HARRISJAN. 30, 2015
NEW DELHI — An intensive investigation of a mysterious annual epidemic in northern India in which thousands of young children suffer convulsions, lapse into comas and die has concluded that a toxin found in litchi fruit may be the cause.“We believe it’s likely to be some sort of toxin” that causes a sharp drop in blood sugar levels that then leads to seizures, said Dr. Padmini Srikantiah, one of the authors of a description of the investigation in this week’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, a publication of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States.Investigators are testing a variety of possible poisons as catalysts for the malady, including pesticides and heavy metals. But the region is India’s litchi center, and the epidemic occurs every year just as the fruit ripen. So a toxin found in litchi seeds has become a focus of further testing, Dr. Srikantiah, a senior epidemiologist with the American agency, said on Thursday.The affected children begin arriving every year in mid-May, brought to overburdened hospitals in one of India’s most impoverished areas by panic-stricken mothers who generally report that their young children, healthy just hours before, awoke with a scream in the middle of the night, suffered convulsions and then became unconscious.AdvertisementAlthough public health statistics are often unreliable in India, the mysterious illness is believed to afflict tens of thousands of people a year and kill thousands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The first reports of the disease date to 1995, when nearly 1,000 children were sickened and 300 died in the three hospitals in Muzaffarpur in Bihar State. Smaller epidemics have followed almost every year since, and similar outbreaks have been reported in litchi-growing regions of Bangladesh and Vietnam.AdvertisementDoctors work to calm the convulsions and keep the stricken children hydrated, but they then have to watch helplessly along with the anguished parents as a third of their young patients die, often within hours. Then, as suddenly as it started, the outbreak stops with the onset of the monsoon rains in July.The newly reported investigation, led by Indian epidemiologists with assistance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has given doctors another tool by suggesting they quickly assess the children’s blood sugar levels and provide intravenous glucose if levels are too low.The hope is that further testing will definitively reveal whether the litchi toxin is the cause and perhaps help find an antidote. Why the sickened youths’ siblings and immediate neighbors are so rarely affected is still unknown.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: India: Investigation Finds Clues to a Mysterious Illness.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.