By JOSEPH GOLDSTEINJAN. 30, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — The gunman who killed three American military contractors at Kabul’s international airport on Thursday was wearing an Afghan military uniform, the authorities said on Friday. The Taliban hailed the attack, but it was not clear whether they were claiming direct responsibility for it.The attacker, who was killed after shooting the Americans, is believed to have been a member of the Afghan National Security Forces, not an infiltrator who had put on a uniform merely to slip past guards, an official with the American-led coalition said. The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to disclose details of the case, cautioned that the investigation was still going on.Details of the attack, which took place Thursday evening on the military side of the airport, remained hazy. The coalition official said the three American contractors had worked for a company called PSI and were armed security personnel. Another contractor was wounded in the attack, the official said.A Taliban spokesman characterized the gunman on Friday as “one of our hero fighters,” saying that his name was Ehsanullah and that he came from Laghman Province in the country's east. The spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid, said in a statement that Ehsanullah “had been waiting for such an opportunity” for a very long time.But it was not immediately clear whether the Taliban had been in contact with the gunman beforehand or whether the militants were praising an attack he had planned on his own.So-called insider attacks, in which members of the Afghan security forces turn on Western allies, have declined since their peak in 2012. At one point, they were so frequent that security rules for shared bases and training missions were tightened. But such attacks ebbed as American troops withdrew from front-line posts, or from Afghanistan altogether, over the last year.Khalid Alokozai contributed reporting from Jalalabad, Afghanistan, and Fazal Muzhary from Kabul.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.