By DAN BILEFSKYJAN. 30, 2015
South Africa has granted parole to Eugene de Kock, the convicted death-squad leader widely known as “Prime Evil” because of his torture of black activists during the apartheid era, after he served two decades in prison, the Justice Ministry said on Friday.Mr. de Kock, 66, was arrested in 1994 on charges including murder and kidnapping related to his time as commander of a notorious police unit based at the Vlakplaas farm near Pretoria, the capital.His crimes became emblematic of some of the worst abuses in the apartheid era. One of the trademarks of the Vlakplaas unit was to bind a man with rope, place him over explosives and then blow him up, a technique that killed the victim and destroyed the evidence.Justice Minister Michael Masutha said that Mr. de Kock was to be freed “in the interests of nation-building,” and because he had shown remorse for his crimes. Mr. Masutha also said that Mr. de Kock had helped the authorities recover the remains of some of his victims.The case laid bare South Africa’s struggle to balance justice and reconciliation, reflected in the hearings of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in the 1990s, which sought to foster unity after the trauma and divisiveness of the apartheid era by granting amnesty in some cases.AdvertisementWhile Mr. de Kock has expressed contrition, critics say that his ruthless brutality merits no mercy, and that he deserves to spend his life behind bars.AdvertisementMr. de Kock testified before the reconciliation commission after his conviction in 1996 on 89 charges that earned him a prison sentence of two life terms plus 212 years. He was pardoned for some crimes, including his role in blowing up the headquarters of a Johannesburg church in 1988. But many of his other crimes did not escape punishment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. de Kock had argued that he deserved to be granted parole because no other members of the apartheid-era police force had been sentenced to prison terms. His defenders said that he was a scapegoat for the apartheid-era government, and that his acts were committed on the orders of higher authorities.His parole is likely to anger relatives of his former victims. “He’s a savage,” Victor Makoke, a relative of an activist killed by the Vlakplaas death squad, told Agence France-Presse last month. “He needs to rot in jail.”Mr. Masutha said the date of Mr. de Kock’s release would not be made public, according to news reports.Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Johannesburg.A version of this article appears in print on January 31, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: South Africa Grants Parole to a Death-Squad Leader.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.