By RICK GLADSTONEJAN. 31, 2015
A Revolutionary Court judge in Iran with a reputation for imposing harsh sentences has been selected to preside in the trial of Jason Rezaian, The Washington Post’s Tehran correspondent, who has been incarcerated for more than six months on unspecified charges, a human rights advocacy group said Saturday.The group, the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, reported the selection of the judge, Abolghassem Salavati, in an updated posting on its website about the prosecution of Mr. Rezaian, who has not been granted access to legal counsel since he was arrested.It quoted a prominent Iranian defense lawyer, Mohammed Saleh Nikbakht, who had wanted to represent Mr. Rezaian, as telling his family that Judge Salavati’s court would get the case. It also quoted Mr. Nikbakht as saying that “for certain reasons,” he could not be Mr. Rezaian’s lawyer.There was no immediate comment from Mr. Rezaian’s family, and efforts to reach Mr. Nikbakht were not immediately successful.AdvertisementThe selection of Judge Salavati has not been reported in Iran’s state-run news media, which has carried only terse dispatches about Mr. Rezaian’s prosecution, saying on Wednesday that he had been charged and that his trial would begin soon. The charges have not been revealed.AdvertisementRights activists said the selection of Judge Salavati suggested that Iran’s hard-line judiciary intended to ensure that Mr. Rezaian cannot undertake a robust defense against the charges — whatever they may be — or get a fair trial.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Salavati is regarded by rights activists as a jurist who has flagrantly ignored basic trial principles in overseeing cases in which many dissidents, journalists, lawyers and members of ethnic minorities have been found guilty and given tough punishments, including execution.As the lead judge in charge of Revolutionary Court Branch 15 in Tehran, he was called the “judge of death” and “the hanging judge” for imposing at least a half-dozen execution sentences after the political upheavals in Iran that followed the disputed 2009 presidential election.His record is considered so egregious internationally that the European Union included him on a 2011 blacklist of Iranian officials accused of human rights violations.Mr. Rezaian, 38, a dual Iranian-American citizen from California, was arrested on July 22 with his Iranian wife, Yeganeh Salehi, a reporter for a newspaper in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. She was released on bail after 72 days, but was told to stop working and warned not to discuss the prosecution of her or her husband.American officials and The Post, as well as members of Mr. Rezaian’s family in the United States, have said he is innocent of any wrongdoing and have repeatedly called on the Iranian authorities to free him.An earlier version of this article misstated the length of time that Mr. Rezaian’s wife, Yeganeh Salehi, was incarcerated. It was 72 days, not “about a month.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.