By ROD NORDLAND and RANYA KADRIJAN. 31, 2015
AMMAN, Jordan —  It is often said that in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan all politics is tribal.That goes a long way toward explaining the country’s reaction to the hostage crisis involving a Royal Jordanian Air Force pilot and a Japanese journalist, including Jordan’s offer to free an extremist on death row and willingness to look the other way when protesters disparaged the king in the presence of his powerful intelligence service.It is not just that First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh is a handsome young F-16 fighter pilot with a prominent social media presence, and the first member of the international coalition bombing the Islamic State to be captured by the extremists. He is also a member of a politically influential tribe, part of a crucial base of tribal support for the king.“The social structure of Jordan is tribal more than institutional,” Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s father, Safi Youssef al-Kasasbeh, said as he sat in a diwan, or social hall, in Amman on Saturday waiting for word of his son’s fate, surrounded by a shifting crowd of well-wishers sometimes numbering in the hundreds. “The cohesiveness is very strong, and now we feel that every tribal member is supported by every tribe in Jordan.”The monarchy has not only maintained good relations with the tribes, it has also built them into the structure of the state by heavily recruiting their members into the military and security services, analysts say. That is a legacy of Jordan’s past, which has left its eight million citizens split between “East Bankers,” or native Jordanians, and “West Bankers,” the descendants of Palestinians displaced by the creation of Israel and its subsequent wars with its Arab neighbors.AdvertisementMost Jordanians whose origins are in East Jordan belong to one of a dozen major or numerous smaller tribes, and are viewed as unquestionably loyal.AdvertisementThe Kasasbeh clan is part of the Bararsheh tribe from southern Jordan. As the crisis has unfolded, elders and notables from the tribe, based in the city of Karak, rushed to the capital, Amman, where they huddled together to back Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s family — and to sing the praises of its captured pilot.Lieutenant Kasasbeh was shot down during an air raid in Syria on Dec. 24. In the first sign of the pilot’s importance, Jordan’s ruler, King Abdullah II, went immediately to his family’s home in Karak to assure them of his concern for their son’s safety.Separately, Bararsheh tribal leaders quietly approached the government and asked officials to offer to trade Sajida al-Rishawi, a convicted would-be suicide bomber on death row, for Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s freedom.Late last month, attempts to free Lieutenant Kasasbeh became more complicated when the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, suddenly threatened two Japanese hostages, then released a video showing the beheading of one. Although the militants had initially asked for ransom, they later changed their demand, asking to trade the second Japanese hostage for the release of the same woman, Ms.  Rishawi, that the tribe hoped Jordan would swap for the pilot.When Japanese officials announced that they were working with Jordan to win their hostage’s release — days before a video Saturday that appeared to show his death — the reaction in Jordan was furious.Protests began springing up, especially among members of the pilot’s Bararsheh tribe, and at one point last week they even demonstrated outside King Abdullah’s Royal Palace in Amman. It is a measure of the sensitivity with which tribes are treated that even though the protesters were chanting slogans calling the king a coward bought by American dollars, Jordan’s usually proactive intelligence services and riot police refrained from intervening.Instead, King Abdullah defused the situation by inviting the pilot’s father, mother and wife into the palace.Advertisement“You always have to pay attention to the tribes; you can’t neglect them,” said the retired Maj. Gen. Ali Shukri, who ran the private office of King Hussein, King Abdullah’s father.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jordan’s king takes his legitimacy, to a large degree, from the support of its tribes, most of which trace their roots to nomadic groups that roamed throughout the Arabian Peninsula. The Hashemite dynasty is built around a clan that is part of a powerful tribe in present-day Saudi Arabia, the Qureish tribe. “All these tribes are really important in the military,” General Shukri said. “They have to accommodate the family as much as possible.”Tribal loyalty trumps even strongly held political views. Mustafa Rawashdeh, a member of Parliament who signed a petition against Jordan’s joining the coalition against the Islamic State, was sitting on Saturday next to the pilot’s father at the diwan, as a member of the same tribe. He also publicly warned against opposition members using the pilot’s plight to political advantage. At one point so many tribal supporters had come to Amman that the family built a huge tent outside to accommodate overflow visitors and the news media.The issue of the pilot’s fate has been so sensitive that Jordanian officials have scarcely mentioned the Japanese journalist, Kenji Goto, although Japan is a major aid donor to Jordan and Japanese officials have been in Amman seeking government help to try to win his release. The Islamic State eventually put the pilot’s fate into the mix, saying he would be killed along with Mr. Goto if Ms. Rishawi was not released, according to a video attributed to the militants.The video did not say the pilot would be released — only that his life would be spared if she were freed by a deadline that expired Thursday.Jordanian officials responded that they wanted to see proof the pilot was alive before freeing Ms. Rishawi, who had been held since 2005 after hotel bombings in Amman by Al Qaeda in Iraq. Then there was mainly silence from the two sides until Saturday, when the new video that appeared to show Mr. Goto being beheaded by a militant was released.It is unclear what calculations the militants may be making and whether they may also factor in Jordan’s powerful tribes, especially if they want to maintain a base of support there.The Islamic State’s cause had already won some sympathy in Jordan, where some back its goal of establishing an Islamic empire and chafe at the continuing autocracy of their own Western-allied government. Jordan is believed to be, after Saudi Arabia, the second-biggest outside contributor of Islamic State fighters.Karak, Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s hometown, has its own minority of pro-Islamic State young men, according to Alaa Fazzaa, an exiled Jordanian dissident who follows online extremism in the country.Advertisement“They are thinking they could use the case of Moaz to stir up disturbances in Jordan,” Mr. Fazzaa said, warning other government critics to hold back — not a position he normally takes. “Anyone who has a bare minimum of national feelings must stay quiet now,” he said.Referring to Karak, Mr. Rawashdeh, the lawmaker, said, “Some of our young men, out of ignorance or because they’re suffering economically, did support ISIS, but right now we’re noticing that people no longer do.“If anything happens to Moaz, the whole street will turn against ISIS,” he said.By Saturday night, Lieutenant Kasasbeh’s fate remained unknown. The video that appeared to show Mr. Goto’s death on Saturday made no mention of the pilot. But many Jordanians were concerned that the reason the militants did not provide proof he was alive, as Jordan’s government demanded, was that they had already killed him.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Tribal Loyalties Drive Jordan’s Effort to Free Pilot.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.