By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICKJAN. 31, 2015
CAIRO —  President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi on Saturday blamed the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood for bombings that killed at least 30 people in the North Sinai two days earlier, and declared that Egypt was “fighting the strongest secret organization” in the world.Mr. Sisi leveled the accusation despite the fact that a Sinai-based militant group with links to the Islamic State terrorist organization claimed responsibility for the attacks and released photographs as proof.The Brotherhood routinely denounces the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, and the Sinai militants for their violence. Those groups, in turn, criticize the Brotherhood for its focus on bottom-up political change, mocking it as little more than a tool of secular Arab governments and the West.The Brotherhood, Egypt’s main Islamist opposition, won a general election before Mr. Sisi led a military takeover in 2013, and he often blames the group for any antigovernment violence.AdvertisementIn his first significant public statement since the attack, Mr. Sisi appeared shaken and angry. He insisted that Egypt was “paying the price” for ending the rule of what he called a terrorist group at the peak of its power — a universally understood reference to the military ouster of President Mohamed Morsi, a Brotherhood leader, in July 2013.AdvertisementMr. Sisi said leaders of the Brotherhood had warned him a few weeks before Mr. Morsi’s ouster “that they would be bringing people from all over the world” to fight Egyptian citizens, from “countries like Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Palestine and Libya.”Surrounded by a phalanx of uniformed military officers, Mr. Sisi also accused unnamed foreign countries of abetting the attacks. His supporters frequently accuse the Islamist-friendly governments of Qatar, Turkey and Sudan of aiding the Brotherhood.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are some countries that are led by leaders of this terrorist organization,” he said. “Do you think these countries will leave us alone?”Egyptian health and security officials stopped providing any accounting of the number killed in the recent attacks after the death toll reached 30. State news outlets reported that officials said it was up to the military to disclose such details.Even at 30 killed, the episode was among the deadliest terrorist attacks in recent years in Egypt, and it followed attacks on a military checkpoint in October that killed at least 31 people.Security forces and militants have fought each other in an escalating battle in the North Sinai since Mr. Morsi’s ouster. The careful coordination of several simultaneous bombings on Thursday night — the exact number could not be determined — appeared intended to show that the militants could still operate with impunity despite a tight clampdown on the area by Egyptian security forces.The bombings mainly targeted military and police facilities, as did most previous attacks.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sisi Blames Brotherhood for Bombings in Sinai.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.