By ROD NORDLANDJAN. 31, 2015
AMMAN, Jordan —  The Islamic State claimed to have beheaded a Japanese journalist in a video released Saturday night, the culmination of a two-week-long drama that appears to have cost the lives of two Japanese men.The video of the killing of the journalist, Kenji Goto, came two days after a deadline set by the extremist group expired, and the Jordanian government did not give in to its demand that a convicted would-be suicide bomber be exchanged for Mr. Goto’s life.Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, reacting to the release of the video, said Sunday that Japan would not give in to terrorism. President Obama issued a statement in which he said the United States “condemns the heinous murder” of Mr. Goto, whom he described as a courageous journalist.Left unclear by the video, which was posted on a Twitter account associated with the Islamic State’s media organization, Al Furqan, was the fate of a Jordanian pilot, whom the extremists also threatened to kill if Jordan did not release the would-be bomber, Sajida al-Rishawi. Japan had not yet authenticated the video. Jordan did not publicly comment.AdvertisementJordan had agreed to release Ms. Rishawi only if the extremists provided proof that the pilot, First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh, was still alive. He was shot down over Syria on Dec. 24 during airstrikes on the Islamic State.AdvertisementThe 67-second video released Saturday showed Mr. Goto in an orange jumpsuit kneeling while a black-masked extremist, who appeared to be the man known as Jihadi John because of his British-accented English, blamed Mr. Abe for Mr. Goto’s fate.“Abe, because of your reckless decision to take part in an unwinnable war, this knife will not only slaughter Kenji, but will also carry on and cause carnage wherever your people are found,” the extremist said. “So let the nightmare for Japan begin.” He then began cutting Mr. Goto’s neck, but the screen went black, and then showed a still shot of his apparently decapitated body, hands still handcuffed behind his back, and with his severed head placed on top.Mr. Abe had promised $200 million in nonlethal aid to countries fighting the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. Speaking to reporters in Tokyo early Sunday morning, Mr. Abe said Japan would not back down from its policy.“We will increase our humanitarian aid, including food and medical support,” he said. “Japan will resolutely fulfill its responsibility to the international community in the fight against terrorism.”The extremists had produced a photograph showing the other Japanese hostage, Haruna Yukawa, also beheaded, a week before. The extremists had demanded $200 million to release both men, but after a previous ultimatum expired, they said they had killed Mr. Yukawa. Then they changed their demand to a swap of Ms. Rishawi for Mr. Goto.While there was widespread support in Jordan for a swap, officials insisted that they wanted their pilot released as well, or at least wanted to see evidence that he was still alive before they would release Ms. Rishawi, who was convicted for her role in a series of bombings of hotels in Amman that killed at least 57 people in 2005.The video of Mr. Goto’s apparent execution began with the extremist brandishing a knife toward the camera, while Mr. Goto knelt and stared calmly at the camera, closing his eyes just before the knife was drawn across his throat. They appeared to be in a dry streambed.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“To the Japanese government,” the killer said, “You, like your foolish allies in the satanic coalition, have yet to understand that we by Allah’s grace are the Islamic caliphate, with authority and power. An entire army thirsty for your blood.”AdvertisementThe top Japanese government spokesman, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, called the killing “a terrorist act of extreme brutality.” Live television coverage in Japan showed officials rushing into the prime minister’s office soon after the video was posted.Bernadette Meehan, a spokeswoman for the United States National Security Council, said American authorities were working to confirm the authenticity of the video, and called for the release of all remaining hostages.The Islamic State message released Sunday was uploaded with a second video, which purports to show the beheading of a man the extremists said was an intelligence agent working for Jordan in Syria.Mr. Goto, 47, was known as a respected journalist and the author of five books who knew his way around conflict zones after having spent more than two decades covering them as a freelance television cameraman. He appeared drawn to Syria and Iraq by a lifelong idealistic zeal to cover the plight of the weak, particularly refugee children.He was apparently captured by the militants in late October when he crossed into territory held by the Islamic State, which has taken over large swaths of Iraq and Syria, in a bid to win the freedom of Mr. Yukawa. They met in April after Mr. Goto helped negotiate Mr. Yukawa’s release from detention by the rebel Free Syrian Army during an earlier trip into Syria.“My son’s final act was to go to Syria to help a fellow Japanese,” Mr. Goto’s mother, Junko Ishido, said Sunday. “Please understand his kindness and courage.”An article in some editions last Sunday about the release of a video by the Islamic State militant group saying it had beheaded a Japanese journalist misspelled, in some copies, the surname of another Japanese hostage who was apparently beheaded by the militants. He was Haruna Yukawa, not Yakuwa.Mohammad Ghannam contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Martin Fackler from Tokyo.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: ISIS Says It Has Killed 2nd Japanese Hostage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.