By JOSEPH GOLDSTEIN and JAWAD SUKHANYARJAN. 31, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan —  Gunfire erupted on Saturday at a demonstration in Kabul where several hundred people had gathered to protest the publication of cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad in the satirical French newspaper Charlie Hebdo, witnesses said.Details were murky, but witnesses said that at least eight people were wounded in a confrontation with the police and that some were believed to have died. Police officials, however, later insisted that they were not aware of any deaths. The protest took place on Jalalabad Road in the city’s east.The most violent clash occurred at an Afghan customs office, witnesses said. “They first attacked the customs office and a garage here,” said Mohammad Yousuf, an 18-year-old mechanic who works nearby, referring to the demonstrators. Then the police opened fire on the protesters, Mr. Yousuf said.A Kabul police spokesman, Hashmatullah Stanikzai, said that seven protesters were wounded, but that he was not aware of any deaths. Mr. Stanikzai said that 17 police officers were wounded and that some of the protesters were armed with guns and firing at random.The demonstrators’ grievances were directed at the Afghan authorities as well as the French newspaper, with chants of both “death to Charlie Hebdo” and “death to the government” heard. Witnesses reported seeing several white Taliban flags among the protesters.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By early afternoon, the police had cleared the area and closed a nearby bazaar where the protesters had gathered at one point.Islamist gunmen attacked Charlie Hebdo’s Paris offices on Jan. 7, killing 12 people. The cover of the newspaper’s next issue featured a cartoon depicting the Prophet Muhammad weeping and holding a sign that read “I am Charlie,” the slogan that became a popular expression of solidarity following the attack.In Afghanistan as in many other Muslim countries, that image, like earlier depictions of Muhammad published by Charlie Hebdo, was seen as a provocation. President Ashraf Ghani called the cover a “great insult” to Islam and an “utterly irresponsible act.”But until Saturday there had been little unrest in Kabul over the matter, though some restrained protests were held. The imam at one mosque, for example, devoted a recent Friday sermon to speaking about Charlie Hebdo and Western notions of freedom of expression without urging Muslims to demonstrate.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Shots Fired at Kabul Protest Against French Newspaper.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.