By ISMAIL KHANFEB. 1, 2015
PESHAWAR, Pakistan —  Gunfire rang out as Fatima Bibi squeezed off three shots, hitting her target every time. Then she lowered her Glock pistol, turned to her fellow academics and smiled.Her instructor was smiling, too.“These ladies are better shots than some of our men,” said Abdul Latif, a police firearms instructor. “They learned to handle a gun in just two days. Their confidence level is remarkable.”Dangerous times call for unusual measures in northwestern Pakistan, where the police are offering firearms instruction to schoolteachers and university lecturers since the Taliban massacred 150 people at a Peshawar school in December.Ms. Bibi was one of eight lecturers from the Frontier College for Women, a postgraduate college, who attended a two-day firearms course at the provincial police firing range last week.AdvertisementThey learned to load, aim and fire weapons ranging from pistols to assault rifles; they also discussed self-defense techniques, and how to defend their students if the Taliban stormed in during class.TAJIKISTANAFGHANISTANGILGIT-BALTISTANKHYBER-PAKHTUNKHWAPROVINCEJalalabadKabulPeshawarIslamabadPAKISTAN100 Miles“The December 16 tragedy showed us that we need to learn to be able to take care of ourselves and our students,” said Naheed Hussain, an assistant professor, who took the course while still wearing her black teaching robe. “We will not replace our pens with guns. But the situation could arise where we are required to serve our country.”AdvertisementThe initiative for the gun lessons comes from the provincial government and the police authorities in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province as part of a push to increase security at schools. The province has borne the brunt of Pakistani Taliban attacks over the years.Gun ownership is common across northwestern Pakistan, which is largely populated by ethnic Pashtuns and includes the restive tribal districts. But the advent of armed teachers has made uneasy many parents, who say it is the responsibility of the state, and not teachers, to protect schools and universities.The notion of armed female teachers, in particular, has provoked consternation across conservative Pashtun society, raising a storm of protest that officials say could call the entire plan into doubt.“How can we teach with a gun in one hand and a book in another?” asked Malik Khalid Khan, president of the All Primary Schools Teachers Association.Abaseen Yusufzai, head of the Pashto department at Islamic College University, said, “This is the stupidest and most illogical thing that has happened in Pashtun society in living memory.”“Women provide moral support, food and water to our warriors,” Mr. Yusufzai continued. “But never in our history have they been required to take up arms. It suggests that the men have lost their nerve, and the courage to fight.”AdvertisementSecurity experts expressed skepticism about the ability of teachers to hold back Taliban militants, who are often primed with drugs when they wage suicide assaults.“How can you expect a woman with a 9-millimeter pistol to forestall a group of terrorists?” said Mahmood Shah, a retired army brigadier who was in charge of security for the tribal belt after 2001. “It’s just nonsense.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Shah said he opposed weapons for both male and female teachers. “Two days training and 10 shots do not make an expert in firearms,” he said. “This is militarizing our educational institutions and putting both teachers and children at greater risk.”But the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa provincial government, which is controlled by the party of the firebrand opposition politician Imran Khan, says it has little choice but to use drastic measures.Mushtaq Ghani, the provincial minister for education and information, said the province’s 65,000 police officers were not enough to secure its 45,000 schools, colleges and universities.The Pakistani Taliban’s attack on a school in Peshawar in December signaled a significant change of tactics.“This is an extraordinary time,” he told reporters last week. “We don’t want teachers to take up guns, but it is necessary in the circumstances.”In addition to the possibility of armed teachers, the authorities have ordered schools to raise boundary walls and hire armed security guards — expensive measures that many schools say they cannot afford.But Muhammad Atif, the minister for elementary education, said the government was redirecting $15 million in government money earmarked for school sanitary facilities and drinking water into the new security measures.“There are 4,700 schools in this province that do not have boundary walls,” he said. “So let’s build walls first and think of toilets and drinking water later.”AdvertisementThe provision for armed teachers comes with safeguards, officials say. Only teachers who are nominated by their principal and pass the normal gun licensing process will be allowed to carry a firearm in class.The program is entirely voluntary, and teachers will not be allowed to display their guns openly.Teachers themselves say they are conflicted — uncomfortable at the prospect of carrying a firearm, yet haunted by memories of the bloodshed at the Army Public School in December, when seven heavily armed militants strode the corridors, flinging grenades and shooting down students.“As I gripped the gun and opened fire I started to sweat, thinking I should have a pen in my hand and not a gun,” said Akhtar Nagina, a physics lecturer at the Frontier College for Women. “But then I remembered what the terrorists had done. And I figured I should at least have a gun in my purse, for my own protection.”A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2015, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Training Teachers to Take Aim Against Taliban.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.