
OCT. 12, 2015

The bombs that tore through a peace rally in Ankara on Saturday roiled a complex political landscape, rived by ideology, ethnicity and bitter conflict that spills across borders. With a national election on Nov. 1, the second in six months, here are the major forces struggling for power. 
The bombs that tore through a peace rally in Ankara on Saturday roiled a complex political landscape, rived by ideology, ethnicity and bitter conflict that spills across borders. With a national election on Nov. 1, the second in six months, here are the major forces struggling for power. The conservative Islamist party led by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has governed Turkey, a parliamentary democracy, since 2002. The party lost its majority in the election in June, but stayed on as caretaker while party leaders tried to form a coalition government. After weeks of talks without a deal, Mr. Erdogan called a new election. Mr. Erdogan also ended a lengthy peace process with Turkey’s restive Kurdish minority, whose candidates did well in the June election, and resumed hostilities against the Kurdish Workers’ Party or P.K.K., a militant group that fought a long insurgency against the Turkish state. Turkey announced in July that it was joining the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State militant group in Iraq and Syria. But most of its airstrikes and other military operations since then have been directed at the P.K.K., including bombing raids on P.K.K. bases on Sunday.  Ethnic Kurds make up 15 to 20 percent of Turkey’s population, but they have often been marginalized and sometimes persecuted by the state since the founding of modern Turkey. Kurdish candidates for Parliament usually run as independents, have won a handful of races and have little influence. But in June, they joined forces in a new left-leaning bloc, the People’s Democratic Party, and captured 80 seats. The party has tried to expand its appeal beyond Kurds, campaigning for causes like women’s rights and equal treatment for all religions, but the ruling party continues to accuse it of being a front for terrorists. The H.D.P. organized the peace rally that was bombed in Ankara. The group was founded in 1978 as a political party, but by 1984 it had begun an armed struggle for independence against the Turkish state that has lasted for decades and claimed more than 40,000 lives. Turkey and its NATO allies consider the P.K.K a terrorist organization. The P.K.K. and its Kurdish allies in Iraq and Syria are hostile to the Islamic State, and so is Turkey. But the Turkish government remains wary of any cooperation with Kurdish fighters against the militants, for fear that Kurdish forces in Syria and Iraq will unite with the P.K.K. against Turkey.In Syria, an offshoot of the P.K.K. led to the creation of the Democratic Union Party (P.Y.D.) and its armed wing the People’s Protection Units, known as the Y.P.G. Though these groups are aligned with the P.K.K., the Turkish government is merely hostile toward them rather than in active state of war.The secular party once led by the founder of modern Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, has been the leading opposition party since the A.K.P. won power in 2002. The party has softened its secular stance somewhat in recent years, hoping to avoid alienating religiously minded voters. It has campaigned mainly on economic issues.The Nationalist Movement Party, the M.H.P, is close in ideology to that of the A.K.P. on many issues, but it strongly opposes Mr. Erdogan’s pursuit of a peace settlement with Kurdish insurgents.The Sunni militants who have seized control of large areas of neighboring Syria and Iraq loom large in Turkey, especially now that the Turkish government has actively joined the fight against them. The jihadists have won support in some quarters for attacking many enemies who are resented or feared on the Turkish right, including the United States, the Shiite-dominated government of Iraq, the repressive government of President Bashar al-Assad in Syria and the Kurds. The Turkish government has accused the Islamic State of responsibility for the bombing in Ankara.Advertisement