A proposal by China that would have withheld the names of countries that criticize nongovernmental organizations at the United Nations has drawn condemnation from diplomats and rights groups, citing concerns about transparency.China made the proposal last week during a session of the United Nations committee that oversees accreditation for nongovernmental organizations to participate in United Nations meetings. At present, the United Nations publishes accounts of committee meetings that include any objections raised by the committee’s 19 member states to nongovernmental organizations seeking accreditation. Last Wednesday, however, China moved that the United Nations no longer name individual countries in its reports, participants in the session said. The motion was supported by Cuba, Iran, Russia, Pakistan and Sudan, the participants said.China eventually dropped the proposal, but not before representatives of other countries expressed alarm about the risks to transparency.
The United States ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, posted on Twitter that the proposal to withhold countries’ names was a “very concerning initiative,” though she did not cite China in connection with the proposal.She added in another post, “In an era of global crackdown on civil society, the UN’s NGO Committee must set the example for openness & transparency.”At accreditation sessions in the past, nongovernmental organizations seeking to gain status as consultative bodies to the United Nations have been asked about their sources of funding or their activities within certain countries. Once the organizations are accredited, they can provide recommendations to the United Nations.Agence France-Presse quoted a diplomat, whom it did not name, as saying of the proposal, “China had long been pushing to restrict NGO and press access to the committee proceedings, however they have never made a motion like they did this morning.”China has restricted the scope of advocacy groups domestically. It has also been accused of sending groups to the United Nations to promote China’s interests under the guise of acting as nongovernmental organizations. Its proposal came just before China assumed the rotating monthlong presidency of the 15-member United Nations Security Council.According to Michelle Evans, advocacy coordinator with the International Service for Human Rights, a New York-based group that is accredited by the United Nations, this was not the first time countries including China have tried to limit nongovernmental organization participation at the international body.China “has pushed hard in recent years for anti-civil society measures in every negotiation on high-level meetings of the General Assembly,” Ms. Evans said in an email. Along with other countries, it has been able to do this by invoking a measure called the “no-objection procedure,” which allows individual member states to bar the participation of nongovernmental organizations at meetings.Last week, the International Service for Human Rights released a statement urging the accreditation committee to continue to be transparent in reports of its meetings. Such disclosure “is crucial to transparency and accountability in the Committee’s work and helps ensure that States cannot hide behind anonymity in asking irrelevant or repetitive questions which have the purpose or effect of denying or deferring NGO accreditation,” the statement said.At a regular briefing on Friday, a United Nations spokesman said that the accreditation committee would continue reporting the positions taken by individual countries during its meetings.China’s mission to the United Nations did not respond to a request for comment. On Monday, a spokesman for the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Hong Lei, said in a faxed statement that China “has consistently supported the participation of nongovernmental organizations in U.N. activities according to U.N. rules of procedures.”