AdvertisementSupported byBy William NeumanCARACAS, Venezuela — The authorities detained several executives of the country’s top pharmacy chain over the weekend amid accusations that retailers were seeking to maintain long lines outside stores as part of what President Nicolás Maduro called a “guerrilla tactic” to sow discontent in the economically beleaguered nation.“I’ve got some conspirators, owners of a chain of stores, jailed by the Sebin,” Mr. Maduro said Sunday in a television appearance, referring to the country’s intelligence police. “I have asked the national prosecutor’s office to speed up the charges so that they are well jailed for sabotaging the Venezuelan people with their chain of stores.”He did not identify the company, but he appeared to be referring to the Farmatodo drugstore chain. He said inspectors had visited a store and found irregularities. “Where there are 10 cash registers, they have three cashiers, and the three cashiers they have, they put to work unloading a truck, and that way they sabotage the whole chain because their goal is to irritate people,” Mr. Maduro said.Farmatodo released a statement saying that it had been visited by the intelligence police and government inspectors and that “company executives were invited to make declarations to the Sebin.”On Sunday night, the head of propaganda and communication for the government’s United Socialist Party, Ernesto Villegas, posted photographs of a Farmatodo store on Twitter and said “they should explain why they foster lines in the entrances to their stores.”Venezuela has been among the countries hardest hit by the steep plunge in the price of oil, its only major export. Shortages of basic products, including disposable diapers, medicine and cooking oil, have become acute, leading to long lines at many stores, including those run by the government. Mr. Maduro says scheming capitalists are waging an economic campaign against his socialist-inspired government, but many economists blame his policies, including rigid controls over prices and access to hard currency needed for imports.On Monday night, Mr. Maduro again went on television and said that he had ordered the arrest of the executives of a supermarket chain and that the military would occupy the chain’s 36 stores. Víctor Maldonado, the executive director of the Chamber of Commerce of Caracas, said that several Farmatodo executives had been released and that two remained in detention, including the company’s executive president and the vice president for operations.“The government continues to point the finger at people who aren’t guilty,” Mr. Maldonado said. “The cause of the long lines is the same as the cause of the shortages, and that is bad economic policy.” At the Farmatodo store visited by inspectors over the weekend, neighbors said that people typically begin lining up outside in the early morning, waiting for a truck carrying basic products to arrive in the afternoon, and that many shoppers buy goods sold at regulated prices in order to resell them later at a steep markup. On Monday, a manager warned shoppers not to line up outside. But when the truck arrived in the afternoon, a line of about 50 people quickly formed, although they remained inside, where they were less visible. All five registers had cashiers. Calls to Farmatodo’s offices went unanswered on Monday. The company has 167 stores in Venezuela and about 29 in Colombia, selling medicine and consumer goods.In Washington on Monday, the State Department announced it had imposed visa restrictions on some current and former Venezuelan government officials believed to be linked to human rights abuses or corruption. It did not name the officials or say how many were being penalized. “We are sending a clear message that human rights abusers, those who profit from public corruption, and their families are not welcome in the United States,” Jen Psaki, a department spokeswoman, said in a statement.The office of Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. responded on Monday to comments by Mr. Maduro, who accused him in a speech on Friday of telling a recent meeting of Caribbean leaders “that the government of Venezuela was going to be overthrown, was going to fall.” Mr. Maduro spoke as if he were addressing Mr. Biden: “You say it is a new era for relations with Latin America. And to go and conspire, and with brother governments of the Caribbean!”Mr. Biden’s office said in a statement that “President Maduro’s accusations are patently false and are clearly part of an effort to distract from the concerning situation in Venezuela.”Patricia Torres and María Eugenia Díaz contributed reporting.Advertisement