
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
FEB. 2, 2015
A detailed forensic analysis of video recorded in Cairo on Jan. 24 strongly suggests that an Egyptian police officer fired the shotgun pellets that killed her, Human Rights Watch said in a report released on Sunday.The rights group’s investigation of the fatal shooting of Shaimaa al-Sabbagh, 31, compared the testimony of four witnesses with evidence from video and photographs recorded before, during and after the Egyptian police used force to disperse a small group of socialist activists who were marching to Tahrir Square with flowers. The march, on Jan. 24, was in memory of more than 800 protesters killed in the 2011 uprising that began with antipolice street protests that Jan. 25, national Police Day in Egypt.According to the Human Rights Watch analysis, an examination of video posted online by the Egyptian newspaper Youm El Sabea shows Ms. Sabbagh crumpling to the pavement a split second after a masked officer fired a rifle in her direction from close range.The very public and well-documented killing of Ms. Sabbagh, in a busy section of downtown Cairo on a Saturday afternoon, outraged Egyptians who had taken to the streets four years earlier to protest police impunity. Efforts by the Interior Ministry to pin the blame for her killing first on an unseen Islamist gunman — who would have had to fire into a street crowded with police officers without attracting attention — and then on an elderly activist standing near her as she was shot only added to the uproar.AdvertisementHuman Rights Watch noted that video and photographs showed that when the masked officer fired, he was standing next to a uniformed police brigadier general who was pointing at the protesters.AdvertisementPresident Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the former military chief who took power after deposing Mohamed Morsi, the president elected after the revolution, offered his first public comment on the killing on Sunday, The Associated Press reported. After offering his condolences to Ms. Sabbagh's family, Mr. Sisi said that one “individual’s mistake should not be used to undermine an entire institution,” in an apparent reference to the nation’s police force.According to local news media reports, in his remarks to a gathering of police and army commanders, religious leaders and politicians, the president also urged Interior Minister Mohamed Ibrahim to reveal “the truth behind” the protester’s death.While Ms. Sabbagh, who left behind a young son, was relatively unknown in life, outrage over her death — and the arresting image of a colleague trying to save her — has made her into an icon of resistance to the authorities.
            Something new adorning the streets of Cairo. #Egypt #shaimaa_sabbagh pic.twitter.com/ef956SpPGh Last week, when female activists gathered at the site of her death to protest the shooting, they were met by counterdemonstrators chanting in favor of the police and the president.After the female activists reportedly dispersed of their own accord, a man believed to be a plainclothes officer was photographed removing flowers left on the sidewalk where Ms. Sabbagh was shot.
            In a country a trash collection problem as bad as #Egypt, cops go out of their way to remove roses left for #Shaimaa pic.twitter.com/7Hox8ZFbAF Against this backdrop, Ms. Sabbagh’s husband released a video tribute in which he said his wife had been motivated by her love of Egypt to continue pressing for the original aims of the 2011 revolution: “bread, freedom and social justice.” Ms. Sabbagh and her colleagues were chanting for those things when their demonstration was attacked by the police.An earlier version of this post misstated Shaimaa al-Sabbagh’s age at death. She was 31, not 32.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »