By ISABEL KERSHNERFEB. 2, 2015
JERUSALEM — Jordan said on Monday that it was sending its ambassador back to Israel, three months after he was recalled in protest of what the Jordanians called Israeli violations at a contested holy site in East Jerusalem. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel welcomed the decision.The decision to return the ambassador, Walid Obeidat, to the Jordanian Embassy in Tel Aviv reflected an easing of tensions and what both countries regard as the importance of the ties between them.It also attested to the calm that has prevailed in recent weeks at the volatile Jerusalem site revered by Muslims as the Noble Sanctuary and by Jews as the Temple Mount.Jordan is the official custodian of the sacred compound, the location of Al Aqsa Mosque and the golden Dome of the Rock. Israel is in charge of security.AdvertisementMohammad al-Momani, the Jordanian government spokesman, said the ambassador was scheduled to be back in Tel Aviv by Monday evening. In a telephone interview, Mr. Momani said that Jordan had seen “significant improvements” in the access Israel allowed Muslim worshipers to the mosque on Fridays, and that there had been better coordination on tourist visits between the Israeli authorities and the Islamic authorities who administer the site under Jordanian supervision.“We felt the message was heard loud and clear, and it is time for the ambassador to go back and to continue following Jordanian interests,” Mr. Momani said.The dispute over the holy site had acutely strained Israel’s relations with Jordan, two decades after the two countries signed a peace treaty. While relations are not warm or openly friendly, the two countries share long borders and coordinate closely on security issues in what has become an increasingly turbulent Middle East.Mr. Netanyahu said of the Jordanian decision, “This is an important step that reflects the shared interests of Israel and Jordan and first among them, stability, security and peace.”Israel’s ambassador to Jordan remained in Amman despite Jordan’s diplomatic sanction, and the Jordanian Embassy in Tel Aviv remained open during the ambassador’s absence.AdvertisementThe tensions over Al Aqsa had accrued over a number of months, as some nationalist Israelis increasingly challenged a decades-old ban on Jewish prayer at the site, revered by Jews as the place where ancient temples once stood. Defiant visits by Israeli activists and politicians pushing for Jewish prayer rights, fierce clashes between Palestinian protesters and the police, and Israeli limitations on the entry of Muslim worshipers to the site all contributed to the recall of the Jordanian ambassador.The episode also severely strained Israel’s relations with the Palestinians and fanned unrest in the predominantly Palestinian neighborhoods of East Jerusalem. Israel accused President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority of incitement to violence after he called on Muslims to defend Al Aqsa “by all means.” Palestinians carried out deadly attacks using vehicles, knives, meat cleavers and guns as weapons.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Israel seized the compound from Jordan in the 1967 war, along with the rest of East Jerusalem and the West Bank. Israel then annexed East Jerusalem in a move that was never internationally recognized. Israeli Jews and tourists are allowed to visit the compound, but the police do not allow non-Muslim prayer there, saying it poses a threat to public order.The tensions with Jordan spiked in the aftermath of an attempt in late October by a Palestinian gunman to assassinate Yehuda Glick, an Israeli-American activist who had agitated for more Jewish rights at the contested holy site. Mr. Glick was severely wounded but survived. The Palestinian assailant was killed hours later in what police described as a shootout.Israel temporarily barred all access to the revered compound for the first time in many years, citing security concerns.Jordan recalled its ambassador days later, after the Islamic authorities said that Israeli security forces had entered the mosque with their boots on, considered a grave insult, and then damaged the mosque doors, burned carpets and broke glass as they confronted Palestinian protesters. Video filmed by the Israeli police showed masked Palestinians hurling rocks and firecrackers at the police from inside Al Aqsa Mosque.Mr. Netanyahu immediately engaged in damage control, reassuring King Abdullah II of Jordan in a phone call that Israel was committed to maintaining the status quo at the contested site and to maintaining Jordan’s traditional role there — a pledge Mr. Netanyahu has repeated publicly many times. Mr. Netanyahu also called on his ministers and Israeli legislators to refrain from visits to the site.Israel has eased age restrictions on Muslim entry to the site for Friday noon prayers since mid-November, and the clashes have waned.Micky Rosenfeld, a spokesman for the Israeli police, said that more than 40,000 Muslims had prayed there on recent Fridays without incident.He added that thousands of tourists and “small numbers” of Israelis have also visited the site during the week, but there have not been any recent, high-profile visits by Israeli leaders.AdvertisementStill, the friction simmers. Mr. Rosenfeld said that a group of Arab women were escorted out of the compound by police two weeks ago after they shouted “Allahu akbar,” or “God is great,” presumably to disturb a visit by Israelis. Last week, Mr. Rosenfeld said, the police removed six Israeli men from the area after they strayed from the route designated for visitors.Rana F. Sweis contributed reporting from Amman, Jordan.A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Jordan Sends Envoy Back to Israel as Tensions Ease.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.