AdvertisementSupported byLetter From AmericaBy Anand GiridharadasWho, if not he, is the president of the poor?President Obama’s State of the Union address last month centered on what he calls “middle-class economics.” He did mention poverty, though. Once. In the section on foreign policy. In a paragraph about Africa.If you’re swimming below the waterline of hope on the South Side of Chicago, or in eastern Kentucky, or in Fresno, Calif., you might wonder: Who, then, is my president?One possible explanation for the omission is the belief that domestic poverty is too fringe, politically speaking. In industrialized countries, there aren’t enough poor people to reward such a focus.The problem with that argument is facts. Here are a few: Most American public school students now qualify for free or reduced-price lunches, a new study reports. The ranks of children whose families receive food stamps have nearly doubled since the Great Recession, to 16 million — about one in five children. An estimated 65 million Americans have a criminal record, forever burdening many people’s efforts to secure work or, failing that, public aid.So there are many Americans who may not fit either of the major parties’ prevailing political-economy narratives: for the Republicans, that anyone can pull themselves up by the bootstraps if only government stopped overregulating boots, straps and pulling; for the Democrats, that anyone can pull themselves up by the bootstraps if only government subsidized straps and created a pullers’ tax credit.The Republican narrative has long overlooked the poor. What’s more striking is how President Obama — the first African-American in the job, the son of a single mother, an erstwhile organizer of poor communities — neglected them in his annual address.He spoke of “chances for everyone who makes the effort.” He praised an aptly middle-class guest, sitting with Michelle Obama in her box, because she “isn’t asking for a handout,” but rather for more ways to “get ahead.” He said, “These ideas won’t make everybody rich, or relieve every hardship. That’s not the job of government.” He kept using the same phrase to describe the people he wants to help: “working families.”On the right, Mr. Obama is often ridiculed as a radical socialist. But what his speech suggests is that, for all the acrimony of American politics today, there is in fact a rather remarkable two-party consensus on the notion that everyone, given the removal of certain obstacles, can rise.What if some people can’t rise? What about people doubly disqualified from being in a “working family,” because they can’t find work and then, not incidentally, fail to form a family? The percentage of adult men not in the labor force — meaning neither employed nor temporarily out of work and collecting unemployment benefits — now lurks at 30.8 percent, the highest level ever recorded. It was 13.3 percent in 1948 and has risen steadily since.What about the street-dwelling transgender teenagers driven from home by hatred, the mentally and physically ill, the disabled, the addicts, the people surfacing from prison to closed doors? What about children born into stressful environments where the beatings are frequent and the words too few, now that we know from writers like Paul Tough that these children are largely doomed by the time they have the first flickers of agency?There are people — millions of them — for whom the “shadow of crisis” has not passed, contrary to Mr. Obama’s opening words.But America is becoming a return- on-investment country, in which every endeavor must justify itself in terms of accountancy rather than philosophy. From 1972 until recently, the United Negro College Fund helped 300,000 students obtain higher education, using a well-loved tag line: “A mind is a terrible thing to waste.”A year and a half ago, it gave in to the imperatives of the age: “What if the future of kids was a stock you could invest in?”Join an online conversation at http://anand.ly and follow on Twitter.com/anandwrites Advertisement