By DAN BILEFSKYFEB. 2, 2015
PARIS —  Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former head of the International Monetary Fund, went on trial Monday on accusations that he participated in a prostitution ring that extended from the north of France to Brussels, Washington and New York.In a case that has riveted France, Mr. Strauss-Kahn, 65, who was once seen as a presidential contender, stands accused in Lille, France, with 13 other defendants, including Dominique Alderweireld, a sex-club owner known as Dodo la Saumure.Mr. Strauss-Kahn is charged with “aggravated procurement in a group,” or pimping, and using his subordinates to obtain prostitutes for lavish sex parties.In addition to shining a spotlight on a clandestine world of Champagne-fueled sex parties that prosecutors say were attended by lawyers, judges, police officials, journalists and musicians, the case is also spurring debate about sexual morality in France and the extent to which the private lives of public figures should remain private.AdvertisementIn France, having sex with prostitutes is not illegal, but soliciting and pimping are.Mr. Strauss-Kahn has acknowledged being present at sex parties but has vehemently denied the charges, saying he was not aware that some of the women present were prostitutes.AdvertisementHis defenders say that the prosecution is seeking to criminalize sexual ardor, and that Mr. Strauss-Kahn is the victim of a puritanical, politically motivated witch hunt. Moreover, they argue that the sex parties reflect a long tradition of libertinage, and that consensual sex between multiple partners behind closed doors is a matter of private taste and morals.Mr. Strauss-Kahn resigned as head of the International Monetary Fund in 2011 after he was accused of sexually assaulting a housekeeper at a hotel in New York. The charges were later dropped. He has since been seeking to rehabilitate himself, working as a consultant, lecturing and advising foreign countries as well as large companies in Russia, Africa and Latin America, among other places.Prosecutors say exclusive orgies were organized in major world cities by businessmen who were seeking favor with Mr. Strauss-Kahn, and that their money was used to finance prostitutes, including for Mr. Strauss-Kahn, who sometimes sought out sex with several partners in one evening.Mr. Strauss-Kahn’s name first appeared in the Lille inquiry by chance, in May 2011. French investigators had wiretapped the phone of Mr. Alderweireld.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If convicted, Mr. Strauss-Kahn could face up to 10 years in prison and fines of more than 1.5 million euros, or $1.7 million.Didier Specq, a veteran court reporter who has written a book about the case, said that while the trial was a blow to Mr. Strauss-Kahn, he could emerge emboldened if found innocent.Mr. Specq said Mr. Strauss-Kahn was still popular among some French people who considered the sexual choices of their politicians to be a private matter.“Morally, he will take a hit,” Mr. Specq said. “But after a few weeks of this trial, people will realize that the evidence against him is thin. It will raise questions as to whether the case was politically motivated.”But others said the trial would have a more damaging effect.Michel Taubmann, a biographer of Mr. Strauss-Kahn, told BFMTV that Mr. Strauss-Kahn had lost his status and connections and was now a man “alone.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Former Chief of the I.M.F. Goes on Trial in Sex Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.