By MICHELLE INNISFEB. 2, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia —  Prime Minister Tony Abbott, struggling to keep unhappy political allies from toppling him, said on Monday that he would abandon some costly and unpopular policies and refocus his attention on the economy.Mr. Abbott, who leads a coalition of Liberal and National Party members, has been in office less than two years, and the next national election is not due before October 2016. But the conservative coalition took a beating in a state election in Queensland over the weekend. A series of missteps and setbacks have dented Mr. Abbott’s popularity so badly that his party’s state candidates there asked him not to campaign with them.In a speech at the National Press Club in Canberra on Monday, Mr. Abbott said the Queensland election delivered “lessons for us all.” As he reset his policy agenda, he said he would consult with his party colleagues more often, rather than make major decisions on his own.“These are testing times for our country,” Mr. Abbott said, mentioning slowing economic growth among Australia’s trading partners and rising government debt. “Building a stronger economy is the fairest thing we can do, because it means more jobs, higher wages and more government revenue to pay for the services we need.”AdvertisementAustralian lawmakers have been known to change prime ministers in midterm when they become disaffected. The previous Labor government did it twice, replacing Kevin Rudd with Julia Gillard and then, as the next election loomed, switching back to Mr. Rudd again. Mr. Abbott noted on Monday that “the chaos” of those days was a major reason voters turned away from Labor in the 2013 election, and he warned his colleagues not to go down the same road.Advertisement“The previous government appeared to be a perpetual soap opera,” said Dr. Geoff Robinson, a lecturer in history and politics at Deakin University in Victoria State.Mr. Abbott dismissed speculation that his deputy party leader, Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, would garner enough support to replace him. “Julie is a friend of mine,” he said. “She has been a terrific deputy. I believe I have her full support.”But he acknowledged that he had made mistakes in office. He said the days of “captain’s picks” — decisions made without input from allies — were over.Mr. Abbott’s missteps — including an unpopular decision to bestow an Australian knighthood on Prince Philip, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II, and a threat to “shirtfront,” or charge into, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia at the Group of 20 summit in Brisbane — have left him open to criticism that he is out of touch both with voters and with his allies in Parliament.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His government has struggled to enact measures he promised in his budget announcement last May, including deregulation of Australia’s universities and co-payments for doctor’s visits. But discontent with Mr. Abbott’s performance seemed to crystallize around the knighthood, announced on Jan. 26.Senior members of his cabinet refused to endorse the decision. “I’m always of the strong belief that all awards should be for Australians,” Barnaby Joyce, the agriculture minister, said in a radio interview. The Australian newspapers owned by Rupert Murdoch, normally supportive of Mr. Abbott, were roundly critical.“His own troops found that one very difficult to explain,” said Grahame Morris, a former adviser to an earlier Liberal prime minister, John Howard.In Queensland, postal ballots were still being counted on Monday, and final results were not expected for up to 10 days. But it was already clear that Campbell Newman, the state premier and Liberal National leader, had lost his seat. Labor, which went into the election with just 9 lawmakers in the 89-seat state assembly, appeared to be headed for a majority of 45 or 46 seats.AdvertisementJohn Wanna, a professor of politics at the Australian National University, said that in the past, new prime ministers were generally given a few years to get governing right, while cabinet ministers were free to express dissenting views. “Now, they are all focused on being on-message,” Mr. Wanna said, “and when it is the wrong message, they are all wrong.”Geoff Gallop, head of the Graduate School of Government at Sydney University and a former Labor premier in Western Australia, said of Mr. Abbott that “he is more radical than people think, and I don’t think he is well-liked.”But Mr. Abbott had an answer on Monday.“I never came into politics to be popular,” he said. “All governments go through difficult patches. You can buckle down to business or not, but failing to buckle down to business always makes a bad situation worse.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Australian Leader Alters Course After Losing State Vote.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.