MingPao journalists down pens for 1hr to protest Ch.Ed’s sudden unilateral decision to change top story (MP StaffAsn) //t.co/P9Q4w0QoHt— Yuen Chan (@xinwenxiaojie) 3 Feb 15At every newspaper, journalists enthusiastically kvetch about editors bumping their articles from prominent spots in print, depriving them of glory, if not readers.But when the newspaper is Ming Pao, a troubled flagship of respectable journalism in Hong Kong, and when the story is about the armed crackdown on protesters in mainland China in 1989, the grumbling can burst into protest. Once again, Ming Pao, a daily broadsheet, is at the heart of contention over media freedom and priorities in Hong Kong.
Journalists at Ming Pao have jousted with the paper’s chief editor this week over his decision to shift the position of an article in Monday’s edition about a cache of documents from the Canadian Embassy in Beijing during the lead-up to the crackdown and the carnage that ensued on June 3-4, 1989.Ming Pao’s staff association denounced the editor’s decision to give more prominent space to a report about a fund for young entrepreneurs in Hong Kong started by Jack Ma, the Chinese billionaire who founded Alibaba, the e-commerce company. The association asserted that the decision was a backhanded attempt to muffle the impact of the report on 1989, still a highly sensitive subject for the mainland government.“In our view, a newspaper’s daily choice of its leading story reflects the principles and values upheld by the newspaper,” Nick Kwok, the chairman of the Ming Pao Staff Association, said in a telephone interview on Wednesday.“In Hong Kong, readers care deeply about stories about June 4th, and they are of historical significance,” Mr. Kwok said. “No matter how you weigh it, it’s obvious that the story about the witness account of machine guns firing at students has to lead.”The controversy over the June 4 story has distilled the tensions over the future of journalism in the semiautonomous Chinese territory of Hong Kong, where commercial and political pressures from mainland China have fed fears that the former British colony’s tradition of press freedom and diversity is imperiled.Those fears have come into sharp focus at Ming Pao, a sober-toned broadsheet. Its former chief editor, Kevin Lau, was shunted aside just over a year ago, prompting accusations that the paper’s owners were pandering to Beijing. Then he was attacked with a cleaver in February last year.In 1995, a Malaysian businessman of Chinese heritage, Tiong Hiew King, bought a controlling stake in Ming Pao and its sister publications. His main business is a timber multinational that does business in China.Mr. Lau has said the cleaver attack appeared to be revenge for his journalistic work. The Hong Kong police arrested 11 people in connection with the assault, including one man suspected of committing it and another accused of helping him flee the scene. But the police have not said whether they have identified a motive for the attack.The latest controversy at Ming Pao has ignited misleading news reports that assume the editors pulled the entire report on 1989. In fact, the article appeared at length. A headline ran over the top of the front page, “Canadian secret documents: Students witness gunfire on June 4.” The article itself appeared on the bottom two-thirds of Page 2 and all of Page 3. (The paper’s front page was given over to coverage of a pro-democracy demonstration in Hong Kong on Sunday.)On Tuesday, the editor in chief at the heart of the uproar, Chong Tien-siong, issued a statement defending his decision. An editor has to decide what is most important for readers to see first in the paper, he said.“The editorial policy of Ming Pao has never shown fear or favor,” Mr. Chong said.“The editor in chief has the power and responsibility to alter the layout,” he added. “On Sunday, I exercised my decision-making power to put Alibaba as the leading story, and I made no alterations whatsoever to the report on the secret documents of June 4. It appeared in its original form in a prominent position.”But aggrieved journalists at Ming Pao have dismissed that explanation, reflecting the persistent distrust between them and Ming Pao editors over the paper’s overall direction. They said that the chief editor broke established norms by coming into the office late on a Sunday night to alter the layout, to which he had not raised objections at an editorial meeting that evening.“His statement that the change was a result of editorial logic is full of red herrings,” Mr. Kwok, the staff association chairman, said of Mr. Chong’s statement. “People have cast doubt on the decision’s motives: the existence of a ‘black hand,’ commercial pressures and so on.”In its own statement released on Tuesday, the Hong Kong Journalists Association urged the paper’s editors to “strengthen communication with the editorial department to dispel the unease and suspicion among the staff of the department.”On Tuesday, 80 staff members of Ming Pao held an hourlong stoppage, Radio and Television Hong Kong, a public broadcaster, reported. In 2015, it seems, the newspaper will remain in the news, a battleground over the future of journalism in Hong Kong.Alan Wong contributed reporting.