By ELISABETH MALKINFEB. 3, 2015
MEXICO CITY —  President Enrique Peña Nieto announced Tuesday that a new federal comptroller would lead an investigation into the purchase by the president and his wife of two houses from government contractors.A third house, built by one of the contractors and sold to the country’s finance minister, Luis Videgaray, will also be part of the inquiry, which will be reviewed by a panel of outside experts.The move was an acknowledgment that Mr. Peña Nieto has failed to mollify critics who argued that buying the houses on favorable terms from companies that went on to win large public works contracts was a conflict of interest.“I want to be emphatic,” Mr. Peña Nieto said. “The president doesn’t grant contracts, decide on procurement or public works.”Advertisement“And despite this clarification, I am aware that the allegations have generated the appearance of something improper, something which in reality never occurred,” he said.AdvertisementQuestions over the purchases of the houses have battered Mr. Peña Nieto’s reputation since the first of them was revealed by a Mexican investigative reporting team in November.An expansive house in Mexico City’s most expensive neighborhood was built by Grupo Higa, a company in the State of Mexico, which surrounds Mexico City, for Mr. Peña Nieto’s wife, Angélica Rivera, a television actress.Grupo Higa won a number of contracts while Mr. Peña Nieto was governor of the State of Mexico. It was also part of a Chinese-led consortium that was to build a $3.7 billion bullet train, one of Mr. Peña Nieto’s signature projects as president.The new comptroller, Virgilio Andrade, is a former member of the autonomous agency that runs Mexico’s elections and was part of Mr. Peña Nieto’s transition team before he took office at the end of 2012.“This won’t earn the president credibility, that the commission is in the hands of somebody who is close to him,” said María Amparo Casar, an anti-corruption expert at the Mexican Institute for Competitiveness.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Peña Nieto also outlined a series of bureaucratic measures that he said would help reduce corruption, including a requirement that top officials reveal any conflict of interest to the comptroller. But Ms. Casar said they were not convincing: “It falls short of what people are demanding,” she said.Still, Ms. Casar said the appointment of a new comptroller was a positive sign because the position, at the top of the ministry of public function, had been vacant for two years. The intent had been to replace part of the agency’s functions with an anti-corruption prosecutor, but no one was ever appointed.The real test of the president’s commitment to combating corruption, she said, will be in the details of anti-corruption legislation expected to be sent to congress soon.AdvertisementAttacking corruption “is not in their DNA,” she said of Mr. Peña Nieto’s administration. “But I hope they won’t be so insensitive as to not take the public pulse on corruption.”Ms. Rivera, the president’s wife, later said she would sell the property, which she was buying on credit from Grupo Higa. The bullet train contract was initially canceled and then put up for bid again before it fell to budget cuts last week.Grupo Higa also sold a house on a golf course in the rural retreat of Malinalco to Mr. Videgaray in 2012, just before he took office. Mr. Videgaray received a mortgage from Grupo Higa but told reporters that he had paid it off at the beginning of last year.In 2005, just after he became governor of the State of Mexico, Mr. Peña Nieto bought a house on a golf course in Ixtapan de la Sal, a weekend resort, from a company owned by the San Román family, which went on to win contracts in the State of Mexico and, more recently, with the federal government.Those two purchases were first reported by The Wall Street Journal.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Purchase by Mexican President Is Under Scrutiny.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.