By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEFEB. 3, 2015
GENEVA — The United Nations Human Rights Council on Tuesday picked an American judge serving on an inquiry into possible war crimes in Gaza to lead its work to completion a day after the inquiry’s chairman resigned after Israel accused him of a “blatant conflict of interest.”The council’s president, Joachim Ruecker, picked Mary McGowan Davis, a former justice of the New York State Supreme Court and one of the two remaining panel members, to take over as chairwoman after the resignation of William Schabas, a Canadian law professor. The inquiry was set up in August to investigate the conduct of hostilities in the summer’s Gaza conflict.Mr. Ruecker chose not to make a new appointment to replace Professor Schabas on the panel since it had largely completed gathering evidence and had already started writing the report that it is expected to present to the council in late March.In a letter to the council last week, Israel’s mission to the United Nations in Geneva accused Professor Schabas of “a blatant conflict of interest” over a previous contractual relationship with “the Palestinian side.” Professor Schabas replied that he had provided a legal opinion for the Palestine Liberation Organization relating to accession to the International Criminal Court, for which he was paid $1,300.AdvertisementProfessor Schabas, speaking to the Israeli media on Tuesday, said he was stepping down to avoid becoming “an obstacle and distraction” to the work of the panel. Accepting his resignation on Tuesday, Mr. Ruecker said that “in this way, even the appearance of a conflict of interest is avoided, thus preserving the integrity of the process.”However, Israel, which denounced the inquiry as a “kangaroo court” and refused to cooperate with its investigations, continued to challenge its legitimacy. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said the inquiry should be shelved, according to Israeli media reports. Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman celebrated the departure of Professor Schabas as “another achievement of Israeli diplomacy” but said it would not affect the panel’s findings because of what he called its inherent bias.AdvertisementMs. McGowan Davis served as chairwoman of a panel formed to follow up on the findings of a United Nations inquiry led by Richard Goldstone that investigated Israel’s 2008-9 invasion of Gaza. The report she helped write found that Israel had investigated 400 allegations of misconduct in the course of the invasion, but little disciplinary action followed, and no investigation was undertaken into those who planned and managed the operation.An earlier version of this article misstated the given name of the man who led a United Nations investigation of Israel’s 2008-9 invasion of Gaza. He is Richard Goldstone, not William.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: New Head of Gaza Inquiry Is Named.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.