AdvertisementSupported byBy Said Ghazali and Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — Saying it was a “grave mistake” for an official Palestinian newspaper to publish a cartoon that some readers thought depicted the Prophet Muhammad, the president of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, has ordered an investigation, according to Wafa, the official Palestinian news agency.Mr. Abbas said it was necessary to take “deterrent measures against those responsible,” Wafa reported. Ali Khalaf, an editor at the newspaper, Al-Hayat al-Jadida, said on Tuesday that the cartoonist and the editor in chief of the paper had been suspended.Mr. Abbas marched shoulder to shoulder with world leaders less than a month ago at the mass rally in Paris after the deadly attack on the satirical French newspaper Charlie Hebdo, which often lampooned Islam and Muhammad. Protesters at the rally brandished pens in raised fists to defend freedom of expression and honor the irreverent staff members of the newspaper who were killed.The cartoon that appeared in Sunday’s edition of Al-Hayat al-Jadida seemed innocuous by comparison with the scathing material Charlie Hebdo published. Even so, many Muslims consider any portrayal or personification of Muhammad, even highly positive ones, to be blasphemous. Mr. Abbas said he was acting out of respect for sacred religious symbols, according to Wafa.The cartoon was drawn by Muhammad Sabaaneh, a prominent Palestinian caricaturist. It depicted a robed figure backed by a halo, standing on a globe of the world and dispersing seeds of light from a heart-shaped purse. A caption in Arabic reads “Saydna Muhammad.”Some Palestinians quickly took to Facebook to express anger at the cartoon, which they said was a depiction of the prophet.But Mr. Sabaaneh denied that that was what it was. He said in his own Facebook post that the cartoon was meant to represent a Muslim who follows the message of Islam, not to depict the prophet himself. “It was a symbolic figure for Islam and the Muslim’s role in spreading light and love for all humanity,” Mr. Sabaaneh wrote.The newspaper also printed a statement rejecting any interpretation of the cartoon as a depiction of a prophet or sacred messenger. It said that by publishing the illustration, it had sought “to defend the role of Islam in spreading the message of love and peace.”Even so, the newspaper apologized for running the cartoon, and it has since disappeared from the paper’s website. Wafa reported the news of the investigation on Monday evening.Mr. Sabaaneh has also been in trouble with the Israeli authorities. In February 2013 he was detained at the crossing between Jordan and the West Bank, then charged in an Israeli military court with handling funds from an illegal organization on behalf of his brother, a member of Hamas, and sentenced to five months in an Israeli prison. Mr. Sabaaneh has said he was charged with collaboration with Hamas because he had published some cartoons in a book written by his brother.Mr. Khalaf, the editor at Al-Hayat al-Jadida, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday that the paper had made a mistake and had apologized for it. Asked about Mr. Abbas’s participation in the Paris rally, Mr. Khalaf said: “The president has his own outside and inside calculations. Every newspaper should have limits to what it publishes and what it cannot publish.”Advertisement