AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — Her friends wanted to lay a wreath in Tahrir Square as a memorial, but Shaimaa el-Sabbagh urged them to reconsider. She feared that the police might attack, mistaking them for supporters of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, said a cousin, Sami Mohamed Ibrahim.But how, her friends asked, could the police attack civilians who were armed only with flowers? So she kissed her 5-year-old son, Bilal, goodbye; left him in the care of a friend near her home in Alexandria; and, a day before the anniversary of the start of the Arab Spring revolt here, boarded a train for Cairo.By midafternoon on Jan. 24, Ms. Sabbagh, 31, lay dead on a crowded street downtown, a potent symbol of the lethal force the Egyptian authorities have deployed to silence the cacophony of protest and dissent unleashed here four years ago. Human rights advocates say the cold brutality of her killing shows how far the military-backed government is willing to go to enforce a return to the old authoritarian order.Stark images of her killing resonated so widely here that in a televised appearance Sunday, even President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi offered condolences, declaring that he saw Ms. Sabbagh as “my own daughter.” At the same time, police attempts to deflect blame for her killing have been undercut by Ms. Sabbagh’s personal profile: as a mother, an accomplished poet and a left-leaning activist who supported the military ouster of the Islamist president.Photographers and videographers captured her death moment by moment. As soon as the procession began and without any warning, masked riot police officers blasted the crowd with tear gas and birdshot from across a narrow street. A shotgun cracked. A kneeling friend held Ms. Sabbagh by the waist to keep her upright, blood streaking down her cheeks and his head against her abdomen. Then another friend carried her limp frame, cradled in his arms, through the tear gas in a vain attempt to save her.Seldom has a needless death by police gunfire been so thoroughly and so movingly documented, rights advocates say, citing both the photographic evidence and multiple witnesses.“A woman who went out to lay a wreath of flowers on Tahrir Square — we see her taking her last breath,” said Ghada Shahbandar, an Egyptian rights advocate. “How much more explicit can an image be?”“It is a disgrace,” she said, lamenting the surreal attempts of the government’s supporters to pin the blame on a shadowy conspiracy as elaborate as a Hollywood thriller. “We have lost the appreciation of human life. We have lost the value of human blood, and we call for more and more killing as though we have not had enough!”Ms. Sabbagh is just one name on a roster of thousands killed by police gunfire since the Arab Spring began in 2011. More than 800 were killed during the original 18-day uprising against President Hosni Mubarak. About 1,000 more, according to the most credible counts, were killed on one day, Aug. 14, 2013, when soldiers and police officers broke up a sit-in by supporters of the ousted President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood. Hundreds more died in other mass shootings that summer.Since then, the killing of protesters — mostly Islamists, but also leftists or liberals, and mostly unarmed — has become an almost weekly occurrence. Sondos Reda, a 17-year-old girl attending an Islamist rally, was killed in clashes with the police in Alexandria on the same day that Ms. Sabbagh died in Cairo. At least 20 others were killed the next day, Jan. 25, on the anniversary of the uprising. A student was killed five days later in clashes with the police at a demonstration in the province of Sharqiya, north of Cairo, and others have reportedly been killed since then in Giza.But in “a moment of collapsing freedoms,” Ms. Sabbagh has become “a symbol of the revolution,” said Sayed Abu Elela, 31, the friend who held her by the waist in the moments after she was shot.Ms. Sabbagh grew up in a conservative Muslim household but rebelled against its traditions, her friends said, and her father, a Muslim preacher who died a few years ago, grew resigned to her independence.He used to tell her, “For the likes of you, wearing pants is a ‘covering,’ ” or modesty, Mr. Abu Elela recalled.As a teenager in the late 1990s, she drifted into a circle of poets who used to meet at cafes around Alexandria, said Khaled Hegazzi, who first met her there. Her activism, he said, seemed to grow out of their cafe debates. “That is where it came from,” he said.She became one of a small group of published Egyptian poets working in the avant-garde style of free verse but using popular, colloquial Arabic. Rejecting the grand and overtly political themes favored by the previous generations, she focused instead on the details of everyday life. Her generation “stopped doing noisy politics,” said Maged Zaher, an Egyptian-American poet who has translated some of Ms. Sabbagh’s work. “There is politics, but it is not sloganeering.”Her poem “A Letter in My Purse” was about a lost handbag. “Anyway, she has the house keys,” Ms. Sabbagh wrote, “and I am waiting for her.”In another poem, Ms. Sabbagh wrote as a Muslim girl who witnessed the crucifixion on a Cairo clock tower, hearing the voices of “the people who love God as they damn this moment where the creatures of God approved/Of crucifying Jesus naked in the crowded square on the clock arms as it declared one in the afternoon.”She married a painter, Osama el-Sehely, earned a master’s degree in folklore at the Academy of Arts in Cairo and developed a passion for documenting the fading traditions of daily life in Egypt. She once spent months visiting towns across the Nile Delta to record the variations in the ways residents baked and served flatbread, said Delphine Blondet, who runs a dance school in Alexandria and recruited Ms. Sabbagh to research traditional birth celebrations for an educational project.Ms. Sabbagh refused payment. “She just loved Egyptian people,” Ms. Blondet said. “Not the country as it is now, for sure, but really the people.”After the uprising in 2011, Ms. Sabbagh joined the Socialist Popular Alliance Party. She became a regular at almost every demonstration, and her friends in Alexandria called her “the voice of the revolution” because of her talent for leading chants. When a television interviewer in late 2012 asked her to look back at the period “after the revolution,” she rejected the question: “We are still ‘after the revolution,’ ” she said.The Egyptian authorities quickly pledged a full investigation into her death. But several witnesses who reported the killing to the police said they had been immediately detained for questioning as suspects — including Mr. Abu Elela, who had held her in her final moments and was detained overnight.And by the next day, an Interior Ministry spokesman made clear that the ministry had essentially ruled out police responsibility. Gen. Gamal Mokhtar of the ministry said at a gathering of international correspondents last week that it was implausible that the police would resort to such force for such a small crowd. “What is the need for the police to shoot bullets?” he asked. The photographs and videos were “no proof at all,” he said.“There is a faction of the Muslim Brotherhood whose entire job and concern is to fabricate photos and videos that tell people that the police are assaulting protesters — that this one is bleeding, that one is injured,” he said.Last weekend, the police detained one of Ms. Sabbagh’s fellow demonstrators, Zohdy al-Shamy, deputy chairman of her party, holding him overnight for questioning about whether he might have used a concealed weapon fired through his jacket pocket to kill his colleague.“Madness,” said Medhat el-Za’ed, a party spokesman.Ms. Sabbagh’s history, though, has also made it unusually difficult for the authorities to explain away the killing by accusing her of treason or violence. Last week, even the flagship state newspaper, Al Ahram, published a front-page editorial expressing rare, officially sanctioned criticism of the Egyptian police.“Peaceful Shaimaa only dreamed of a free country,” wrote Ahmed el-Sayed al-Naggar, the chairman of the state-run news organization, but “she was killed in cold blood by the same person who killed the martyrs she was going to honor.”In the television appearance Sunday, Mr. Sisi urged the interior minister to track down the killer, offering reassurances that even if a police officer had shot Ms. Sabbagh, the ministry itself would not bear the blame.“I don’t know, in all sincerity and truth, who is behind the killing of Shaimaa el-Sabbagh,” he insisted, a hand on his heart.In Alexandria, a friend and her cousin said, no one has yet told Ms. Sabbagh’s son that his mother is not coming home.Merna Thomas contributed reporting from Cairo.Advertisement