By CHOE SANG-HUNFEB. 3, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea — A South Korean Army sergeant was sentenced to death on Tuesday for killing five of his fellow conscripts and wounding seven others in a shooting rampage in June.The 23-year-old sergeant, whom a military court identified only by his surname, Yim, attacked soldiers in his unit near the North Korean border with a rifle and a hand grenade, then fled his guard post. After a manhunt, he was captured the next morning, alive but with a self-inflicted gunshot wound near his shoulder.The sergeant “committed a detailed and premeditated crime of murdering unarmed colleagues in the barracks,” the military court in Wonju, a city east of Seoul, said in its ruling Tuesday.Sergeant Yim’s lawyers said that they would appeal, arguing that the court had failed to take into account the persistent bullying and ostracizing that the sergeant said he suffered at the hands of his fellow soldiers in the barracks.AdvertisementAt the time of the killings, the sergeant was three months short of finishing the 21 months of military service required of most young South Korean men. Before shooting himself, he had written a note in which he described the bullying he said he experienced.The case was the latest to highlight the challenges that South Korea, which technically has been at war with North Korea for more than 60 years, faces in maintaining its largely conscript military. The Ministry of National Defense has since promised to review its screening process to ensure that soldiers chosen for the grueling guard duty along the heavily militarized, 150-mile-long border with the North are mentally and physically fit for the task.AdvertisementIn recent years, the military has come under harsh scrutiny for disciplinary problems, with bloodshed occasionally erupting within the ranks. In 2005, an army private who had been hazed by his superiors killed eight fellow soldiers in a front-line army unit. In 2011, a corporal bullied by fellow marines went on a shooting rampage at a base near the maritime border with North Korea, killing four. Last April, a 20-year-old private died after being repeatedly bullied and beaten by other soldiers.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: Soldier Sentenced to Die.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.