A day after President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner of Argentina, on a state visit to China, raised eyebrows with a post on Twitter making fun of Chinese pronunciation, the Chinese state media continued to ignore the episode, focusing instead on her meeting with President Xi Jinping, and on their talks about cooperation in areas including telecommunications, mining and energy.On Thursday, the state news agency Xinhua reported that Argentina and China had signed a joint statement on deepening bilateral relations and several business agreements. A spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that China had no comment on Mrs. Kirchner’s Twitter posts.Online commenters in China were less restrained.
Twitter is blocked in China, and with official reports ignoring the controversy, popular reaction was not immediate. But as word of the Argentine president’s post spread, so did criticism of Mrs. Kirchner in China.In a Sina Weibo account affiliated with the nationalistic Global Times newspaper, the most upvoted comment contained an expletive directed at the Argentine president, and a variety of other insults were also lobbed. “So this is the I.Q. of a president,” one user said.On Wednesday, Mrs. Kirchner, who is battling declining approval ratings and political scandal at home and was in Beijing hoping to secure Chinese financing for infrastructure projects to aid the troubled Argentine economy, had attended a forum of more than 1,000 Chinese business leaders. Afterward, she posted in Spanish that perhaps they wanted “rice” and “petroleum” — but substituted L’s for R’s in a caricature of a Chinese person speaking broken Spanish.Her comment quickly spread on Twitter, where Mrs. Kirchner has 3.53 million followers. After the immediate rush of online criticism, Mrs. Kirchner posted on Twitter a “sorry,” in English, before adding that the “levels of ridiculousness and absurdity are so high, they can only be digested with humor.”Several Chinese online commenters have challenged Mrs. Kirchner to try speaking Mandarin, whose four tones make words such as Lǐyuērènèilú (Rio de Janeiro) difficult to pronounce, as one user pointed out.“The Argentine president is pretty ‘special,’ laughing at Chinese people’s pronunciation,” another user wrote on his Sina Weibo account.“Even if you’re joking, you can’t do it while in the host’s home,” he added. “She doesn’t understand how important face is to Chinese people. Should quickly apologize.”Another person posted: “You come to China to get money, but you aren’t even respectful. Don’t come to our country. You’re not welcome.”Others responded with their own stereotypes regarding mispronunciation, commenting that Mrs. Kirchner must have been thinking of “Japanese or Koreans.”The paradox of Mrs. Kirchner issuing her comments on a social media platform blocked in China was not lost on the Chinese commenters.“I support lifting the ban on Twitter, then we can all go curse her,” one of the most upvoted comments said. “Is this a case of bullying us because we can’t go on Twitter?”But a few commenters seemed unfazed by Mrs. Kirchner’s effort at humor at the expense of Chinese accents.“It’s just a harmless joke,” one wrote. “Don’t we also make fun of foreigners’ pronunciation of Chinese and their writing skills?”