By NEIL MacFARQUHARFEB. 4, 2015
MOSCOW — Glancing out the window at the swirling snow, Aleksei A. Navalny, the Russian opposition activist, mused aloud about how mounting economic problems, along with some public antagonism toward the Kremlin’s role in the war in Ukraine, may have damaged President Vladimir V. Putin’s administration enough to make it vulnerable.He is gambling that they have, leading a drive by the fractious, somewhat anemic opposition movement to organize an anti-crisis demonstration on March 1, testing its conviction that Muscovites — if not the broader Russian public — are fed up.“The number of people who will be ready to listen to us will increase,” said Mr. Navalny, 38, wearing a dark blue-gray sweatshirt and bluejeans, his previously lean frame reflecting the past year spent confined by house arrest to his 800-square-foot, three-room apartment. “We can see that people support Crimea and all this stuff, but they don’t want to pay for that.”Having been Russia’s leader for the past 15 years, Mr. Putin can no longer entirely blame the deepening economic crisis on his predecessors or even on foreign hostility, Mr. Navalny said in an interview, after months of being barred from speaking to the news media.Advertisement“It is much easier for us to explain that within these 15 years, Putin actually did nothing,” he said. “All the time they told us that they are reconstructing the great Russia, they are reconstructing the great Soviet Union and blah blah. But now oil prices dropped and everything is falling apart.”The government has tried to extend his house arrest, despite the sentencing in December. Mr. Navalny plans to pick up where he left off, trying to weaken the centralized authority of Mr. Putin and the ruling United Russia party by highlighting accusations of corruption and mismanagement. The president may enjoy an 84 percent approval rating for returning Crimea to Russian control last March, he said, but polling by Mr. Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation indicates that 87 percent want government corruption curbed.Despite Mr. Putin’s huge personal support, “he cannot delegate this support to the lower level, that is why this system is so weak,” Mr. Navalny said.AdvertisementThe headquarters of his anti-corruption campaign are in an upscale office block. They could be the disheveled offices of a campaign anywhere, except one whiteboard details the interrogation schedule of employees hauled in for questioning by the security services — 12 sessions in three days.Mr. Navalny, a father of two who trained as a corporate lawyer, lives in permanent legal twilight. He has been convicted twice in court, while the appeal against a third conviction, on Dec. 30, for criminal fraud will start Feb. 17, it was announced this week.His three-and-a-half year sentence was suspended, but his younger brother, Oleg, 31, was sent to jail for the same term. “Their idea was to punish me by imprisoning my brother and keeping me quiet and isolated in my apartment,” he said. “They have a long history and long experience of torturing people, so I guess that they are good psychologists in such situations.”His brother remains in good spirits, he said, brandishing a recent letter in which Oleg had sketched Mr. Putin as a toad sitting on an oil spigot, a reference to one of Mr. Navalny’s earlier speeches.Still, the criminal cases against Mr. Navalny multiply. The latest accusation is that he received a stolen piece of street art from the nearby city of Vladimir that neither the janitor who painted it nor the municipality that regularly trashes such works claims was stolen, he said. An active case means the security services can legally continue to follow him, monitor his telephone calls and Internet traffic, and the like, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Navalny is not quite sure why he was spared jail, but guesses that Mr. Putin has larger concerns right now and does not want another prominent political prisoner to become an international cause célèbre, after releasing the oil tycoon Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky in December 2013. House arrest generates far less sympathy, he said.Mr. Khodorkovsky joined other opposition figures in endorsing the March 1 rally, and Mr. Navalny said the two men share similar ideological outlooks. “I consider him an ally,” he said.Both men want to be president of Russia one day, yet share similar handicaps. For one, their convictions bar them from running for office for many years. (Before the convictions, Mr. Navalny was released from jail while one case was on appeal and allowed to run for mayor of Moscow in 2012, winning a surprising 27.2 percent of the vote.)In addition, both are viewed with some suspicion by Russian liberals: Mr. Navalny for his occasional nationalistic pronouncements and Mr. Khodorkovsky for getting stupendously rich through what many considered the dubious acquisition of state assets.AdvertisementOpposition to Russian involvement in the war in Ukraine is the main theme of the March 1 rally. The rally needs a permit, and Mr. Navalny thinks it may get one for a location on Moscow’s outskirts, but not in the center.“Everyone understands that war with Ukraine is just crazy,” he said. But other issues include some major political and economic demands: reducing the 32 percent of the government budget dedicated to defense and public security; canceling the sanctions on Western food imports, which fuel inflation; and loosening election laws to give more parties a chance, including his own, the Progressive Party.Mr. Navalny said he thought Western sanctions on certain sectors, like banking, had had some influence on the Kremlin, while personal sanctions had been too easy to circumvent.If the West really wanted to influence the discussion inside the government, it could quietly impose a complete travel ban on the 1,000 or so most important Russians and their families, Mr. Navalny said, many of whom own property abroad. “That would increase the split in the elite,” he said. “All these guys want to drink coffee in Paris.” Such measures would be popular with ordinary Russians, he added.Although many opposition figures have fled into exile, Mr. Navalny said moving abroad has no appeal. He admitted, however, that he was no longer as naïve as when he first started about how fast change can happen.“I still live here, my children live here and I am not going to leave,” he said. “It is my country.”An article last Thursday about a perception by Aleksei A. Navalny, the Russian opposition activist, that Russia’s recent economic troubles may have made President Vladimir V. Putin’s administration vulnerable misidentified the field of law that Mr. Navalny practiced before becoming an anticorruption campaigner. He was in corporate law, not real estate law. The same error appeared in an article on April 17, 2013, about his defiance ahead of a trial on charges of embezzlement.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Amid Economic Woes and Public Discontent, Putin Critic Sees Opening.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.