
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
FEB. 4, 2015
During a state visit to China on Wednesday, Argentina’s embattled president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, risked offending her hosts by joking about their accents on Twitter.Mrs. Kirchner, who was trying to promote trade and investment ties between the two nations, boasted on her official account that a forum she had attended in Beijing was attended by more than 1,000 business leaders. She then lapsed into broken Spanish to mock the way some Chinese speakers inadvertently mistake the “r” sound for an “l” in the Spanish words for goods they might exchange, “rice” and “petroleum,” as well as in the name of her party’s youth wing, La Cámpora.
            102 empresas argentinas y más de 500 empresas chinas inscriptas en el seminario. pic.twitter.com/Zf3RUjP9l3 
            Más de 1.000 asistentes al evento… ¿Serán todos de “La Cámpola” y vinieron sólo por el aloz y el petlóleo? …        Scarcely a minute later, as readers on the social network denounced her wordplay as racist and xenophobic, Mrs. Kirchner added a sort of apology.
@CFKArgentina ignorante, estúpida y racista, una joya vamos. Y esta es la representante de un país, pobrecitos argentinos        
            "Lice and petloleum" -- so while begging Beijing for money, Argentina's Kirchner mocks Chinese accent on twitter. http://t.co/A9z3rMD1AT After writing that she was “sorry,” the president complained that “levels of ridiculousness and absurdity are so high, they can only be digested with humor.”
            Sorry. ¿Sabes qué? Es que es tanto el exceso del ridículo y el absurdo, que sólo se digiere con humor. Sino son muy, pero muy tóxicos.        Despite the outraged response, the same comments were posted on the president’s official Facebook page 15 minutes later. Argentines quickly posted a raft of comments despairing of their president on both social networks, with tags based on the pidgin Spanish she had employed.
            Cuando se elige x presidente a un ignorante, suceden estas cosas
#Aloz 
#Aloz #Petlóleo #Clistina #Colupta AdvertisementFive hours after the message was posted, the original tweet was not only still on Mrs. Kirchner’s Twitter account, but it was “pinned” to the very top of her page, a space usually reserved for updates users want to make sure all of their readers see.AdvertisementWith the world's largest currency reserves, of nearly $4 trillion, China has become an increasingly important economic partner to Argentina, which has struggled financially since defaulting on bonds last year. As Bloomberg Business reported, the Chinese have helped Argentina strengthen its depleted central bank reserves through an agreement known as a currency swap.The official Twitter account of Argentina’s presidency later shared Mrs. Kirchner’s apology, without explaining what she was apologizing for, before attempting to redirect the attention of Argentine Twitter users to highlights of her reception by her Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping.
            CFK se reunió con Xi Jinping, ratificó la alianza con China y firmó 15 nuevos convenios bilaterales @CFKArgentina pic.twitter.com/b14XDcNmzE 
            La alianza estratégica con China tendrá una fuerte participación del empresariado argentino https://t.co/JrgiHeRYrX Chinese official media appeared to ignore Mrs. Kirchner’s tweets. State television presented an antiseptic account of her meeting with Mr. Xi, saying the two leaders “cemented political and economic ties.”Aside from Argentina's economic problems, Mrs. Kirchner has been struggling with a scandal at home over the mysterious death of a prosecutor investigating the 1994 bombing of a Buenos Aires Jewish center. That prosecutor, Alberto Nisman, had drafted a request for her arrest, the investigator looking into his death said Tuesday.The unusual tweets led some of the president’s critics to suggest that she might be cracking under pressure from the scandal. A leaked State Department cable published by the Spanish newspaper El País in 2010 revealed that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s office had asked the U.S. Embassy in Buenos Aires frank questions about Mrs. Kirchner’s “mental state and health” one year earlier. The cable specifically asked if Mrs. Kirchner was “managing her nerves and anxiety” by “taking any medications” that might help her “handle stresses” or “calm down when distressed.”Jonathan Gilbert contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: On Visit to China, the Argentine President Mocks Locals for the Way They Speak.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »