AdvertisementSupported byLetter From IndiaBy Manu JosephNEW DELHI — In matters that do not concern religion, India’s poor and rich usually adore different deities. But for a brief period, over the past year, it appeared that an uncommon consensus had come about, that both the miserable and the fortunate were united in reposing their trust in Narendra Modi, who became prime minister after conveying the extraordinary message to Indians that he was a frugal, capitalistic, humanitarian, nationalistic, secular, jovial, once-married celibate.But it was inevitable that the poor would feel the tug of their primary political instinct, which is to be suspicious of whatever the rich think is good for the nation. As Delhi, which is a quasi-state, holds its legislative elections on Saturday, surveys suggest that Mr. Modi’s party will be eclipsed, even though its rival has been maligned in recent months by all the insult-delivery devices of the elite.When Arvind Kejriwal formed the Aam Aadmi Party in 2012, he vowed to end corruption and improve the lives of the poor.Long before Mr. Kejriwal had emerged in the national consciousness, he was the type of politician India’s elite claimed to wish for, though they might have imagined him in better shirts. He was highly educated, incorruptible, an outsider to the political system and cunning enough to win elections. In late 2013, circumstances made him Delhi’s chief minister.However he might have corresponded to the dream of the elite, he proved to be a disturbing reality. A confluence of corporate and political forces suggested, through the full force of the news and social media, that he was an “anarchist.” If that were true, what preceded him in Delhi’s administration must have been orderly corruption and incompetence.In the 49 days that he was in power, he gave away water and cheap electricity and terrified government officials by asking citizens to report those who asked for bribes. He arranged for the public to meet his ministers, but such huge crowds turned up with grievances that Mr. Kejriwal and some of his fellow leaders had to flee.He protested on the streets against the Delhi police for not listening to him. He even slept on the road as a part of his protest. He tried to introduce an anticorruption bill in the Delhi assembly but did not have the numbers to push it through. He attempted to make a virtue of this and made a significant tactical error. In February 2014 he quit as chief minister. His political foes portrayed him as an anarchist and a coward who had abandoned his duties.For a host of reasons, that defamation succeeded in diminishing him further in the perception of the middle classes. They feared that he was not good for the economy, and they had found an honorable reason to dismiss him.The parliamentary elections were approaching that spring, and Mr. Kejriwal’s party had declared that it had national ambitions. Those who despised him had to discredit him swiftly. This they did, Mr. Kejriwal alleged several times during his campaign, through the mainstream news media. The big corporations that control a section of Indian journalism, he said, had become agents of Mr. Modi. The charm of Mr. Modi among the middle classes was at its height, and in that glow Mr. Kejriwal appeared diminished.Mr. Kejriwal is held to exacting standards by journalists and the public even as they are more lenient with Mr. Modi, who is from the old breed of politicians. That is the success of Mr. Kejriwal and his misfortune — he has raised the bar, but only for himself.The Aam Aadmi Party fared very poorly in the national elections held last year. The poor of Delhi, too, were disenchanted with Mr. Kejriwal, but they never abandoned him. Over the past several weeks, surveys have traced a progression in their renewed hope in him even as Mr. Modi has floundered. Last month, Mr. Modi met President Obama wearing an expensive suit whose pinstripes were made up of his own name repeated hundreds of times. Mr. Kejriwal, who is always attired in clothes that match the impoverishment of an average urban Indian, exploited Mr. Modi’s suit to the hilt.If Mr. Kejriwal wins in Delhi, it will once again set him on a path to reclaim India’s poor from their more ambiguous deities.Follow Manu Joseph, author of the novel “The Illicit Happiness of Other People,” on Facebook. Advertisement