By DAN BILEFSKYFEB. 4, 2015
PARIS —  The man accused of stabbing three soldiers guarding a Jewish community center in southern France this week had been questioned by counterterrorism officers and released in the days before the attack, a senior police official said on Wednesday.The man, Moussa Coulibaly, was arrested on Tuesday after, the police said, he lunged at the throat of a soldier near the Jewish center in Nice and wounded him and two other soldiers who intervened. The attack raised alarm in a country still reeling from the terrorist attacks last month in and near Paris that left 17 people dead.Christophe Crépin, a senior police official, said Mr. Coulibaly, who was known to French counterterrorism services and had a criminal record, had been questioned by the intelligence services in France after he flew to Turkey on Jan. 28. Turkey is frequently used as a gateway by Europeans seeking to join extremist groups in Syria. But Mr. Crépin said no formal investigation was opened and Mr. Coulibaly was released, as there was insufficient evidence that he posed a threat.“We can’t arrest and detain every person who comes back from Turkey,” he said. “We must obey the rule of law, and uphold civil liberties, and there was nothing to suggest Mr. Coulibaly would commit such an attack.”AdvertisementThe suspect has the same surname as Amedy Coulibaly, the man who killed four people at a kosher supermarket last month in Paris and was then killed by the police, but the authorities have thus far not established a link between them.AdvertisementWhile the soldiers were not seriously wounded and no one at the Jewish center was harmed, the case underlines the challenges that counterterrorism forces face when confronted with petty criminals like Mr. Coulibaly. He did not appear to have firm connections to radical Islamic networks, but the authorities said he showed signs of being attracted to Islamic extremism. Others questioned why Mr. Coulibaly had been released without a more extensive investigation.“Why was a man with a long criminal rap sheet, who went to a sensitive region known for housing terrorists, allowed to come back to France and permitted to move freely?” Éric Ciotti, a member of the center-right Union for a Popular Movement party in the National Assembly, asked in a statement posted on his website.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The authorities said Mr. Coulibaly, 30, had been known to the police for 10 years and had been sentenced six times between 2003 and 2012 for crimes including theft, drug use and verbally assaulting public officials.According to Le Monde, Mr. Coulibaly, from Mantes-la-Jolie, roughly 30 miles west of Paris, came to the attention of the intelligence services in recent months after a sports club he attended reported him to the police for showing signs of “aggressive proselytizing.” The club also reported that he had behaved coldly toward women and had reproached a man at the club for showering naked. But the police decided that his behavior did not justify putting him under surveillance.At the beginning of January, Mr. Coulibaly requested a one-way ticket to Turkey at a travel agency on the French island of Corsica. His behavior and issues with his passport prompted an employee to notify Air France, which called the police, Le Monde said. Unable to legally prevent him from getting on the plane, the intelligence services asked the Turkish authorities to deport him immediately back to France, the newspaper reported.When questioned by the police in Nice, the newspaper said, Mr. Coulibaly said he had been in Turkey as a tourist. He said he wanted to join his girlfriend in Corsica, but provided no address, Le Monde said. Despite their suspicions, the police released him, again citing a lack of evidence.Instead of traveling to Corsica, he stayed at a hotel in Nice, where he was monitored by intelligence services. But he did not arouse suspicions, news reports said. Days later, according to the authorities, he dropped a plastic bag in front of a soldier to distract him, then brandished a knife with an eight-inch blade.Aurelien Breeden contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Frenchman Was Detained Before Attack at Jewish Site.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.