Andrew Small, a policy researcher at the German Marshall Fund of the United States in Washington, explores China’s ties with Pakistan in a new book that delves into the relationship’s history, the Chinese origins of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons, extremism in the two countries and how the future might develop as the United States recedes from Pakistan and Afghanistan.In his book, “The China-Pakistan Axis: Asia’s New Geopolitics,” Mr. Small argues that although China has long been close to Pakistan — thanks in part to shared mistrust of India — there have always been irritants below the surface. The presence in remote areas of Pakistan of the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, founded by separatists from the Uighur ethnic minority native to the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, is especially troubling to Beijing. China is suspicious, he says, that elements in the Pakistani Army harbor sympathies for the Uighurs.The book is especially timely as President Xi Jinping is expected to visit Pakistan soon, perhaps for Pakistan Day celebrations at the end of March. Chinese presidents do not visit Pakistan often, only about once a decade. If, as expected, Mr. Xi goes to Pakistan and bypasses India, the trip could open a new chapter in the relationship. Following are excerpts from an interview with Mr. Small:What prompted you to write about Pakistan and China, an important relationship but rarely written about in full? I was frustrated with the lack of authoritative material on a friendship that I believe is so important to the understanding of Chinese foreign policy, the future of Pakistan and Afghanistan, and the prospects for the U.S.-China relationship. The Pakistani Army’s assault on Islamabad’s Red Mosque in 2007, the incident that opens the book, pulled many of these strands together.While the United States had been pushing Pakistan for years to mount a crackdown on various extremist groups, it was pressure from Beijing that ultimately played the decisive role, following the kidnapping of Chinese “massage workers” by Red Mosque militants. For all the tensions between Washington and Beijing in East Asia, the region to China’s west is an area where the two sides have important interests in common and where Chinese assertiveness, especially in dealing with its Pakistani friends, is generally very welcome. But in practice it has been extremely difficult to draw China out on these issues, not least because of Beijing’s close, secretive and carefully protected relationship with Pakistan.I wanted to figure out how the rising threat of Islamic militancy was reshaping China’s approach in this region, and to try to get to the facts behind the most mythologized stories — China’s nuclear relationship with the Pakistanis and the Saudis, China’s dealings with the Taliban, China’s plans for naval bases in the Indian Ocean, and so on — that affect calculations about so many different global security concerns, but where definitive answers have been so hard to come by.The amount of information you were able to elicit from the Chinese is truly remarkable. Why do you think Chinese scholars and officials were interested in being forthcoming? I certainly benefited from being able to pursue conversations with Chinese friends over many years rather than one concerted burst of research, but more and more, Chinese officials have been opening up on these issues with Western governments, too. The main reason has been China’s mounting concerns about the internal situation in Pakistan and the prospects for Afghanistan after the U.S. withdrawal. This has only been further accentuated by fears about the worsening terrorist threat in China itself.When I started the research, one former senior U.S. official said that Pakistan was the single country that the Chinese wouldn’t talk frankly about to the Americans. Conversations about Afghanistan were not very productive either. That is no longer true. The China-Pakistan relationship is still sensitive, and there is undoubtedly a lot of caution about how much material makes it into the public realm. But, privately, Chinese scholars and officials want to exchange assessments, information and gripes about a set of problems that they’re really struggling to deal with.It was illustrated for me during a couple of the trips I made to Kabul. On the first occasion, I had to go through an odd lobbying process via Afghan and Pakistani officials even to meet with the Chinese diplomats there, and the U.S. ambassador at the time, Karl Eikenberry, detailed his Chinese counterpart’s unwillingness to be seen with him bilaterally in public. The second time, it was an open-door, free-flowing information, with the Chinese officials saying, “Watch this space — we’re going to be scaling up our political involvement here in the years ahead.” In between the trips was Obama’s speech announcing the planned drawdown of U.S. troops, which has had a catalytic effect on China’s attitude towards the whole region.China is quite worried about the terror threat from Pakistan, and particularly dislikes the fact that the East Turkestan Islamic Movement operates in Pakistan’s tribal areas. Why does China not exert more pressure on the Pakistanis about harboring the ETIM? Was the recent Pakistani offensive into North Waziristan inspired in part by the Chinese?
The ETIM issue has been the biggest source of tension between China and Pakistan in recent years, and behind closed doors the pressure from Beijing at a number of different junctures has been pretty strong. Among the examples are the run-up to the 2008 Olympics, the run-up to the 60th anniversary of the People’s Republic of China and after various incidents in Xinjiang that appeared to have cross-border involvement.Nevertheless, there are plenty of officials on the Chinese side who bought the argument from the Pakistanis that an operation in North Waziristan was difficult to mount and potentially ill-advised. There were also doubts about whether a rather small number of ETIM fighters could really do very much harm sitting out there in the tribal areas. As the terrorist violence in and beyond Xinjiang has worsened though, especially after the attacks in Beijing and Kunming over the last 18 months, patience has worn thin. While the direct involvement of ETIM in the attacks on the Chinese mainland remains in doubt, North Waziristan had become a propaganda hub. And, although there were many reasons for the launch of the offensive there, it was certainly encouraged by China. There are even recent stories that Beijing has suggested conducting joint military operations with the Pakistanis. China is suspicious that, in the lower ranks of the Pakistani Army, there are sympathies with the Uighurs, and has complained in recent years about warnings being given before operations are conducted, a phenomenon that is quite familiar to the U.S. side.China and Pakistan have talked for ages about building an overland route from the Pakistan port of Gwadar on the Indian Ocean to China, an important strategic route for China because it would mean less reliance on the Malacca Straits. But this route would have to go through Baluchistan, a haven for extremists. You say in the book the route is closer to happening than in the past. Do you see it in the next decade?
It’s true there has been no meaningful progress on the project in recent years, due to a combination of the disputes between the Pakistani Navy and the Singapore Port Authority, which was running Gwadar, and some significant security problems. But since Chinese companies have resumed control of the port, and the Xi and [Prime Minister Nawaz] Sharif governments have invested new energy in moving the initiative forward, it has become a serious proposition again.The fact that there are lively political battles in Pakistan about the precise route of the economic corridor is illustrative of the fact that there’s actually something to fight about now. The security problems haven’t gone away, and there are still plenty of doubts on China’s part over whether the most ambitious infrastructure connectivity plans are really going to work, but they’re at least willing to try. Gwadar has potential use as a naval facility, even if it never becomes an economic hub. And there are lots of less grandiose economic projects that fall under the umbrella of the “China-Pakistan Economic Corridor” that should proceed regardless.After the killing of Osama bin Laden by the Americans in 2011, you say that Pakistan quickly showed the Chinese the crashed U.S stealth helicopter, probably a technological bonanza for the Chinese. What did the Pakistanis hope to get in return?There has been a standing arrangement in place for some time that the Pakistanis allow the Chinese to get access to Western military technologies that fall into their hands, so there was almost certainly no one-off quid pro quo. Pakistan did the same thing with U.S. cruise missiles in the past, which the Chinese were then able to reverse-engineer to the benefit of both sides. When military equipment is sold directly to Pakistan by the United States, there are elaborate protections in place, but stray stealth helicopters and missiles are a different matter. Historically, Pakistan has benefited far more from this arrangement. Most importantly, China provided critical technological assistance and materials for Pakistan’s nuclear and missile program, which continues to this day. The People’s Liberation Army has frequently been willing to give the Pakistanis access to its very latest kit, which will be of even greater value in the future as the technical quality of Chinese equipment continues to improve.President Obama’s trip to India last month is still fresh in people’s minds. It was a three-day panorama of effusive and friendly images and words. How did that go down in Pakistan and China?
Evidently neither side has reacted that well, and I think there was some surprise — not so much about the U.S. willingness to embrace [Prime Minister Narendra] Modi, but how forward-leaning the new Indian leader is over relations with the United States, and what the implications of that might be. The Chinese complained specifically about the “joint strategic vision” statement for the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean, and the Pakistanis were more generally piqued. The fact that the [Pakistani] chief of army staff paid a visit to Beijing on the very same day as Obama was in India showed the need for a little bit of symbolic counterplay, and China’s willingness to go along with it.From time to time, the Chinese have told the Pakistanis that, though we are very good friends, don’t alienate the United States too much. Why do they say that?China wants Pakistan to benefit from as much U.S. financial largess and military support as it can. Part of Pakistan’s value to China continues to come from its playing a balancing role against India, and it can do that far more effectively with advanced U.S. defense equipment and economic and diplomatic backing than when it gets treated as a pariah state. A healthy U.S.-Pakistan relationship also acts as something of a constraint on the depth of U.S.-India ties. Beijing is also very wary about being caught in the middle of tensions between the two sides.Poor U.S.-Pakistan relations invite a lot more pressure and scrutiny on China’s own dealings with Pakistan, which was the case throughout the 1990s over nuclear parts and missile sales, and the worst-case scenario — outright military confrontation between the United States and Pakistan — would be a disaster for China’s position in the region.