A lawyer for a Chinese doctoral student who was expelled from Norway last month on the grounds that his research could be used for military purposes said that the student would contest the Norwegian government’s decision and that the case “will be sent to the court” on Monday.The Norwegian authorities had ordered the student to leave the country by Jan. 23, because they believed he was “part of a research exchange who is using the information to benefit military authorities in China,” said Nils Anders Gronas, the lawyer.“The decision is based on the fact that the Norwegian authorities assume that he takes part in a research area that is strongly associated with the military authorities in China and which allegedly exchange information about mass destruction weapons,” Mr. Gronas said by email on Thursday.
The student finds these charges “incomprehensible,” Mr. Gronas said, but he has already returned to China. Mr. Gronas declined to give the student’s name.The student had been working on a project on wind power at the University of Agder, and had been there for nearly three years, according to a Norwegian colleague who asked not to be named.Also expelled from Norway was a professor at the university who is a citizen of a European Union country but was not further identified. It was unclear whether the professor, whom the university still considers to be an employee, according to the Norwegian broadcaster NRK, faces similar allegations as the student.The director of university management at the University of Agder, Tor A. Aagedal, expressed support for the two. “We cannot see that there are grounds for expulsion,” Mr. Aagedal told NRK.Mr. Gronas, the lawyer, said, “In my view, there are several violations of the European Convention on Human Rights, and it will be very interesting to see how the authorities will justify their decision.”Andreas Bondevik, a spokesman for the Norwegian Ministry of Justice and Public Security, said in an email that the ministry could not comment on the case because “it involves issues related to national security.”According to Mr. Gronas, the Chinese student previously attended the Harbin Institute of Technology, a science and engineering university in northeastern China that has links to the Chinese military.Scientists at the university made headlines last year for their work on a supersonic submarine. The university’s website boasts of producing graduates who have become “generals of the People’s Liberation Army” or senior Communist Party officials.The student’s expulsion is the latest incident to strain relations between China and Norway. Ties have been troubled since the Nobel Committee, whose members are chosen by the Norwegian Parliament, awarded the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo, the Chinese democracy advocate who is serving an 11-year sentence on charges of subversion. Despite the Norwegian government’s protest that it had no influence over the committee’s decisions, China put a temporary freeze on high-level contacts.News of the expulsion emerged shortly before the Norwegian Police Security Service, which oversees domestic security, released its annual report on national security threats, which named Russia and China as countries allegedly carrying out intelligence operations in Norway. Both the Chinese and Russian embassies in Oslo protested the report.Ma Qiang, a political counselor at the Chinese Embassy in Oslo, told Xinhua, the Chinese state news agency, that the expulsion was an “infringement on the scholar’s rights” and would have “a negative impact on bilateral ties.” On Wednesday, a spokesman for the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs called the accusation against the student “baseless.” A Xinhua editorial said that this was only the latest incident in which “Western countries defamed China on the basis of unverified assumptions” and that it was “high time for the West to stop demonizing China.”Norway and China “chose passivity, hoping the other side would take the first step to normalize,” Erlend Ek, a Norwegian policy analyst at the Beijing-based advisory firm China Policy, said on Friday. But, he added, “The hope to normalize faded over time.”The case of the expelled student would only complicate relations, he said, noting, “It has got a security element that was not very present before.”