Xinjiang herdsman finds 17-pound gold nugget that was “practically lying on bare ground” //t.co/lr7c8bFUnt //t.co/IJLrmKa5co— China Xinhua News (@XHNews) 5 Feb 15The mountains of the remote Altay area of northwestern China have a storied history of gold mining. People in the region talk about mines that Russians helped build and operate in the first half of the 20th century. The Russians left the area after the People’s Liberation Army took over the vast Xinjiang region. Altay sits near the borders with Russia, Mongolia and Kazakhstan, and it is a place from which legends travel far.On Friday, another tale of gold and good fortune was born, when Chinese state news media reported that an ethnic Kazakh herder had stumbled across an enormous gold nugget shaped like China. One official news website even posted a slide show featuring the nugget, which weighs more than 17 pounds and is nine inches long and seven inches wide.
A report by the state-run news agency Xinhua said the herder, Berek Sawut, found the nugget on Jan. 30 as he was resting at sunset near a mine.The herder said he was worried he would not be able to keep it, because he believed that all ore from mines in the area belonged to the state, but so far no government official has demanded that he hand over his find.The nugget is natural gold ore mixed with quartz and other minerals, according to a report by China News Agency. This kind of nugget is usually called “dog head gold,” because the nuggets come in rough, round shapes in which one can discern, if squinting, the eyes and nose of a dog. These kinds of nuggets are common in the Altay area. Sometimes they are called “horseshoe gold.”The nugget found by the Kazakh herder in Qinghe County is the largest of this kind to be discovered in Xinjiang, according to Modern Express, a newspaper owned by Xinhua.Folklore says the Empress Dowager Cixi coveted such nuggets and became furious once when no one was able to find one for her birthday.The official news reports did not estimate the value of the nugget found recently. If it were pure gold, which it is not, it would be worth about $346,000, at $1,250 per ounce.Photos of the nugget circulated widely on Chinese social media on Friday. Some people asked online whether Taiwan was part of this golden map of China.Xinjiang has more than 600 gold mines, and the region’s estimated gold reserve is 207 tons. The industry has been growing quickly in the region. Last year, Xinjiang produced 20 tons of gold. The Chinese government also values Xinjiang for its oil, natural gas and coal reserves.Herders in Altay say they have been suffering financially this past year because of a drought. The lack of rain has meant a dearth of grass and plants, which has resulted in thinner sheep. The herders are selling sheep for lower prices to merchants traveling to the Altay region. Mia Li contributed research.
