By RANYA KADRI and ANNE BARNARDFEB. 5, 2015
AMMAN, Jordan — Jordanian warplanes bombed Islamic State targets on Thursday, the Jordanian military said, after King Abdullah II promised a “harsh” response to the militant group’s brutal killing of a captured Jordanian pilot.Jordan has been taking part for months in American-led airstrikes against the group, which has seized large parts of Iraq and Syria. But until now, Jordan had kept its participation relatively quiet, for fear of trouble with Islamist extremists at home.That changed on Thursday, when the king appeared in state media reports wearing military fatigues, and was filmed paying condolences to the father of the slain pilot as warplanes flew overhead. The jets were said to be saluting the pilot’s family on the way back from the mission against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Jordan appeared to be redoubling its participation in the anti-Islamic State coalition, despite the militant group’s threats to shoot down more pilots and its offer of a bounty for any who are captured or killed.AdvertisementIn a video that the Islamic State made public on Tuesday, the pilot, First Lt. Moaz al-Kasasbeh, was seen in a cage being burned alive. For Jordanians, the extreme brutality of the killing appears to have transformed their country’s role in the coalition from a potential political liability to a point of pride.AdvertisementThe military’s unusual public announcement of the airstrikes started with the words, “This is the beginning — you will know who the Jordanians are!”“We will be faithful to our hero the martyr Moaz,” the statement continued. “We will continue our fight, sacrificing everything to defend the true values of Islam.” It went on to say the airstrikes were meant “to punish those who did this heinous act.”At the same time, the state-owned newspaper Al Rai published an article that was strikingly critical of the coalition led by the United States, a major patron of Jordan, and that said airstrikes alone were ineffective against the Islamic State.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The article, written by Mohammad Karroub, a longtime commentator, implied that Gulf Arab states, usually seen as allies of Jordan, were supporting the Islamic State. Even so, he argued, the militant group “has rebelled against its creator, turning into a sort of Frankenstein.”Mr. Karroub went on to question whether the United States might be allowing the Islamic State to retain control of Mosul, a major Iraqi city, in order to gain an advantage in nuclear negotiations with Iran, an ally of Iraq’s Shiite-led central government.The article said the international coalition needed to rethink its regional strategy and focus on ending outside support for the Islamic State. “I suppose that Jordan, before any other state, must exert pressure in this direction,” Mr. Karroub wrote. “For the war on terrorism cannot be broken down into component parts; it is not a seasonal war that will succeed if carried out piecemeal.”The Jordanian military did not make clear where the airstrikes on Thursday were carried out. The country’s foreign minister said in a television interview that the targets were in Syria.The dead pilot’s father said the jets that flew over his house were returning from Raqqa, a city in northern Syria that the Islamic State uses as a base. Some Raqqa residents wrote on social media that airstrikes had hit buildings outside the city, but others said there were no coalition airstrikes in the area on Thursday.A video posted online by the Jordanian armed forces showed pilots who took part in the airstrikes writing messages in chalk on bombs. One wrote, “Islam has nothing to do with ISIS.” Another quoted the Quran as saying that the militants would burn in hell.Ranya Kadri reported from Amman, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.