By SHUAIB ALMOSAWA and ROD NORDLANDFEB. 5, 2015
SANA, Yemen —  A senior member of Al Qaeda who had issued a statement saying the group had encouraged the terrorist attacks in Paris last month was killed in a drone strike on Saturday, the militant group said on Thursday.Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula said that the drone strike, on Jan. 31, destroyed a car in Shabwah Province, in southern Yemen, killing four of its members who were inside. One of them, the statement said, was Harith al-Nadhari, an ideologue who had publicly praised the attack on the French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo. The group attributed the drone strike to the United States military.The announcement was made by a Qaeda member who acts as a media liaison for the militant group.“These strikes came after the Houthis, who became America’s loyal partner in the south of the Arabian Peninsula, took full control under an American supervision and an international conspiracy,” the statement said, referring to the Yemeni rebel group that has taken control of the capital.Houthi fighters forced the resignation of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi on Jan. 22 and have been negotiating with other political groups to form a new government. The Houthis, though bitter enemies of Al Qaeda, have publicly opposed American drone strikes in Yemen. But they have apparently done nothing to interfere with the strikes since they took de facto control last month, and the American military has said the strikes will continue.AdvertisementThe Qaeda statement on Thursday said the drone strike that killed Mr. Nadhari, whom it described as a member of the group’s Shariah Committee, was the fifth since the Houthis took over.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The earlier Qaeda statement about the Paris attacks quoted Mr. Nadhari as suggesting that they were meant as revenge against “some filthy French people” for insulting the Prophet Muhammad.Advertisement“Some sons of France misbehaved toward God’s prophets, so some of the believer soldiers of God rose up against them and taught them good behavior and the limits of freedom of expression,” Mr. Nadhari said. “Those who came for you are soldiers who love God and his messenger, do not fear death, and lust for martyrdom in the path of God.”While he did not name the attackers or say that Al Qaeda had planned the attack, Mr. Nadhari praised their actions and said that France would face further attacks if it did not halt its “aggression against the Muslims.”“O French, until when will you fight God and his messenger?” he said. “If you become Muslims, it is a good thing for you.”Shuaib Almosawa reported from Sana, and Rod Nordland from Amman, Jordan. Ben Hubbard contributed reporting from Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Kareem Fahim from Baghdad.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Drone Strike in Yemen Said to Kill Senior Qaeda Figure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.