

      By KAREN ZRAICK

UPDATED February 20, 2015

A prosecutor in Argentina accuses the president of attempting to cover up a secret deal to shield terrorists. Days later, the prosecutor is found dead and the president alleges a conspiracy. Here's an overview of key developments in the case.
Related Article

A prosecutor in Argentina accuses the president of attempting to cover up a secret deal to shield terrorists. Days later, the prosecutor is found dead and the president alleges a conspiracy. Here's an overview of key developments in the case.
Alberto Nisman is found dead of a gunshot wound to the head in his 13th-floor luxury apartment in Buenos Aires on Jan. 18. His door had been locked from the inside. A .22-caliber pistol is found near his body. There is no suicide note. Days earlier, Mr. Nisman had accused President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and top Argentine officials of trying to cover up a deal to shield Iranian officials from responsibility in the 1994 bombing of a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires that killed 85 people.“I might get out of this dead," Mr. Nisman was reported to have said the day before he died. Transcripts of phone calls between agents of Iran and Argentina are said to reveal secret talks about a deal to protect Iranian officials from charges in exchange for oil to help ease Argentina’s energy crisis.The calls, believed to have been intercepted by Argentine intelligence officials, were part of the 289-page criminal complaint Mr. Nisman filed. The deal never materialized. Government officials angrily deny the allegations.Mrs. Kirchner changes her position on Jan. 22 and says that Mr. Nisman’s death was not a suicide but part of a sinister plot by rogue spies to destabilize her government.“They used him while he was alive and then they needed him dead,” Mrs. Kirchner wrote in a letter, which she subtitled, “The suicide (that I am convinced) was not suicide.”  Government officials had said that Mr. Nisman was manipulated by Antonio Stiusso, a former intelligence chief ousted in December. In a televised speech on Jan. 26, Mrs. Kirchner says the intelligence services “have not served the interests of the country,” and she says she'll move to disband the agency.She proposes replacing the agency, the Intelligence Secretariat, or S.I., with a new organization that would have reduced surveillance powers.The same day, Damián Pachter, the first journalist to report the suspicious death of Mr. Nisman, flees to Israel, saying that he fears for his life in Argentina. Diego Lagomarsino, an aide to Mr. Nisman, said on Jan. 28 that his boss feared for his family's safety.  He lent Mr. Nisman the pistol that apparently killed him.The government insinuates that Mr. Lagomarsino was an intelligence operative, perhaps involved in a nefarious plot.The next day, mourners line the streets in Buenos Aires to watch the funeral motorcade that carried Mr. Nisman's body to a Jewish cemetery on the edge of the city. In a televised address on Jan. 30, Mrs. Kirchner blames unspecified outside forces that she said were trying to disrupt the country and undermine her government. She pleads with Argentines to remain united and to “not let them bring conflicts here that are causing desolation, death and strain on other countries.”The dead prosecutor had drafted a request for the arrest of the president before he died, the lead investigator into Mr. Nisman's death says. Viviana Fein, the investigating prosecutor, says on Feb. 3 that the 26-page document seeking the arrest of Mrs. Kirchner and Héctor Timerman, the foreign minister, was found in the garbage outside Mr. Nisman’s apartment. Ms. Fein summons Mr. Stiusso, the former spy chief, to testify in the Nisman case. The newspaper La Nación reports that a phone believed to belong to Mr. Stiusso was used to call Mr. Nisman hours before his death. But the former spymaster is nowhere to be found.  Almost four weeks after Mr. Nisman's suspicious death, a federal prosecutor has revived the accusations he leveled against Mrs. Kirchner. The prosecutor, Gerardo Pollicita, is seeking to charge the president, the foreign minister and other supporters of Mrs. Kirchner in an effort to keep the 289-page criminal complaint that Mr. Nisman had filed against Mrs. Kirchner from languishing in Argentina's legal system.The move sets up a mounting conflict between Mrs. Kirchner's government and parts of the judiciary.Tens of thousands of Argentines flow into the center of the city on Feb. 18 for a demonstration organized by a group of prosecutors in honor of Mr. Nisman. Opposition political figures and Mr. Nisman’s former wife, Sandra Arroyo Salgado, a prominent judge, participate as rain falls.Political analysts say that the gathering reflects growing concern over judicial independence in Argentina. An Argentine judge  decides that the criminal complaint Mr. Nisman put forward is not sufficient to open a criminal investigation into Mrs. Kirchner. In a 63-page document released on Feb. 26 detailing his decision, the judge, Daniel Rafecas, said that the allegations did not “minimally hold up.”The former intelligence official was said to have helped Alberto Nisman, found dead last month, in his inquiry into a 1994 bombing in Buenos Aires.AdvertisementThe former intelligence official was said to have helped Alberto Nisman, found dead last month, in his inquiry into a 1994 bombing in Buenos Aires.