AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter BakerWASHINGTON — As President Obama officially rolled out a new national security strategy for his final two years in office, his top foreign policy aide on Friday denounced “alarmism” over various international crises, saying the challenges now facing the United States are nothing like those presented in the past by Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union.Susan E. Rice, the president’s national security adviser, said the Obama administration would stand strong in its efforts to counter Russian aggression in Ukraine and to defeat the Islamic State militant group in Iraq and Syria. But she defended Mr. Obama against critics who blame him for the many geopolitical eruptions that have occurred seemingly all at once.“Too often, what’s missing here in Washington is a sense of perspective,” Ms. Rice said in a speech at the Brookings Institution introducing the 29-page security document. “Yes, there is a lot going on. Still, while the dangers we face may be more numerous and varied, they are not of the existential nature we confronted during World War II or during the Cold War. We cannot afford to be buffeted by alarmism in a nearly instantaneous news cycle.”The new security strategy, the first in five years and the last planned for the Obama era, asserts that the United States will continue to play a strong leadership role in the world but that it must recognize the limits of American power as well. It argues that even as Washington confronts short-term threats, it should not lose sight of longer-term issues like climate change, trade, poverty, cybersecurity and global health.Some Republicans called the document another articulation of passivity.“This new ‘strategy’ is a regurgitation of the same failed policies that have engendered an international environment of weakness and made the United States and our allies around the world less safe,” said Representative Michael R. Turner, Republican of Ohio, a member of the House Armed Services Committee.Peter D. Feaver, who helped write a national security strategy for President George W. Bush in 2006, said the Obama document did not deal candidly with how much it exposed the flawed premises of the president’s last such strategy in 2010. “The 2015 N.S.S. does talk about things that have changed, but without acknowledging how much the changes rebut the logic of President Obama’s first-term strategic approach,” Mr. Feaver said.To make her point about not letting crises of the day dominate American diplomacy, Ms. Rice announced that Mr. Obama had invited the leaders of China, Japan, South Korea and Indonesia to visit him separately at the White House in the coming months. The invitations are part of the president’s longstanding, if sometimes fitful effort to “rebalance” American foreign policy so that it focuses more on Asia, the region of the future, and not simply be consumed by conflicts in Europe and the Middle East, the areas that have dominated Washington’s attention for decades.President Xi Jinping of China and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan will each be accorded a state visit or a similarly grand reception, with all the pomp and circumstance that come with such occasions. Mr. Xi visited Mr. Obama in California in 2013 and hosted him in Beijing last fall, but it will be his first White House visit since taking office. Mr. Abe last visited the White House in 2013. While he is not a head of state — that would be the Japanese emperor — Mr. Abe will be given the same treatment as if he were, officials said.Additionally, President Park Geun-hye of South Korea and President Joko Widodo of Indonesia will come on what are called working visits, without the trappings of a South Lawn arrival ceremony and a formal state dinner. Those will be the first White House meetings for either leader, both of whom were elected in the last two years.The announcement came just after Mr. Obama’s recent trip to India made him the first American president to visit that country twice while in office. Mr. Obama used the trip to encourage India to play a greater role in Asia and found a willing partner in Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who privately shared his unease with China’s efforts to assert itself in the region.“As we update our existing international system, our strategy is to enhance our focus on regions that will shape the century ahead, starting with the Asia-Pacific,” Ms. Rice said. “Our rebalance is deepening longstanding alliances and forging new partnerships to expand cooperation.”But the day’s developments underscored how hard it can be for the administration to focus on long-term strategy when it is grappling with the latest upheaval around the world. Even as Ms. Rice was speaking, American officials were evaluating a claim by the Islamic State that a Jordanian airstrike had killed an American hostage. And the leaders of Germany and France were in Moscow trying to negotiate peace in Ukraine.In response to questions after her speech, Ms. Rice acknowledged that the administration was rethinking its opposition to sending arms to Ukraine, but she gave little hint as to what decision might be made or when it might be made. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, who repeated her opposition to arming Ukraine in the days before she traveled to Moscow, is due to visit Mr. Obama in Washington on Monday.“Obviously it’s a significant step,” Ms. Rice said, “and we will want to do so in close consultation, adding coordination with our partners whose unity on this issue with us thus far has been a core element of our strength in responding to Russia’s aggression.”Advertisement