AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter BakerWASHINGTON — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. announced on Friday that he would not attend the speech to Congress by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel next month, further escalating a diplomatic flap that has already soured relations between the Obama administration and one of America’s closest allies.Mr. Biden, who as president of the Senate would normally be seated next to the House speaker during such a speech, plans to be overseas when Mr. Netanyahu visits, his office announced. President Obama had already decided that he would not meet with Mr. Netanyahu, citing a policy of not getting together with foreign leaders shortly before elections in their countries.There have been deepening strains between the Israeli leader and the administration since Representative John A. Boehner, the House speaker, arranged for Mr. Netanyahu to address Congress about Iran without informing the White House. Mr. Netanyahu is deeply worried about Mr. Obama’s efforts to negotiate a nuclear pact with Iran, and Republicans want to give him a forum to express those concerns.It has driven a partisan wedge into what has traditionally been bipartisan support for Israel. Democrats in Congress have expressed anger over the speaking invitation, and some have talked about skipping the speech. Israeli officials were on Capitol Hill this week to try to calm Democrats, and some said they thought most would still attend. But Mr. Biden’s decision could encourage others to boycott.A Jewish-American leader, Abraham Foxman, meanwhile, has called on Mr. Netanyahu to cancel the speech. Mr. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League, said it would be counterproductive because angry recriminations had “turned the whole thing into a circus.”“It needs a mature, adult statement that this was not what we intended,” Mr. Foxman told the newspaper Forward. “It has been hijacked by politics. Now is a time to recalibrate, restart and find a new problem and new timing to take away the distractions.”A member of the Israeli Parliament from Mr. Netanyahu’s party, Tzachi Hanegbi, questioned on Friday whether the prime minister had fully understood that the invitation had originated solely from the Republicans.But Mr. Hanegbi suggested that Mr. Netanyahu should not cancel or postpone the appearance. “What would the outcome be then?” he asked. “The outcome would be that we forsake an arena in which there is going to be a very dramatic decision” on Iran. Mr. Boehner’s office offered no comment on Friday but has said that it told the White House about the invitation shortly before it was announced and did not notify congressional Democrats in advance. Mr. Boehner this week defended the invitation, saying it was important to hear Mr. Netanyahu’s views on such a critical issue as Iran.Asked to respond to the news that Mr. Biden would skip the speech, Mr. Netanyahu’s office instead issued a statement citing reports that the United States was seeking to conclude a deal with Iran by the end of March.The United States and five other nations that have been engaged in negotiations with Iran “might conclude a dangerous deal enabling Iran to produce nuclear weapons that would threaten the survival of Israel,” the office said in an emailed statement Saturday morning. “Prime Minister Netanyahu believes it is his obligation to speak out about this grave threat to the Jewish state while there is still time to stop a bad deal.”Critics in Congress, including some Democrats, have advanced legislation that would threaten more sanctions on Iran if it does not agree to a reasonable deal by spring. Mr. Obama has complained that such legislation would disrupt the negotiations and has vowed to veto it.When congressional Democrats began discussing a boycott of the Netanyahu speech this week, questions arose about whether Mr. Biden would attend. His office put those to rest even while declining to say what specifically would keep him away.“We are not ready to announce details of his trip yet, and normally our office wouldn’t announce this early,” one official said, “but the planning process has been underway for a while.” Mr. Biden played a key role in a dispute between the Obama administration and Mr. Netanyahu that helped set the path for a rocky relationship. In 2009, the administration pressed Israel to freeze settlement construction in disputed territories to help promote peace talks with the Palestinians. Mr. Netanyahu agreed only to a temporary, partial freeze of West Bank housing. While Mr. Biden was visiting Israel in March 2010, and just hours after he had vowed the United States’ unstinting support, the Israeli government announced 1,600 new housing units for Jews in East Jerusalem. Mr. Netanyahu at the time appeared taken by surprise by the more hawkish elements of his own government, but it was perceived as a provocation and an insult by the visiting Americans. Mr. Biden was furious, as were Mr. Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton, then the secretary of state.Jodi Rudoren contributed reporting from Jerusalem.Advertisement