By ADAM NOSSITERFEB. 6, 2015
DAKAR, Senegal —  The Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram on Friday morning struck across Nigeria’s border into Niger for the first time, broadening the regional conflict to a fourth country in West Africa.Boko Haram fighters crossed the Komadougou River separating Nigeria from Niger and attacked Bosso, a remote town that is a local seat of government with an open-air market that has been sheltering thousands of refugees from the conflict.An army officer in Niger said the fighters were pushed back after at least three hours of combat. Speaking from Niamey, the capital, the officer said all the Boko Haram fighters who entered Bosso were killed. Other Niger government officials could not be reached on Friday afternoon, and phone lines to Bosso, on Niger’s eastern edge, were not working.“We are in control of the situation,” said the army officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly. “Anybody who entered the town, nobody came out alive,” the officer said. He would not say whether any troops or any civilians in Bosso had been killed. “People heard gunfire and went home.”AdvertisementNiger’s army has troops based in Bosso, at the edge of the area of recent fighting with Boko Haram. An army detachment is always posted at the river’s shallowest point, which can be easily crossed. Last week, officials in Bosso said they could hear Chadian planes bomb Boko Haram positions across the frontier.Niger’s Parliament is scheduled to vote Monday on whether the country’s troops will join those of Nigeria, Cameroon and Chad to take on the insurgents. Chad’s troops have had notable successes over the past week in confronting Boko Haram along the Cameroon border, retaking at least one Nigerian town.AdvertisementBut the extension of the fighting to Niger is a new phase in the war on Boko Haram. Wary of being drawn into the fight, Niger’s government has been careful so far not to provoke the Islamists. Some analysts believe that the Islamists have heavily infiltrated Diffa, a regional capital in the country’s far east.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page A5 of the New York edition with the headline: Boko Haram Widens Fight, Striking Niger.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.