By SEBNEM ARSUFEB. 6, 2015
ISTANBUL —  The Turkish foreign minister withdrew at the last minute from a high-profile international security conference in Munich on Friday, after learning that Israeli diplomats might take part. The abrupt move was the latest twist in a bilateral relationship between Israel and Turkey that was once friendly but has become strained and bitter.“I was going to attend the conference, but we decided not to after Israeli representatives were later added to the session on the Middle East,” the minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, said on TRT, the state broadcaster.He was at pains to say that Turkey’s withdrawal was not aimed at the host country, Germany, with which Turkey has fairly strong relations even though Germany has not endorsed full membership for Turkey in the European Union.At least 20 heads of state and other senior policy makers, including Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Secretary of State John Kerry, were expected to take part in the three-day conference on diplomatic and military issues that began Friday in Munich.AdvertisementA senior Turkish official said his country would still be represented, but by a lower-level diplomat. He spoke on the condition of anonymity under his government’s diplomatic protocols.AdvertisementYuval Steinitz, the cabinet minister who is heading Israel’s delegation to the conference, said he was surprised by Mr. Cavusoglu’s decision to withdraw, saying it would cast a shadow on Turkey’s future and identify the country with Islamic extremism.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Israel and Turkey were once strong political allies in the Middle East, but their relations began to sour in 2008 when Israel began a major military operation in Gaza while Turkey was trying to achieve a reconciliation between Israel and Syria. The strains became much worse in 2010, after a flotilla of ships led by a Turkish aid organization tried to transport supplies to Gaza in defiance of an Israeli naval blockade. Israeli commandos raided the flotilla in international waters, and eight Turkish citizens and an American citizen of Turkish descent were killed, inflaming anti-Israeli sentiment in the country.Some progress was made in repairing ties when Israel apologized for the raid in 2013 and agreed to pay compensation. But the Turkish government, led by the Islamist Justice and Development Party, has made the lifting of the blockade a precondition for resuming fully normal relations.The Israeli foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, said Friday that the Turkish withdrawal from the conference showed that it was a mistake for Israel to have issued the apology. Mr. Lieberman said that there was no chance of rehabilitating relations with Turkey as long as the current Turkish leadership remained in power.Despite the diplomatic tensions, Israel and Turkey remain major trading partners, and the flow of goods has been growing in both directions in recent years, according to the Turkish Ministry of Customs and Trade.Jodi Rudoren contributed reporting from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: At Diplomatic Conference, Turkey-Israel Rift Worsens.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.