By MICHELLE INNISFEB. 7, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia — Prime Minister Tony Abbott on Sunday moved forward by a day a vote challenging his leadership, calling for an end to uncertainty before Parliament goes back into session after the summer recess.Lawmakers in the conservative Liberal Party, which Mr. Abbott heads, were originally scheduled to vote on a motion to declare the party’s top positions vacant, known as a leadership spill in Australian politics, at a meeting on Tuesday. That meeting will now be held at 9 a.m. Monday. A junior lawmaker, Luke Simpkins, proposed the motion on Friday.“The last thing Australia needs right now is instability and uncertainty,” Mr. Abbott said at a brief news conference on Sunday in Sydney. “The only question for our party is: Do we want to reduce ourselves to the level of the Labor Party in dragging down a first-term prime minister?” He said he wanted to deal with the spill motion as quickly as possible, putting the issue of leadership “behind us.”The previous Labor government changed leaders twice. It removed Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in 2010 during his first term and replaced him with Julia Gillard. Ms. Gillard was then replaced by Mr. Rudd just before the September 2013 election, which Mr. Abbott’s conservative coalition won.But in less than two years as prime minister, Mr. Abbott has lost the support of some of his ministers and his personal approval rating in polls has plummeted. Some Liberal Party members believe that he has failed to promote government policy effectively and say he has lost touch with the electorate. Mr. Abbott’s decision to knight the Duke of Edinburgh, Prince Philip, on Jan. 26, Australia Day, further hardened opinion against him, with critics saying there were many more deserving Australians.Communications Minister Malcolm Turnbull, speaking to Australian news media in Sydney on Sunday, said he would support the prime minister in voting against the spill motion because he was a member of the cabinet. But Mr. Turnbull did not rule out challenging Mr. Abbott for the leadership. Mr. Turnbull, a former investment banker and businessman, is seen as a likely candidate for Australia’s top post.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.