AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressBEIJING — The authorities in southern China have seized about 8,000 rolls of toilet paper and 20,000 packages of tissues containing unflattering images of Hong Kong’s pro-Beijing chief executive, according to an official of the small political party that placed the order.The items were to be sold at a market in Hong Kong during Lunar New Year celebrations later this month, the official, Lo Kin-hei, a vice chairman of the Hong Kong Democratic Party, said Saturday.Late last year, Hong Kong was shaken by protests organized by a pro-democracy movement whose supporters demanded greater electoral freedom than the authorities in Beijing were willing to grant. Protesters expressed anger at Leung Chun-ying, the chief executive, calling him a puppet of Beijing and asking him to step down.No reason was given for the seizure of the paper products, worth about $12,900, in the city of Shenzhen, outside Hong Kong, Mr. Lo said. He said he guessed that the Chinese authorities “don’t like people mocking government officials, especially high-ranking government officials, after the movement.”“They have become more cautious about criticisms about them,” he said.The party’s 4,000 rolls of toilet paper with Mr. Leung’s image sold out at last year’s seasonal market, and party officials decided to get more this year from a factory in Shenzhen, Mr. Lo said.The images of Mr. Leung on the novelty products were cartoonish and unflattering. One shows him with two fangs, and another has the equivalent of the word “lying” on his forehead. The sickle-and-hammer symbol of the Communist Party of China also appears on some products.Citing the need to protect the manufacturer, Mr. Lo declined to reveal the factory’s name and said he had no information on the whereabouts of the factory owner. “We are worried about what has happened to him,” Mr. Lo said.Calls to the Shenzhen police rang unanswered on Saturday, and there was no official report about any seizure of toilet paper.Advertisement