By KAREEM FAHIMFEB. 7, 2015
BAGHDAD —  As the curfew expired on Sunday, one famed Iraqi musician celebrated by playing his cello for bystanders in the street. Elsewhere, dozens of men, too young to remember life before the nighttime restrictions, jumped into their cars and toured the city in a roaring convoy, suddenly freed.A barber, Abdul Rahim Raji, trimmed a customer’s beard, an hour past his normal closing time. “We feel secure,” he said, as other customers waited. “We feel Baghdad is returning to what it used to be.”The government’s decision to lift the curfew brought revelers to the streets, dancing and waving flags to mark the end of rules that lasted a dozen years and symbolized the suffering and everyday sacrifices of Iraqis.But the milestone came on a day of stunning violence in Baghdad, leaving many other Iraqis in no mood to celebrate, and broad sections of the city quiet after midnight, as if clinging to old routines. At least 47 people were killed on Saturday in explosions that tore through busy markets and restaurants, announcing that the violent era was far from past.AdvertisementA pharmacist in the Karrada neighborhood who gave his name as Abu Samir reflected on Iraq’s losses and his own: A brother murdered, his body never found, and family homes flattened by airstrikes. “Shall I be happy while Karrada is safe, and other people are killed in their neighborhoods?” he said.AdvertisementIraq’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, last week ordered the lifting of the curfew, as one of several measures that were part of an effort to restore a semblance of normal life to a city that has been steadily transformed into a fortress — with blast walls, checkpoints and stifling security regulations — since the United States invasion in 2003.The curfew, which has been lifted at times over the years only to be reinstated, had most recently been in force daily from midnight to 5 a.m., constricting the capital’s night life but also curtailing routine or emergency tasks, like hospital visits or early morning flights.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Abadi also imposed new restrictions on weapons, banning armed people from several neighborhoods. He removed checkpoints on some roads and ordered government ministers to reduce the size of their security convoys, all to ease the capital’s traffic.There had been recent signs that the threats to Baghdad were subsiding, especially those posed by the Islamic State militants who took over parts of northern Iraq last summer. As the government strengthened its security presence in the capital to repel an offensive by the militants, there were fewer of the daily bombings that had become a hallmark of life here, residents said.Saturday was a terrible exception. In the deadliest attack, the police said a female suicide bomber detonated her explosives outside a restaurant and a pickle shop in the New Baghdad neighborhood, killing at least 24 people. By nightfall, the blast site was sealed off with police tape.Dhia Abdullah, who lives nearby, said he and his neighbors had become numb to all the bombings. When the latest one occurred, about 11 a.m., he did not even bother to leave his home. The lifting of the curfew did not give him any confidence. “We don’t want it, as long as security is shaky,” he said, speaking of shadowy militant sleeper cells.The explosions on Saturday, which also struck five other neighborhoods, brought the death toll to at least 73 people over the past 10 days in Baghdad. As the curfew was set to expire, helicopters could be heard hovering over the city, and police cars raced nervously through the streets.For many young people, though, the sense of joy was irrepressible, with the night suddenly available to socialize or to drive. “You always had to be on time,” said Mohamed Wissam, 20, an English major at Baghdad University. Asked what he would do with his nights, he replied. “Anything I want.”Omar Al-Jawoshy contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Curfew’s End Brings Hope and Fear to Baghdad.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.