By CHOE SANG-HUNFEB. 7, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  North Korea said Saturday that its leader, Kim Jong-un, had overseen the test-firing of a new antiship missile, weeks before planned joint military exercises by South Korea and the United States that the North has protested.“The intelligent rocket precisely sought, tracked and hit the ‘enemy’ ship after taking a safe flight,” the state-run Korean Central News Agency said Saturday. The report, which characterized the missile as “ultraprecision,” said the test had been held off the country’s east coast but did not say when or exactly where.The state news agency also released photographs of a missile in flight and of Mr. Kim apparently observing the test from the shore, with binoculars.South Korea’s Defense Ministry did not immediately comment on the missile test. But Yonhap, a South Korean news agency, quoted an unidentified government source as saying that the missile tested was similar to the North’s KN-01 sea-to-sea cruise missile and that it flew about 62 miles.AdvertisementLike his father and predecessor as North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-il, who died in 2011, Kim Jong-un has focused on building up the North Korean military, saying it is needed to repel what the North insists is a planned American invasion.AdvertisementUnder Mr. Kim’s leadership, the North has conducted missile and rocket tests, mostly involving short-range projectiles, more often than it had in the past. It also carried out its third nuclear test, in 2013.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, North Korea offered to impose a moratorium on nuclear tests if the United States and South Korea suspended their annual large-scale joint military drills, scheduled for March, which the North called a rehearsal for an invasion. Washington quickly rejected the proposal.Since then, the North’s state media has issued reports of Mr. Kim’s overseeing coastal drills involving submarines, ships and planes. Mr. Kim was quoted as saying that he felt no need to negotiate with American “rabid dogs” and that Washington was plotting to overthrow his government.The report on Saturday said the new antiship missile would be deployed in the near future.North Korea has tested KN-01 missiles before. South Korean media also reported last year that the North may have introduced the Russian-developed Kh-35 antiship cruise missile or a copy.In recent months, North Korea has repeatedly proposed talks with the United States and South Korea, but both countries have accused the North of lacking sincerity about ending its nuclear weapons program.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: North Korea Says It Tested New Missile With Success.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.