AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael ForsytheHONG KONG — President Xi Jinping of China is set to make a state visit to the United States later this year, his first since becoming the top leader of Asia’s biggest economy.No date has been set yet for the visit, Cui Tiankai, China’s ambassador to the United States, told reporters over the weekend, according to the official China Daily newspaper.Mr. Cui’s announcement came after Susan E. Rice, President Obama’s national security adviser, extended an invitation on Friday to Mr. Xi and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan to come to Washington for a state visit. Ms. Rice also invited President Park Geun-hye of South Korea and President Joko Widodo of Indonesia.Summit meetings between the leaders of the United States and China, the world’s two biggest economies, are always major events, and there will be pressure on both sides to deliver something from this one. A meeting between Mr. Xi and Mr. Obama in Beijing in November yielded a major agreement on controlling greenhouse gases.There are many contentious issues between the two nations, including concerns about cybersecurity and tensions between China and Japan and the Philippines, which are American allies, over territorial claims in the East and South China Seas.Patrick Ventrell, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said the White House was still in the process of determining mutually convenient times for the visits by Mr. Xi and Mr. Abe, which officials “very much look forward to hosting.”The announcement of their visits and separate ones by the presidents of South Korea and Indonesia later this year “underscore our enduring and ongoing commitment to our Asia-Pacific rebalance strategy,” Mr. Ventrell said. “We will use these visits to expand our economic, diplomatic and defense cooperation with all these countries.”The Chinese Foreign Ministry said in a faxed reply to a question about the preparations that “China and the U.S. have been maintaining close communication regarding high-level exchanges between the two countries.”Mr. Cui, speaking to the Chinese news media, likened ties between the United States and China to the lead characters in a popular Chinese cartoon. He expressed hope that in the coming Chinese year of the goat, bilateral ties would be more like the “gentle goat” who is the main character, and less like the mischievous wolf who plots to eat the goats.Mr. Obama and Mr. Xi have met several times, but Mr. Xi has never been hosted in Washington for an official state visit. Mr. Xi’s predecessor, Hu Jintao, made a state visit four years ago.Mr. Xi came to the United States as vice president in 2012, and visited Muscatine, Iowa, where he had spent some time on an official exchange program in the 1980s. He and Mr. Obama also met at the Sunnylands retreat in California in June 2013.Julie Hirschfeld Davis contributed reporting from Washington. Kiki Zhao contributed research from Beijing.Advertisement