This week, the trial of the man accused of killing Chris Kyle opens in a Texas courtroom, even as the Clint Eastwood film based on Mr. Kyle’s life, “American Sniper,” is playing in a theater three miles away. Much as Mr. Kyle’s death shocked the nation, the film has generated fierce debate nationally over the meaning of his life and his death, and the Iraq war itself. To some, Mr. Kyle represents all that was right with the American-led invasion, to others, all that was wrong. Yet to many veterans, his story offers a chance to discuss and debate a remarkable array of complex and personal questions: the mix of motivations that lead people to sign up in the military, the riot of emotions troops feel when they kill or witness death, the struggle to reengage with civilian society upon coming home. A number of people have sent At War essays about how they viewed the film, including the piece below by a former Marine. What do you think? Send us your thoughts: atwar@nytimes.com.We arrived at the mall and made our way to the massive IMAX theater where we found all but the first few rows completely full. “At least it’ll be immersive,” my wife said with a look of optimism as we took our seats. “Oh great,” I thought to myself, “an immersive experience of the Iraq war, this ought to be good for me.”While reading “American Sniper” last year, I saw in Chris Kyle a man who had made himself vulnerable in his struggle to become human again while recounting the events that led him to become America’s most deadly sniper. Now with the movie, I thought that perhaps its six Oscar nominations were an effort by the Academy to say, “This subject is important and we should be taking it seriously.” But it also occurred to me that the nominations were just a figurative pat on their own backs for “serving those who served.”I was reminded of “The Hurt Locker,” which had the movie industry convinced that they’d nailed it. “It seemed so realistic,” I can remember some people telling me. Give me a break. And then there was “Zero Dark Thirty” (also based on a Navy SEAL memoir). It, too, received wide critical acclaim with several Oscar and Golden Globe nominations. Perhaps for some audiences it was an entertaining, climactic moment seeing Osama Bin Laden killed on screen. But I couldn’t help but think of a much more pressing narrative: the nation’s involvement in Afghanistan. I mean, why not show any one of the countless Army units living in the mountains for 12 months at a time, being attacked daily and barely making it out alive?So with tempered expectations, I watched “American Sniper,” thinking, “Maybe this is Hollywood doing the best it can with limited understanding and budget.” But I started to reach my limit, my list of grievances adding up: gaping entrance wounds and digital blood, poor weapon handling, inaccurate military lingo, blinding muzzle flashes at night with suppressors on the end of M-4 carbines.Then came a surprise: The scenes of Mr. Kyle returning from war. Initially these moments seemed fairly normal — until I realized that this was a calculated attempt to show how not normal it is to come home with a higher state of vigilance, sense of urgency and suspicion of others, all hallmarks of post-traumatic stress disorder. “That,” I thought, “I can relate to.” Multiple firefights and engagements with the enemy continued to play out, some more accurate than others. But as the film drew to a close, I thought, “They may actually get me after all.”When Hollywood stepped aside and the story that inspired the film, Mr. Kyle’s death — that was the moment I finally felt overwhelmed. My jaw began to tighten, my eyes fixed on the screen and I dreaded the wave of emotions I knew would come next. When the actual footage of his funeral motorcade played out, with pictures of him and his family and simple white on black text that read, “killed while helping a fellow veteran,” only then did I feel I was finally introduced to the real Chris Kyle.One of the less discussed messages of the film is how the motivation for joining the military is rarely the motivation for staying in, going back to war or doing the actual fighting. Mr. Kyle signed up in response to the 1998 attacks on American embassies in Africa, as many from my generation joined in response to the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. But by the time I arrived in Iraq in 2007, “victory” had already been declared. I wasn’t there to rid Iraq of Saddam or prevent another 9/11. I was there to answer a question: “Can I endure the most difficult thing a man can face?” I was there for the war experience. Though it may seem noble to fight for one’s country and family, those weren’t my reasons for going to Iraq. So no one is in my debt, no one owes me anything.But we do owe it to ourselves to understand the wars we have waged and those who have fought them.We cannot simply thank the troops and then encourage them to go on with their lives. And we veterans do not have the luxury of remaining silent about our experiences. Everyone admires the “Greatest Generation” for their humility and how unlikely they are to talk about their war memories. But there is no shortage of awareness when a country experiences total war, when sugar is rationed and tens of thousands of men are lost in a single day of fighting. Iraq was so incredibly different. During the past decade of war, less than 1 percent of the American population served in the military at any given time, compared with more than 12 percent during World War II.My guess is that many veterans will look past the inaccuracies of “American Sniper” because, quite frankly, it’s the best thing we’ve got. Cobra attack helicopters flying during a sandstorm, satellite phone calls home during sandstorms and firefights. I don’t think so. Maybe in Hollywood but not in Iraq. The truth is, we can do so much better than this. But the film could play an important role in reminding us of how unresolved this whole chapter of our history really is. We know Iraq had nothing to do with the Sept. 11 attacks, and that Saddam Hussein did not have weapons of mass destruction. Add to that the recent news of the Islamic State now controlling large parts of Iraq and you have got a generation of veterans who bear an incredibly unique burden.Yet there’s been a lack of meaningful conversation about the Iraq war in general, and “American Sniper” in particular. Either you loved the film, and so are viewed as a war monger by its critics; or you are a critic of the film and branded unpatriotic by its supporters. We would do well to begin separating these debates and recognizing the difference between those who tell war stories on screen and those who were actually there. And even more, remembering that those who send the country to war are often disconnected from the ones who end up fighting. Unfortunately, these conflicts have exhausted or killed some of those most qualified to speak about the costs of war. What hope do we have if we do not seek to engage with those who remain?

Douglas W. Jackson served four years as a rifleman in the Marines, and was deployed to Iraq during the surge of 2007. He is a recent film school graduate based in Florida. See more of his work at jacksondwj.com