AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — The gloves came off in Israel on Monday as a fierce newspaper war exploded into the country’s harsh election campaign.The two most widely circulated papers, Yediot Aharonot and Israel Hayom, have been in a dogfight since Israel Hayom, a free paper backed by the American billionaire Sheldon Adelson, began publishing in 2007. Derided as a cheerleading mouthpiece for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the free paper has cut deeply into the formerly dominant readership and advertising revenue of Yediot Aharonot, which is critical of Mr. Netanyahu.Now the prime minister himself has more than joined the fray. He posted a withering Facebook post on Monday accusing Yediot’s publisher of “an orchestrated and ridiculous campaign of slander” against him, his Likud Party and Mr. Adelson’s paper. Yediot’s leading columnist, Nahum Barnea, responded in a radio interview by calling Mr. Netanyahu a paranoiac who “needs hospitalization.”This came a day after a pair of lawyers filed a petition to ban Israel Hayom from publishing during the election campaign, calling it “a propaganda platform” that is “masquerading as a newspaper” and “the Israel 2015 version of George Orwell’s ‘1984.’ ”The election, scheduled for March 17, was called after Mr. Netanyahu’s governing coalition collapsed, in part over a bill to outlaw free newspapers that was obviously aimed at Israel Hayom.“We have now the two major newspapers in Israel, each of them have their own agendas on this issue called Netanyahu,” said Rafi Mann, a veteran former journalist who now teaches at Ariel University and Hebrew University. “There is a battleground, which is a very bloody battleground, and of course Netanyahu is in the middle.”“I guess that anybody who is in power and being attacked by newspapers from time to time has a need to fight back,” Mr. Mann added, referring to the prime minister. “To do it by himself is really something that we haven’t seen.”Political analysts say the election is largely a referendum on Mr. Netanyahu’s rule as he seeks a fourth term. “It’s us or him” is the slogan of the Zionist Union, the joint slate of the Labor Party and the centrist Tzipi Livni, and other opposition groups have taken up the mantra “Anyone but Bibi,” Mr. Netanyahu’s nickname.Recent polls suggest that Likud is running ahead of the Zionist Union and that Mr. Netanyahu will be able to form another governing coalition. But a survey published Monday by The Times of Israel found that undecided voters — one-quarter of the public — are leaning toward the Zionist Union, and that fewer than one-third of likely voters thought well of the prime minister’s job performance. The poll’s margin of sampling error is 3.41 percent.Mr. Netanyahu has suffered blistering attacks not just in Yediot but from many Israeli news media outlets, over his performance at the solidarity march in Paris and his plans to address Congress about the Iranian nuclear program. Gossipy stories have appeared about his wife, Sara, quoting former employees at his official residence.“It is time to put things on the table: the main source standing behind the wave of slander against me and against my wife is Noni Moses, the publisher of Yediot Aharonot and Ynet Website,” Mr. Netanyahu wrote on Facebook on Monday. Mr. Moses, he asserted, “will stop at nothing to topple the Likud’s leadership headed by me, and to close Israel Hayom newspaper.”Mr. Moses, who followed his father and grandfather as Yediot’s publisher, declined to be interviewed, and so did the paper’s editor, Ron Yaron. A statement from their office said, “One of the most important roles of free and independent media in democratic countries is to examine the acts of the government, including the person who heads it.” Yediot and Ynet “are careful to maintain uncompromising and professional journalism, objectivity and truthfulness,” the statement said.But Israeli media watchers say that Yediot has in fact been going after Mr. Netanyahu since the 1990s, when it ran a scathing multiple-page spread about his wife. And it has ratcheted up since the emergence of Israel Hayom.“You can see more and more items that are being framed as being against the prime minister — his name appears all the time, his wife’s name appears all the time, and it’s always in a negative context,” said Tehilla Shwartz Altshuler, head of the media reform project at the Israel Democracy Institute. “The problem is that the competition between Israel Hayom and Yediot Aharonot became ugly, it became nasty. We know that journalists are being instructed to do their work in a biased way.”Yediot was once read by more than half the Israeli public, but according to industry surveys, it had fallen to 35 percent last year, behind Israel Hayom at 39 percent. Public confidence in the news media has meanwhile plummeted, according to surveys by the Democracy Institute.The 66-page legal petition filed with the election commission on Sunday says Israel Hayom should be barred until after the election under laws limiting campaign advertising.“This is a newspaper that is propaganda from the beginning until the end, even in the sports,” said Itzhak Aviram, one of the two lawyers who filed it. “The problem is that a big newspaper in Israel, the biggest now, is going for one of the candidates, and it’s against the law.”Dan Raviv, a former television journalist who represents Mr. Adelson in Israel, did not respond to emailed questions and declined to discuss the developments. Gabby Sobelman contributed research.Advertisement