
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
FEB. 9, 2015
Video recorded on Sunday outside a soccer stadium in Cairo, where at least 19 fans were killed in a fatal crush before a match, appears to show that the panic was triggered by the collapse of a gate and the firing of tear gas into the tightly packed crowd.As the Interior Ministry and supporters of the Cairo club Zamalek traded blame for the deaths on Monday, the video offered evidence that flawed crowd-control measures had led to the tragic sequence of events at the Air Defense Sport Village on the outskirts of the capital.Video obtained by Al-Masry Al-Youm, an independent news site, showed that fans were forced to pass through an improvised turnstile gate resembling those used to herd cattle, which created a bottleneck. That temporary structure then crumpled under the weight of frustrated fans who tried to scramble over it to get into the stadium.Footage of the same scene recorded from another angle showed the police shooting tear gas shells at the fans as they scrambled out from under the collapsed gate, Sarah El Deeb of The Associated Press noted.While the police blamed Zamalek’s hard-core supporters, known as the Ultras White Knights, for initiating the stampede, fans of the club who were present and critics of the authorities argued online that the security forces were guilty of poor planning and the excessive use of force.
            Even if Desmund Tutu became the Egypt police chief, nothing much will change. It is the lack of training, the recklessness with human life.        
            Today's violence at #Egypt football game underscores unresolved issue at core of 2011 uprising: violent, irresponsible & poorly trained cops        
            A stampede created by security forces doesn't absolve them of responsibility.        
            One day they chanted " Die for your club " & yesterday they died for there club. #ZamalekMartyrs pic.twitter.com/55P0MKgcO9 
            Did they die in a stampede? Maybe. But when cops shoot tear gas at fans in a tight corridor, they are responsible for that stampede. #UWK 
            I seem to know more abt crowd control at this point than the Egyptian police just from watching them fatally make same mistakes repeatedly.        AdvertisementOnline reaction to the tragedy was also filled with praise for one Zamalek player, Omar Gaber, who responded to the pleas of fans who did make it into the stadium by refusing to take the field.
            Man of the match : omar gaber        
#OmarGaber,#Respect pic.twitter.com/pbIT69t6rp Mr. Gaber, who reportedly angered the club’s president by publicly pledging his loyalty to the fans before the match, which went ahead despite the deaths, was immediately suspended.There were reports in the Egyptian sports press on Monday that Zamalek would also cancel the rebellious young star’s newly signed contract extension.
            Zamalek terminate Omar Gaber's contract extension after refusing to play yesterday’s match. http://t.co/4aqOxeK4rg. pic.twitter.com/XHC032N7Ry The relationship between the club’s administrators and the fans has been uneasy for some time, in part because the Ultras had played a prominent role in the 2011 uprising that toppled President Hosni Mubarak. Despite that tension, the club had welcomed the elaborately choreographed support from the Ultras the day before the match by sharing video of the supporters cheering during a training session.
            Tomorrow we meet again! #ZamalekSC http://t.co/BDNPJw9Xja Liam Stack contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »