AdvertisementSupported byBy Rod NordlandSANA, Yemen — Feuding political parties resumed United Nations-mediated talks with the Houthi militants controlling Yemen’s capital on Monday, but two parties withdrew within hours complaining of threats from the Houthis.The talks are regarded as crucial to reverse deepening political anarchy in Yemen, the Arab world’s most impoverished country and an incubator of Qaeda militants who are a frequent target of American drone strikes.United Nations officials had coaxed the parties back to negotiations three days after the Houthis’ unilateral declaration of a plan to form a new government and choose a president.But soon after the first session began on Monday, Abdullah al-Noman, the secretary general of the Nasserist Organization, a small party, accused one of the top Houthi negotiators, Mehdi al-Meshaat, of threatening to use force to compel the other parties to accept the Houthis’ plan.Citing those threats, the larger Islah party later said that it was boycotting the talks as well, according to a statement on its website. The Islah statement also objected to the Houthis’ insistence on sticking to their unilateral plan to form a government. The Islah party is an Islamist Sunni grouping that has bitterly opposed the Houthis, who are dominated by Zaydis, adherents of a sect that is an offshoot of Shiite Islam.Party representatives engaged in a heated argument with Mr. Meshaat, who was quoted by a participant as replying, “If you don’t behave, we will take appropriate measures against you,” which they interpreted as a threat of force. Houthi militiamen are in de facto control of the central government, its military, and much of central and northern Yemen.The talks were scheduled to resume Monday evening after a recess of several hours, but without Islah participating it was unclear if they would be successful at uniting the opposing factions.The United Nations talks, mediated by its special envoy, Jamal Benomar of Morocco, collapsed last Thursday. The next day, the Houthis made a unilateral declaration replacing the Yemeni Parliament and creating the basis for the election of a presidential commission. Most opposition groups denounced that plan, even after the Houthis tried to soften it by appointing the former defense and interior ministers to a security committee.Yemen has been without a government since Jan. 22, when the pro-American president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, and his entire cabinet resigned under pressure from the Houthis, who had most of them under effective house arrest. Mr. Hadi and most of the Parliament, aside from the two ministers who joined the security committee formed on Saturday, have remained under house arrest since then.The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, on Sunday called for the talks between the Houthis and the political parties to resume but said that Mr. Hadi would have to be restored to the presidency. The Saudi-led Gulf Cooperation Council and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have also denounced the Houthi plan, saying it amounted to a “coup.”The Houthis are eager to make a deal bringing in a compromise government and president, in part because Yemen is on the brink of economic collapse and Saudi Arabia has refused to continue its multibillion-dollar aid if a Houthi regime is in charge. Saudi Arabia sees the Houthis as clients of its regional rival Iran, which is believed to finance their movement, as it has with Hezbollah in Lebanon.Shuaib Almosawa contributed reporting.Advertisement