By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICKFEB. 9, 2015
CAIRO —  President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi on Monday called for an investigation into a confrontation with riot police officers that killed at least 25 people at the gates of a soccer stadium here, as prosecutors ordered the arrest of the leaders of a fan group.The government ordered the league to suspend play indefinitely. The violence began on Sunday night, when thousands of fans of the Cairo soccer team Zamalek were packed into a narrow, caged-in corridor as they tried to enter the stadium.The police blamed a stampede for the deaths, but several fans said that the police had set it off by firing tear gas into the throng and birdshot at the fleeing crowds.Photographs and videos that were circulated on the Internet appeared to confirm the use of gas and birdshot by a squadron of heavily armed riot police officers, as well as the burning of at least two cars near the stadium by fans. One photograph appeared to show the body of a child who had been trampled to death at the stadium gates while still clutching a bag of snacks.AdvertisementMost of those killed were men ages 17 to 22, according to a roster posted on the Facebook page of a fan group known as the Ultras White Knights.AdvertisementIt was the worst episode of soccer-related violence in Egypt since a brawl between fan groups at a match in Port Said killed more than 70 people three years ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The match on Sunday was the first since the Port Said episode in which the authorities had allowed fans into a stadium for a league game. As a first test, the authorities had approved the sale of 5,000 tickets and had let team owners distribute another 5,000 for the 30,000-seat stadium, which is owned by the military, state news media reported.One player, Omar Gaber, a 23-year-old midfielder for Zamalek, refused to play the game after learning of the deaths outside. The team’s owners said they would suspend him, state news media reported.Within a few hours of the first casualties, the general prosecutor, Hisham Barakat, ordered the arrest of White Knights leaders and charged them with responsibility for the deaths, the flagship state newspaper Al Ahram reported.Mr. Sisi, in a statement on Monday, appeared to neither blame nor absolve the police of misconduct. Expressing “great sadness” and “deep sorrow,” Mr. Sisi called for “the investigating authorities to uncover the root causes of the incident and determine those responsible.” He asked that “all necessary measures be taken to prevent a recurrence of the incident.”There was no indication whether Mr. Sisi intended to redirect the general prosecutor from his initial focus on the fans’ culpability. Human rights advocates say that the police are rarely held accountable for civilian deaths in Egypt.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Egypt’s Leader Seeks Inquiry Into Soccer Stadium Deaths.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.