By NIKI KITSANTONISFEB. 10, 2015
ATHENS — With Greece preparing for tough talks with creditors in Brussels, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras's government easily won a confidence vote in Parliament early Wednesday with assurances that it would reverse an economic program that has slashed living standards.Speaking to Parliament before the vote, Mr. Tsipras said his government would seek a short-term “bridge” agreement to a new deal and a “necessary” reduction of Greek debt.He appealed for “space and time,” instead of an extension of the current loan program, saying the country could not “return to an age of bailouts and suppression.”Mr. Tsipras told lawmakers, “This is our red line” — a short-term bridge agreement without further austerity.AdvertisementIn the vote, his government, which came to power last month, secured the support of all 162 coalition lawmakers in the 300-seat House. But wining over international creditors — the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, which have extended Greece more than $270 billion in bailout loans since 2010 — will be much more difficult.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Tsipras said he was optimistic about a “mutually acceptable agreement” with creditors. But earlier in the day, Wolfgang Schäuble, the finance minister of Germany, which has championed austerity in economically troubled eurozone states, appeared to dismiss the prospect of a new plan for Greece. “We are not negotiating a new program,” Mr. Schäuble said amid a flurry of diplomacy aimed at laying the groundwork for a compromise.AdvertisementGreece’s finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, is expected to present his compromise plan at a summit meeting Wednesday in Brussels. The proposal anticipates a bridge financing program through the end of August and a change in the mix of economic measures imposed by creditors, a Greek official said Monday.Mr. Tsipras did not give details on the proposal but indicated that Greece would press its case. “There is no way back,” he said. “As long as we have the people by our side, we cannot be blackmailed by anyone.”Polls indicated that seven in 10 Greeks backed the tough stance toward the country's creditors. The same proportion said they wanted Greece to remain in the eurozone “at all costs” amid renewed speculation about the Greece's defaulting on its huge debt, which stands at 175 percent of its gross domestic product, and about its leaving the single-currency union.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.