AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — For the third time in three days, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said Tuesday that he still planned to address a joint meeting of Congress next month on the Iranian nuclear program, despite mounting calls here and abroad for him to cancel.The statement — Mr. Netanyahu’s lengthiest about the speech since the Republican speaker of the House of Representatives, John A. Boehner, issued the unorthodox invitation without consulting his Democratic colleagues or the White House — sought to put the roiling controversy in historical context and evoked his longstanding sense of mission regarding Iran.It came a day after President Obama said that the speech violated protocol and threatened to politicize the American-Israeli alliance, and that he and Mr. Netanyahu had “a very real difference around Iran.” The prime minister, too, said, “We do have today a profound disagreement with the United States administration” about an emerging deal with Iran, but he added that it was not a “personal disagreement” with Mr. Obama.“I am going to the United States not because I seek a confrontation with the president, but because I must fulfill my obligation to speak up on a matter that affects the very survival of my country,” Mr. Netanyahu said in the 394-word statement emailed to reporters after 8 p.m.In Washington, Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont joined a handful of Democrats who have announced that they will not attend the speech, along with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. Mr. Leahy issued a blistering statement criticizing the secret, partisan orchestration of the event, due to be held two weeks before Israel’s national elections, as “a tawdry and highhanded stunt that has embarrassed not only Israel but Congress itself.”But Representative Eliot L. Engel of New York, the senior Democrat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said that he intended “to go and hear what he has to say” despite the political storm surrounding the speech.Whether Iran is racing toward nuclear weapon capabilities is one of the most contentious foreign-policy issues challenging the West.“The U.S.-Israel relationship is bigger than any of the personalities involved at a given time,” Mr. Engel said through a spokesman. Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, reiterated on Tuesday that Mr. Obama would not meet with Mr. Netanyahu during his visit to Washington because he “does not want to be in a position of even appearing to interfere with the outcome of an Israeli election.” Mr. Netanyahu, who is seeking to secure a fourth term, has made stopping Iran from developing nuclear weapons a central tenet of his political life for two decades. The March 3 speech was originally framed around legislation to impose further sanctions on Iran, though the Senate leadership has postponed a vote on that bill.Uzi Arad, a former national security adviser to Mr. Netanyahu, said Tuesday that the prime minister “must definitely do the math” on whether he has failed in his mission, since “despite our will and announcements, Iran today is closer to reaching nuclear capability than it was a year and two and three and four years ago.” Speaking on Israel Radio, Mr. Arad stopped short of saying Mr. Netanyahu should not go to Congress, but he said Israel “should have prevented the current situation from coming about by means of understandings with the Americans.”Mr. Netanyahu, though, cited several “serious disagreements” over decades between his predecessors and American administrations “over the best way to achieve the security of Israel.” The first prime minister of Israel, David Ben-Gurion, “declared Israel’s independence in the face of strong opposition” from George Marshall, then the secretary of state, Mr. Netanyahu said in the statement, and other Israeli leaders pursued the 1967 war, bombed an Iraqi nuclear reactor and used strong military force to quell the second Palestinian intifada against Washington’s wishes.“None of these disagreements led to a rupture in the relationship between Israel and the United States,” he said. “In fact, over time, our relationship grew stronger.”Julie Hirschfeld Davis and Michael D. Shear contributed reporting from Washington.Advertisement