AdvertisementSupported byLetter From EuropeBy Katrin BennholdLONDON — British politics, in the view of the comedian Al Murray, is “a joke.” Which is presumably why Mr. Murray, or rather his comic alter ego, a pint-waving pub landlord with a set of outrageous opinions, feels at home running for Parliament in the same Kent constituency as Nigel Farage, the pint-waving head of the U.K. Independence Party.The election pledges for Mr. Murray’s Free United Kingdom Party include going to war with Germany, “if they are up for it.” He proposes not just leaving the European Union, as Mr. Farage and a lot of members of the governing Conservative Party have called for; Mr. Murray also vows to block the Channel tunnel with British bricks. (“Probably have to get some Poles in to do it.”)Three months before the general election on May 7, Mr. Murray’s satire of Mr. Farage — and, by extension, the mainstream politicians terrified of losing votes to him — has provided some welcome comic relief in a campaign pitting an unpopular prime minister, David Cameron, against an even more unpopular opposition leader, Ed Miliband.Neither party is expected to win a majority, which economists say is just as well. In a research note titled “Clowns to the left of me, jokers to the right,” Robert Wood, chief economist for Britain at Berenberg Bank, argues that Mr. Murray is not the only comedian in town.“The choices are 1970s left-wing statism or ludicrous public spending cuts and a Brexit vote,” Mr. Wood said, referring to the referendum on Britain’s membership in the European Union that Mr. Cameron has promised if he is re-elected.Mr. Miliband, dubbed Red Ed by some opponents, has promised a “mansion tax” and a levy on banker bonuses. He wants to dispossess property speculators who “hoard” land, to control energy prices and to raise the top rate of income tax to 50 percent, after it was lowered by Mr. Cameron to 45 percent. Stefano Pessina, the executive chairman of the drugstore chain Boots, said this month that if the Labour Party were allowed to follow through on its promises, it would be “a catastrophe.” Another proposal, to guarantee workers the first option to buy their company when it is on course to be sold, broken up or floated on the stock market, was described as “barking mad” by the British venture capitalist Jon Moulton.Asked during a BBC interview to name a single notable Labour supporter in the business community, Mr. Miliband’s chief economic adviser, Ed Balls, failed to recall even one complete name, managing only “Bill.”Mr. Cameron gets higher ratings on economic management than his rival. But his promise to hold a referendum on European Union membership is not popular in the business community, which regards the Continent as a crucial market.Meanwhile, a scheduled $86 billion in spending cuts over the next five years as outlined by the Conservatives’ budget statement would imply a “fundamental reimagining” of the role of the state, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a British think tank. It would take government consumption of goods and services to its lowest share of gross domestic product since 1938.To make this prospect palatable, a Conservative campaign slogan urges voters to “stay on the road to a stronger economy” on a poster depicting a pothole-free road stretching through rolling green hills. Embarrassingly, the road turned out to be in Germany.The best outcome, said Mr. Wood, the Berenberg economist, would be one that prevents either major party from carrying out its preferred economic platform.“If coalition politics means modest austerity and no other changes, the U.K. will be fine,” he said. “The U.K. is not Italy or Greece. Britain does not need radical surgery just to grow.”Mr. Murray, who like Mr. Miliband and Mr. Cameron is Oxford-educated, offered his own “common sense solutions” to an economic recovery that has yet to significantly bolster real incomes and create good-quality jobs.The pub landlord proposes to “lock up the unemployed,” rename welfare payments as “scrounge credits” and revalue the pound at £1.10. Greece, he offered, could be run from Kent County Council.Advertisement