By AUSTIN RAMZYFEB. 10, 2015
HONG KONG — Taiwan’s top official in charge of relations with mainland China resigned on Tuesday, after prosecutors said that his former deputy, whom he had suspected of disclosing state secrets, would not face charges.“Although I can’t agree with the prosecutors’ reasoning, because the handling of this case has disturbed society, I am willing to accept political responsibility and ask to resign as chairman of the Mainland Affairs Council,” the official, Wang Yu-chi, said in a statement.Last year, Mr. Wang asked his deputy at the time, Chang Hsien-yao, to resign while prosecutors investigated allegations that he had passed state secrets to China, including sensitive information about Taiwan’s economy, its policy toward the mainland and its strategy in negotiations with Beijing. Mr. Chang was said to have used intermediaries to pass the information to China.But prosecutors said on Tuesday that there was insufficient evidence to charge Mr. Chang, who had denied wrongdoing.AdvertisementMr. Wang took up his post in 2012 and last year traveled to China for the first official talks between the two sides since the end of China’s civil war in 1949.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a statement, President Ma Ying-jeou of Taiwan said he supported Mr. Wang’s decision and called him an “extremely excellent” Mainland Affairs Council chief.“These two years he has earnestly taken up the task of systemizing and normalizing cross-strait relations and has shown to be equal to the task,” Mr. Ma said of Mr. Wang.AdvertisementUnder Mr. Ma, Taiwan has pursued a series of agreements with China that have led to a drastic growth in trade. While the fear of military conflict between the two sides has eased, many in Taiwan worry that China is using its economic might to increase its influence over the self-ruled island, which it considers part of its territory.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Taiwan: Official Responsible for Ties With Beijing Resigns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.