By GARDINER HARRIS and ELLEN BARRYFEB. 10, 2015
Arvind Kejriwal, leader of the young anticorruption party Aam Aadmi, spoke with supporters after winning in the vote for the Delhi Assembly.NEW DELHI — Less than a year after Narendra Modi won a historic victory to become India’s prime minister, a smaller political earthquake struck the capital on Tuesday as a young political organization led by an anticorruption crusader trounced Mr. Modi’s governing party in local elections.The Aam Aadmi Party, or Common Man Party, won 67 of the 70 seats in the Delhi Assembly, far more than polls or even the most enthusiastic of the party’s supporters had predicted. Aam Aadmi is led by Arvind Kejriwal, a former tax examiner who rose to fame as a campaigner against graft and refashioned himself into a defender of this city’s lowest social strata.For Mr. Modi, the Delhi results represent the first resounding defeat since his Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P., won an outright majority in the lower house of India’s Parliament in May, the largest such majority in 30 years. In that election, the party won all seven parliamentary seats in Delhi, and as recently as December, polls had indicated that the B.J.P. would win the Delhi elections handily.But despite a string of successful foreign trips, Mr. Modi’s government has yet to demonstrably revive India’s economy, which is producing a fraction of the jobs needed for the roughly 12 million Indians who come of age annually. This latest election, in which the B.J.P. took just three seats, is the first sign that voters may be losing patience, analysts say. Some also suggested Mr. Kejriwal’s “common man” image resonated in New Delhi, despite his frequent political missteps.AdvertisementHoping to take advantage of what they saw as Mr. Modi’s enormous personal appeal, the Bharatiya Janata Party had used Mr. Modi’s image and presence throughout the campaign. In speeches, Mr. Modi had vilified Mr. Kejriwal, and Mr. Modi’s picture was the dominant image on full-page newspaper ads in the days leading up to the vote.AdvertisementStill, commentators disagreed on Tuesday about how badly Mr. Modi and his party would be wounded by the Delhi results, with some suggesting it was just a hiccup in the Bharatiya Janata’s effort to become the new dominant national party. They said that the Delhi contest was just one of many state elections — the B.J.P. had already done well in four state elections since Mr. Modi came to power — and that the party’s loss was the result of tactical missteps rather than a fundamental rejection of its message and leader.But others suggested that Mr. Modi’s loss was more fundamental and that his honeymoon with India’s voters had ended.Mr. Kejriwal briefly served as Delhi’s chief minister a year ago, but he resigned after just 49 days, leaving the running of the state to a centrally appointed governor. The move was one of many apparent miscalculations Mr. Kejriwal has made since coming to prominence, including a cantankerous split with his first political patron and, last year, a decision to create a national party that would compete across India for parliamentary seats, which largely failed.But Mr. Kejriwal’s oft-repeated apologies for resigning and a 70-point manifesto he developed for the election — promising to improve the lives of Delhi’s vast underclass through a crackdown on corruption, as well as by providing cheaper electricity and free water — resonated strongly across the sprawling capital region.The Delhi results also deepened the crisis engulfing the once-dominant Indian National Congress party, which ruled Delhi for 15 years until 2013 but failed to win a single seat on Tuesday despite vigorous campaigning by Rahul Gandhi, the scion of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty.Mr. Kejriwal managed to outmaneuver Mr. Modi on multiple levels, not only projecting himself as the true agent of change but also as a man from humble circumstances. Mr. Modi’s party won last year in part by trumpeting his upbringing as the child of a tea seller, a modest background that contrasted sharply with that of Mr. Gandhi. But recently, Mr. Modi has been seen wearing a suit with pinstripes made from the repeated printing of his own name, reported to have cost $17,000. Mr. Kejriwal, by contrast, is known as “the muffler man” for his modest attire and his ungainly habit of wrapping his head in a scarf to stay warm.Showered by rose petals and raucous chants from hundreds of well-wishers who thronged the alley outside his party’s headquarters on Tuesday, Mr. Kejriwal appeared on a third-floor balcony flanked by his wife and closest aides.Advertisement“This is the triumph of truth. Neither do we have money, nor do we have any resources,” Mr. Kejriwal said. “But it’s scary. This huge mandate begets responsibility in its wake. I would like to request all party workers to remain humble and not indulge in the slightest bit of pride.”Mr. Kejriwal said he would take the oath as chief minister on Saturday at Ramlila Maidan, a field where he helped stage vast anticorruption protests in 2011.Half of India’s population is under age 25, and Aam Aadmi has become the party of the young, with thousands of students from around India volunteering as canvassers. Nishtha Sood, 24, came from the southeastern state of Jharkhand because she saw Mr. Kejriwal as the answer to the routine corruption that she said had cost her father his land. “What other choice do we have if we want a corruption-free government?” Ms. Sood asked.Mr. Kejriwal’s vow to crack down on small-scale corruption has particular resonance among slum dwellers. The vast majority of Delhi’s cycle rickshaw drivers and street hawkers, for example, do not have permits and are routinely pressured for small bribes by constables who often pay bribes to land their jobs.Soni, a woman with one name who sells flatbread from a tiny brick oven set up on a back street, said that before Aam Aadmi’s rise, her family used to pay 1,000 rupees a month — roughly a quarter of their earnings — in bribes to the police and licensing officials so her business would not be shut down.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I voted for the broom,” she said on Tuesday, referring to Aam Aadmi’s ubiquitous symbol. “He is the man who helps the poor.”Mamata Banerjee, the chief minister of the state of West Bengal and a fierce critic of Mr. Modi, wrote on Tuesday on Twitter that the results were a “turning point” and “a big defeat for the arrogant and those who are doing political vendetta & spreading hate among people.”A spokeswoman for Mr. Modi’s party, Meenakshi Lekhi, said the Delhi rout “is a small loss and a big lesson,” adding that the party would reflect in coming days on what happened.The courtyard of the headquarters of the once-powerful Congress party was nearly deserted on Tuesday. Ajay Maken, the head of the Delhi campaign, tendered his resignation Tuesday morning and left. P.C. Chacko, general secretary in charge of the Delhi elections, sat at his desk sipping tea.“In fact, we have been expecting at least a few seats in Delhi,” Mr. Chacko said. “We were really not prepared. We didn’t have our organization structure intact.”Suhasini Raj, Hari Kumar and Nida Najar contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: Prime Minister’s Party Is Routed in Delhi Vote.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.