Berek Sawut, an ethnic Kazakh herder, was overwhelmed by hundreds of calls a day after the Chinese news media reported last week that he had stumbled across a 17-pound gold nugget in the foothills of the Altay range of northwest China. The nugget, in the shape of China, was the largest discovery of its kind in the vast region of Xinjiang.So Mr. Sawut turned off his cellphone at some point this week. That led to a round of reports that said he had mysteriously vanished. But soon Chinese reporters located him again, in Qinghe County, where he lives.It is unclear what will happen to the nugget, which has drawn nationwide attention in China. Mr. Sawut told reporters that he thought officials might take it, as precious metals found in mines in the region are deemed state property. The Altay area is known for its gold deposits and for mines that date to the pre-Communist era and that were once operated by Russians.
A #Xinjiang herdsman finds a huge #gold nugget shaped like the map of #China.
//t.co/Z6onC1PB12 //t.co/oslSxINOUj— China.org.cn (@chinaorgcn) 6 Feb 15But the herder had found the nugget above ground, on a wintry landscape, as the sun was setting.On Wednesday, the state-run China News Agency quoted an unidentified local official as saying that the Qinghe County Bureau of Land Resources had no intention of taking the nugget from the herdsman. People in the area who have found gemstones or gold nuggets above ground have been allowed to keep them. But the bureau might offer to buy the nugget to display in a local museum, the official said.The bureau is running a series of tests on the nugget to determine its worth. Initial news reports said the nugget was natural gold ore mixed with quartz and other minerals. If it were pure gold, it would be worth more than $310,000, at $1,250 per Troy ounce.The Beijing Morning Post reported on Wednesday that someone had offered Mr. Sawut three million renminbi, about $480,000, for the nugget, but that the herder would not settle for less than the equivalent of $800,000. In any case, he was waiting for officials to say whether the nugget was his to sell, the report said.On Monday, People’s Daily, the official Communist Party newspaper, published an article with the headline “To Whom Should the Dog-Head Gold Belong?” (This type of nugget is often called “dog-head gold” or “horseshoe gold” because of the images that can be seen in its rough shape.)The article said that if the nugget were considered a cultural relic, then the government could claim it. But it also mentioned that the Qinghe County Cultural Relics Bureau had already said the nugget was not such an object, and that as a result the bureau had no rights to it. Separately, the local Bureau of Land Resources, the Bureau of Mines and the police have put together a “joint investigation group” to examine the nugget.The Beijing News ran an op-ed on Wednesday with the headline: “Why Does Everyone Fear the Confiscation of the Dog-Head Nugget?” The author, Tao Shun, a sociologist, wrote that the overwhelming public sentiment was that Mr. Sawut should keep the nugget, and given that the law should be “a mirror of public sentiment,” that he had the right to keep it.Mia Li contributed research.