

      By ALISON SMALE

OCT. 2, 2015

BERLIN — Lothar de Maizière, the first (and last) freely elected prime minister of East Germany, realized at the time that his role was to preside over a “giant bankruptcy.” Iris Gleicke was raising a child and hoping she could visit her godmother in the West. The parents of Ioulia Isserlis were living in Russia, but would eventually decide to move the family to Germany — the “safest place” for Jews. She would later tap into the thriving youth scene in a city once divided by a wall, but now split over whether to wear brand-name clothes. They are among six Germans from different generations — roughly 25, 50 and 75 years old — who described their views on the past, present and future of Germany for the 25th anniversary of reunification on Oct. 3, 1990. Born in different eras — during World War II, in the heart of the Cold War and around the time of unification — they have seen the rapid changes in Germany, but from vastly different perspectives. Germany is the predominant power in Europe. But it still seems uncertain as it assumes a global role. And new challenges have emerged with hundreds of thousands of refugees seeking a new life there, and an iconic German company, Volkswagen, denting the country’s image and perhaps economy. Reunification has cost an estimated 1 trillion euros ($1.16 trillion), yet East-West inequalities remain. A new government report showed that gross domestic product per capita in eastern Germany has more than doubled in the past 25 years, but is still one-third lower than western Germany’s. East Germany’s economy collapsed, as the Treuhand, the state-run agency appointed in 1990 to privatize East Germany’s government-owned businesses, failed to save most enterprises. The even swap of East German marks for West German currency in 1990 was politically necessary, but economically ruinous. And eastern Germany is rapidly aging. Yet against all expectations, Berlin — once the epitome of a divided Germany — has become a city beloved by the young, a chaotic, sprawling crucible for the creative and a magnet for millions of visitors. Here are the memories and views of six Germans: Iris Gleicke, 51: I was a single mother, doing an extra computer course for which I had to travel 30 kilometers, and back. I was tired — I fell asleep while Günter Schabowski [the ruling party member who mistakenly announced the immediate opening of the wall] had his famous press conference. The next day there was some Bavarian report I thought was nonsense and then the journalist said: ‘I am at the Berlin Wall, people are on the wall.’ I got to work and a colleague flung her arms around my neck and champagne corks popped and she screamed, ‘You knew all along.’ I had said during that autumn that by March, I would be able to travel quite normally to visit my godmother in West Germany for her birthday. And so it was. Joachim Grosskreutz, 75: I got home and found a note from my wife and son: “We’ve popped over to West Berlin.” I added: “I’m coming after you,” and took off. I remember seeing a couple with a baby carriage packed full of things, as if fleeing from East to West. I couldn’t understand — did they really think things could be rolled back? We drank till 4 a.m. in a bar. In the morning, I went — like a good German — to work. Jörg Krämer, 49:I was an economics student in Münster, watching television with my friends and we saw the wall is open! We got in the car and drove to Berlin. Next day I was at the wall. There was a giant party mood, I remember exactly, the feeling of a real change. It was great. First Lt. Claudia Seidenschwanz, 30: I have only vague memories of East Germany. There was a store on my street where I got sweets, and suddenly it was no longer there. I remember visiting the partner town in West Germany, a furniture store — I’d never seen anything like that. Ioulia Isserlis, 26: Most young people hang out in the eastern part of Berlin — it’s more hipsterish and the Western part more posh. Right now there is this wall between being hipster or posh, between no brands, looking cool and skinny, and wearing brands. That’s the war right now. Lothar de Maizière, 75:  The elections [in spring 1990] were not really elections — they were a plebiscite for the unity of Germany, a state ruled by law, a federal system with a social market economy and the Deutschmark. I knew very exactly studies on the state of East Germany economically, so it was clear to me that I was not really prime minister but administrator of a giant bankruptcy. Back then I had 160 clients a year as a lawyer, now I had 16 million clients, full of unbelievable expectations.  Mr. Grosskreutz, 75:  When the wall fell, we had a chance. My expectations were dashed very quickly, and very deeply. Ms. Gleicke, 51:  No one fired a shot. We went on the streets for freedom and democracy, got free elections, and everyone kept their nerve. It was a time of euphoria — sometimes I find it a pity that no one looks back and remembers that. Mr. Krämer, 49: I had the feeling there would be a huge boom, a reunification boom. Then came the one-for-one swap of the East mark for West marks, and I could see as a student that this conversion was a huge economic mistake. In one blow, the Eastern firms were simply delivered up to the Western ones. It was clear that the East would collapse economically.Ms. Isserlis, 26:  We could decide Israel or Germany, and my parents finally decided that for Jews, Germany is the safest place. Mr. de Maizière, 75:  Overnight, we were bolted onto the toughest economy in the world. We were spared the wait, unlike the Poles or Czechs, but it was an unbelievable shock for the East German economy. Unemployment was four times what it was in the West. The East Germans emigrated from their country without having left it. Mr. Krämer, 49: The East’s economy was simply jettisoned. The Treuhand itself was not the cause of the problem — it certainly tried to make the best of it. But it could not change anything in the withered state of the economy. Ms. Gleicke, 51:  The mandate of the Treuhand to preserve was simply disregarded. It became: privatize as soon as possible, cost what it may. The East Germans found they had served their purpose. Some Western politicians made outrageous suggestions — like unemployment would not be so high if so many East German women did not insist on working. I was such a monster — single mother, not staying at home in the kitchen. Mr. Grosskreutz, 75:  What happened was more a takeover than a reunification. Mr. Krämer, 49: To my shame I must say I have spent fairly little time in the East. In Berlin, I spend the night in west or east, wherever there is a good price for a hotel. And I took my 13-year-old son to the center of Berlin, showed him the cathedrals, the Museum Island — those are really great buildings, one must say. And I had to explain everything to him: what was East Germany, who were Communists, why was Berlin divided.Lieutenant Seidenschwanz, 30: My parents were very happy and proud when their youngest daughter went to serve. We never mentioned the (East German) National People’s Army. We do speak occasionally about East/West thinking.Ms. Isserlis, 26: When I arrived in Germany there was a lot of talk that it was so good and so easy in East Germany, we had a better life, but now I don’t hear it so much.Ms. Gleicke, 51: The young people are no longer Ossi [from the East] or Wessi [West] — they treat it much more loosely. And they are spread all over the country. For us older ones, I am an Ossi and I will probably always remain one.Mr. Krämer, 49: In East Germany, the catch-up process stuttered several years ago. Basically things there are at a standstill.Lieutenant Seidenschwanz, 30: I would say there are extreme differences between the north and south of Germany. East/West plays no part at all. I have my status as a soldier, and camaraderie wherever I am.Mr. de Maizière, 75: I visited a lawyer friend in Prague three years ago and asked why people there seemed more content than those in Berlin. Two things, he said: We are comparing with earlier, while you still compare with the West. And we are changing, while you were changed.Mr. Grosskreutz, 75: Russians bore the brunt of the cost of triumph over the National Socialists, and have nothing from it. It is very complicated.Mr. de Maizière, 75: The first time [Mikhail S. Gorbachev and I] met in Moscow on April 29, 1990 ... I had brought a piece of the Berlin Wall … as gratitude for his words, “He who comes too late gets punished by life.” And then he said something that I will never forget: “Didn’t we all come too late?” Gorbachev is for me a hero from a Greek tragedy. He wanted to have a humanized form of socialism, and got a shabby capitalism, pretty much the shabbiest. He wanted a democratized Soviet Union, and got its collapse. And yet he remains one of the great saviors of the second half of the 20th century.Ms. Isserlis, 26: We left basically everything behind in Russia, came with two bags, one-way tickets. It was a spontaneous decision — my dad had applied for the visa almost in fun, then it was expiring and in the last two weeks we decided to go. But we were still very tied to Moscow because my grandmother refused to come to Germany, so until two years ago we went back twice a year to visit her.Mr. Grosskreutz, 75: I was born in 1940, went to school in 1946, and am of the generation which still remembers the destroyed cities. When my parents celebrated my second birthday, there was a conference going on in Wannsee at which the Nazis plotted the industrial-scale destruction of Jews. These are things which have really marked me. I am too young to feel direct shame for the Nazi atrocities.Lieutenant Seidenschwanz, 30: To be here as a soldier, for Germany, and to do something good — that makes you proud. If you go out in uniform in Prizren or Pristina, you are warmly greeted, even in German, and the Kosovars are still grateful for the German engagement.Mr. Krämer, 49: When I say, “I am a German,” nothing really changed. The changes happened in the East. The only point perhaps is the switch of capital from Bonn to Berlin. But life itself has not changed, and especially not for someone who was always oriented toward the banks, which means Frankfurt, the financial capital. Berlin is far away, you know.Ms. Isserlis, 26: Right now, it’s about being European, not German. I think you can’t really divide being German from being French. I don’t think there is so much difference. Being Jewish I guess is No. 1, then comes Berliner.Ms. Gleicke, 51: If you think back, [reunification] was a big challenge then. The difference is that we had roofs over our head, and spoke the same language. Yet really nothing stayed the same. Of course it makes me sad, and a bit angry, that exactly in East Germany now there are people who run after the neo-Nazis, and refugee shelters are set on fire. That depresses me. But reunification is proof that the Germans can do it.Mr. de Maizière, 75: For me the biggest fear is that our Europe will get broken. That national egoisms will become so strong once more that decisions taken together will no longer hold and it is clear that Europe is just a fairweather setup.Ms. Isserlis, 26: Berlin has also a big Jewish community that is growing and like every week there is a new restaurant popping up. Right now there are 30,000 Israelis. Of course the history is always in the head but it’s also a great feeling that Jewish life is coming back.Mr. Krämer, 49: I looked at East German data in the 1990s, and saw that the amount spent was double the region’s income. Every second mark came from the West; the firms basically hardly made money. Poland and the Czech Republic relied on their own strength. No one gave them an extra mark for every one they earned. They were poorer, but tackled their own development.Mr. de Maizière, 75: I always said there was a 10/10 generation — 10 years too long in East Germany to really make a fresh start, and 10 years too young to retire. And that is tragic, because they were the people who for 40 years effectively carried East Germany. And then they were told we don’t need you any more.Ms. Isserlis, 26: There were no hard parts [to becoming a Berliner]. You just have to know … to go out late.Emmarie Huetteman and Victor Homola contributed reporting.An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of one of the Berlin residents interviewed. She is Ioulia Isserlis, not Iulia. An earlier version of this article misstated the gross domestic product per capita in eastern Germany relative to that of the west. G.D.P. in the east is one-third lower than the west’s, not one-third of the west’s.Advertisement