By MICHAEL D. SHEAR and JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISFEB. 11, 2015
President Obama said that although all but 100 of the American troops deployed to West Africa to help manage the Ebola outbreak will be coming home by April 30, the civilian response will be expanded.WASHINGTON —  President Obama announced on Wednesday that the United States was withdrawing almost all of its troops from the fight against Ebola in West Africa, but he said the world needed to remain vigilant as it sought to eradicate the deadly disease.“While our troops are coming home, America’s work is not done,” Mr. Obama told an audience that included six Ebola survivors. “Our mission is not complete. Today we move into the next phase.”The president said that civilian employees of various government agencies, along with American volunteers and about 100 members of the military, would remain in West Africa as the effort moved from containment of the virus to eradication.“Our focus now is getting to zero,” Mr. Obama said. “Every case is an ember that if not contained can light a new fire.”AdvertisementMr. Obama praised the military effort, which he said had become a “hope multiplier” that persuaded other nations to join in the effort to stop the spread of the disease. And he thanked the volunteers who rushed to the continent at great personal risk when the threat from the disease became clear.Advertisement“Plenty of American heroes remain on the ground, with even more on the way,” he said.The announcement reflects vindication for Mr. Obama and the administration, whose slow initial response to the Ebola outbreak raised questions about the president’s ability to handle fast-moving global crises.But the ceremony also raises questions about whether Mr. Obama is prematurely claiming success on what he had labeled a national security priority, opening himself to criticism should Ebola again spiral out of control.Evidence is mounting that the spread of Ebola has slowed considerably in West Africa, particularly in Liberia. Four months ago, well over 1,000 cases were reported every week in West Africa, and some public health officials estimated that the death total could reach one million by the end of January. Instead, there were about 9,000 deaths, and Liberia is now reporting only a handful each week — a dozen in the last three weeks.But the signs of progress come with substantial caveats. Mr. Obama’s advisers say Ebola will remain a concern until the virus is stamped out, and public health officials are not close to achieving that goal.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Obama’s announcement came as the World Health Organization reported that the number of new cases in the three afflicted countries — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — totaled 144 in the week ended Feb. 8, compared with 124 new cases in the previous week.It was the second consecutive week that new cases had risen after a prolonged downward trend.“Despite improvements in case-finding and management, burial practices and community engagement, the decline in case incidence has stalled,” the organization said in a weekly update on the Ebola crisis, which is posted on its website.While new cases in Liberia remained relatively low, according to the update, a spike in Guinea cases, coupled with widespread transmission in Sierra Leone, underlines “the considerable challenges that must still be overcome to get to zero cases.”The Obama administration said it planned to shift its focus to track patients and their contacts case by case.Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Withdrawing Troops, Obama Calls for Vigilance on Ebola.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.