By DAVID M. HERSZENHORNFEB. 11, 2015
KIEV, Ukraine —  Viktor V. Medvedchuk often turns up in places where only buddies of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia get to go, like the V.I.P. section at a Formula One championship in Sochi, Russia, in October. He sat just a few feet from Mr. Putin, next to the actor Steven Seagal, another pal of the Kremlin leader’s.Mr. Medvedchuk’s close ties to Mr. Putin are no secret, and he was in Belarus on Wednesday for negotiations between the Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatists waging war in eastern Ukraine. But in a sign of the inscrutable nature of Ukrainian politics, he was there not on behalf of the Russian leader or the separatists but for President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine and the Ukrainian state security service.In an interview, Boris Lozhkin, the head of Mr. Poroshenko’s presidential administration, said that what matters most is what Mr. Medvedchuk — who has participated in the negotiations since they started last June — can contribute to ending the conflict in eastern Ukraine.The security service, known by its Ukrainian abbreviation S.B.U., also said recently that it had enlisted the services of Mr. Medvedchuk in helping negotiate an exchange of hostages, designating him the agency’s special envoy for humanitarian issues.Advertisement“He is a friend of Putin and he is trying to find his place in the new Ukrainian-Russian environment,” Mr. Lozhkin said in the interview. “He is trying with hostages. Maybe it will be effective. And if it will be effective, I think it’s O.K. if Medvedchuk will do it.”AdvertisementMr. Medvedchuk has visited the war zone to meet with Aleksandr V. Zakharchenko and Igor V. Plotnitsky, the leaders of the separatist Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.“With hostages, first of all, or cease-fire, if he will be useful in these negotiations or with Putin or with Zakharchenko,” Mr. Lozhkin added, “personally, I don’t see what’s the problem.”Others, however, do see a problem.Mr. Medvedchuk, who was the longtime chief of staff to former President Leonid D. Kuchma, is a polarizing figure in Ukraine, known for his ruthlessness in politics and for his checkered past as a young lawyer in the Soviet Union. His role in a Soviet crackdown on dissidents ahead of the 1980 Olympics is widely believed to have contributed to the death of a Ukrainian poet and human rights activist, Vasyl Stus.Mr. Stus, exercising one of his few rights as a dissident defendant, tried to refuse representation by Mr. Medvedchuk, his state-appointed lawyer. Mr. Medvedchuk, however, insisted on speaking at the trial anyway, declaring his client guilty and saying he deserved to be punished. Five years later, Mr. Stus, who had been nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature, died at the age of 47 in a forced labor camp in Russia.“He acted more like a prosecutor than a defense lawyer,” Yevhen Sverstiuk, an essayist and author who knew Mr. Stus, said in an interview last year. Mr. Sverstiuk, who himself spent seven years as a political prisoner in Soviet labor camps and five years in exile in Siberia, died in December at 86. He had recently served as president of the Ukrainian PEN Center, a chapter of the international writers’ association.“A man with such a past cannot be a public figure,” Mr. Sverstiuk said of Mr. Medvedchuk in the interview, adding: “In short, he is a sinister character. This is an evil name.”Mr. Medvedchuk, who declined requests for an interview, has never denied his role in the Stus case, and has even spoken publicly about it, saying it is unrealistic to think he could have successfully defended a client against the Soviet regime.AdvertisementOther critics are less interested in Mr. Medvedchuk’s actions during Soviet times than in his role as Mr. Putin’s point man in Ukraine.Their friendship is well established. An official Kremlin photograph shows Mr. Medvedchuk sitting with Mr. Putin and other dignitaries at a Sambo martial arts tournament in the Black Sea resort city of Sochi in August.And on an official trip to Ukraine in 2012, Mr. Putin visited Mr. Medvedchuk’s lavish residence on the coast of Yalta in Crimea. Video of the visit showed Mr. Putin hoisting his reputed goddaughter in the air and chatting on a balcony overlooking a large fountain.With Russia worried about Ukraine’s shift westward, Mr. Medvedchuk founded a group called Ukrainian Choice aimed at preventing the former president, Viktor F. Yanukovych, from signing new political and economic accords with Europe.In July 2013, Mr. Putin sat next to Mr. Medvedchuk at an event the group held in Kiev and gave a speech about the deep historical ties between Russia and Ukraine, including “the common spiritual values that make us a single people.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Throughout that fall, Ukrainian Choice ran an aggressive anti-gay ad campaign warning against decayed values in the West. In a precursor to Russia’s now frequent charges of fascism against Kiev and the West, Mr. Medvedchuk described the European Union as the modern heir to Germany’s Third Reich.A co-founder of a major law firm in Kiev, he was not always so virulently anti-Western, according to analysts who have followed his career.As a member of Parliament from 1997 to 2002, he was known to express pro-European views, and had strong working relationships with officials in Poland.Yet, he became so powerful and influential as Mr. Kuchma’s chief of staff, from 2002 to 2005, that there was a joke in Kiev political circles: Mr. Kuchma was serving as president in the Medvedchuk administration.AdvertisementSome Ukrainian analysts believe there is more than a grain of truth in the gag, and that Mr. Putin’s goal is to create a Medvedchuk administration, if not in Kiev, then in Donetsk, where the Kremlin has made clear it would like to see the region granted autonomy similar to that of Chechnya in Russia.In May, with the crisis in eastern Ukraine deepening, Mr. Putin publicly urged that Mr. Medvedchuk be given an important role as a peace negotiator. As soon as Mr. Medvedchuk got involved, the Kremlin issued a statement expressing Mr. Putin’s praise.Stanislav Belkovsky, a Russian political analyst, said that he had no doubt about Mr. Medvedchuk’s role: “He is Putin’s personal representative.”Last month, Mr. Medvedchuk served as a courier for Mr. Putin, delivering a letter to Mr. Poroshenko proposing a mutual withdrawal of heavy artillery from the war zone. The overture came after separatist forces briefly seized control of the Donetsk airport, apparently in a bid to lock in that significant strategic gain. It was swiftly rejected and fierce fighting resumed over the airport, with the separatists ultimately capturing it anyway.“Putin and Medvedchuk are very close to each other psychologically,” Mr. Belkovsky added. “They share the vision toward Ukraine, that Ukraine is not an official state. It’s a failed state that historically is an entity to be split between Russia and the West.”Sergii Leshchenko, one of Ukraine’s most prominent journalists and now a member of Parliament, said he was not surprised that Mr. Poroshenko’s administration did not want to acknowledge Mr. Medvedchuk’s involvement.“His reputation is very poor; nobody wants to be involved with Medvedchuk openly,” Mr. Leshchenko said. “People prefer to hide the contacts.”Still, Mr. Leshchenko said the situation in Ukraine was so dire that Mr. Poroshenko should accept any help Mr. Medvedchuk might provide, echoing a point he made as a journalist when Mr. Medvedchuk appeared at the first talks last June.“Medvedchuk is evil,” Mr. Leshchenko wrote in a blog post. Still, he added, “it is better to negotiate with Medvedchuk than to dig graves.”Andrew Roth contributed reporting from Donetsk, Ukraine.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Close Friend of Russian Leader Takes Role as a Negotiator for Ukraine.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.