By THOMAS FULLERFEB. 11, 2015
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia —  The Malaysian authorities have detained a cartoonist and ordered an investigation into two prominent politicians in an intensifying crackdown on dissent after the country’s highest court upheld a five-year prison sentence for the leader of the opposition, Anwar Ibrahim.The government for decades has been accused of using draconian and archaic laws to sideline and intimidate its critics. But the latest cases come with a modern twist: The country’s highest police officer, Khalid Abu Bakar, is using his Twitter account to issue warnings to government critics and to order his subordinates to track and investigate dissenting voices.Zulkiflee Anwar Ulhaque, a cartoonist who goes by the name Zunar, was taken into custody on Tuesday after posting on Twitter a series of cartoons and messages critical of the high court’s handling of Mr. Anwar’s highly politicized trial on sodomy charges.“The lackeys in black robes are proud of their sentence,” Mr. Zulkiflee wrote after Mr. Anwar was sent to a prison outside Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital. “The reward from political masters must be plenty.”AdvertisementMr. Khalid sprang into action after reading Mr. Zulkiflee’s post.“This man is inviting @PDRMsia to take action against him,” he wrote on Twitter, using the handle for the police department, whose Malay initials are P.D.R.M. He instructed his subordinates to “please track him down and investigate.”AdvertisementThe police arrested Mr. Zulkiflee at his home Tuesday night and on Wednesday obtained a court order to detain him until Saturday, said his lawyer, Melissa Sasidaran.“The authorities have been trying to get at Zunar for quite some time,” she said. “They are worried that messages in his cartoons might get through to the people.”Mr. Khalid also called for investigations into posts on Twitter by Rafizi Ramli, the secretary general of Mr. Anwar’s party, and Nga Kor Ming, an opposition member of Parliament.After the verdict in Mr. Anwar’s case on Tuesday, Mr. Rafizi posted an image of a judge with a wig emblazoned with dollar signs.“This is ridiculous. Where else in the world?” Mr. Rafizi wrote on Wednesday. “Judges should be criticized, especially in matters where the majority of the thinking public knows that a prosecution is all politically motivated.”Mr. Nga had posted a message that urged people to “fight this cruel regime.”Mr. Khalid, in a response to his post, said: “We will take action under the Sedition Act.”The Internet has been seen by critics of the government as a liberating force in Malaysia. Unlike television and the print news media, social media and the web are largely free of government controls. But Mr. Khalid’s vows to aggressively police the Internet have curbed this new frontier of free speech and have expanded the reach of a paternalistic government.Advertisement“He is always telling you what you can and cannot do,” said Ezra Zaid, a host at BFM, a talk radio station, referring to Mr. Khalid’s messages on Twitter. “But unlike other Twitter trolls, he has the power to arrest you.”One recent post by Mr. Khalid exemplified the tone of his messages.“Be careful what you say,” he wrote. “Don’t utter words that will cause the P.D.R.M. to take action. If you dare to talk, you dare to bear the consequences.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, Mr. Khalid ordered an inquiry into a Twitter user who had claimed that the disappearance of a Malaysia Airlines jetliner last year was a conspiracy. “Please track and investigate,” he instructed his subordinates on Twitter.Mr. Khalid’s online policing is creating a marriage of modern technology with archaic, repressive laws.Eric Paulsen, the co-founder of a civil- rights group called Lawyers for Liberty, said in an interview on Wednesday that about 15 people were charged with sedition over the past year in Malaysia. The law against sedition was enacted in 1948, when the country was still a British colony and was facing a Communist insurgency.Mr. Paulsen was arrested last month and charged with sedition after writing on Twitter that the government’s Islamic affairs department was promoting extremism in sermons it disseminated. He made the comments after the killings of journalists in Paris in January.Mr. Khalid told his more than 30,000 Twitter followers that the arrest had taken place.“The police force, at the end of the day, is not independent,” Mr. Paulsen said on Wednesday. “It’s a political force used to prop up the government.”Mr. Khalid did not respond to questions sent by The New York Times to his Twitter account, and a government liaison officer did not respond to an email seeking comment.Phil Robertson, the Asia deputy director of Human Rights Watch, said Mr. Khalid’s vow to police social media had made Malaysians think twice before posting anything.Advertisement“In Malaysia’s Twittersphere, the I.G.P. is like a shark in open water — inspiring fear whenever he comments,” said Mr. Robertson, using the initials for the inspector general of police.Mr. Ezra said Malaysian society would be better served if the police shifted their focus to crime and other social ills.“Zunar is not the most wanted or most dangerous criminal in the country,” he said of the cartoonist. “In this day and age, I think the real fear is that if the top brass is so preoccupied with cartoonists, who is going after the real bad guys in our society?”A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Malaysian Police Use Twitter in Crackdown on Dissent.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.