By ROD NORDLANDFEB. 11, 2015
SANA, Yemen —  The Houthi militiamen who effectively rule Yemen were increasingly isolated Wednesday as several Western countries joined the United States in closing their embassies here, despite few signs of deteriorating security in the streets.Some international organizations appeared to be reducing their staffs as well, and the World Bank, which provides more than $1.1 billion in support to Yemen, had only a guard force on duty on Wednesday at its offices.Many saw the move as intended to pressure Yemen’s power brokers to come to an agreement. Although the embassies cited security concerns as the reason behind the closings, they came amid relative calm in Sana, the capital, even on the anniversary of its Arab Spring revolution, with peaceful pro- and anti-Houthi demonstrations.The British and American embassies in Sana were closed Wednesday, with the last diplomats from both embassies withdrawn. The German Embassy was also closed, a security official said, although its diplomats had not yet left. France urged all its citizens in Yemen to leave and said that the embassy would close Friday.AdvertisementAt the United Nations, the Security Council was scheduled to hold a meeting on Thursday on Yemen and receive a briefing by Jamal Benomar, the special United Nations adviser on Yemen, who was in Sana. Mr. Benomar has been trying to mediate political reconciliation talks.AdvertisementYemen’s government collapsed on Jan. 22, leaving international donors with no one to accept funds officially. Saudi Arabia, the biggest unilateral donor, said it was cutting off its more than $4 billion in aid after the Houthi takeover of Sana last year.Yemen has been an important ally in the fight against Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, and there have been no reports of the withdrawal of American military forces who help carry out drone strikes against the extremists. Despite the Houthis’ public opposition to the drone strikes, they have made no move to stop them, and they are strongly against Al Qaeda.It was not clear why the Western countries closed their embassies now, because they have been left open during much more violent times in the capital.“As soon as the Americans do something like this, all the other Western embassies follow them,” said a Foreign Ministry official here, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media. “The closure does not necessarily mean the security situation is bad, but it could mean the foreign missions want to exercise or put more pressure on the Houthis.”A senior member of the Houthi political bureau, speaking on the condition of anonymity as a matter of policy, expressed regret about the American move. “We didn’t want them to go, and we were ready to work with the American Embassy on measures that would ensure their protection and facilitate their work.”The last American diplomats left Yemen after driving in a convoy to the airport in Sana on Wednesday morning.A Yemeni staff member of the embassy, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media, said the embassy’s official vehicles were seized by the Houthi authorities at the airport, along with the personal weapons of guards that were inside them, instead of allowing embassy staff members to drive them back.AdvertisementThe Houthis later broadcast a statement saying they were taking the vehicles and weapons for safekeeping until embassy officials returned.The State Department urged all Americans living in Yemen to leave, although there has been no sign of an exodus. At the Yemen America Language Institute, the executive director, Aziz Alhadi, a Yemeni-American from Pittsburgh, said none of the school’s four American teachers were planning to leave.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think everyone is worried a little bit, but we’ve been through so much already,” he said. “In Sana, the streets are safer than they were.”Houthi militiamen who have taken over Yemen’s military are omnipresent in the city, which has been relatively quiet the past two weeks.Yemen has been without a government since President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi resigned late last month, citing pressure from Houthi militants who have taken control of the capital but have not yet installed a government of their own.On Wednesday evening, Mr. Benomar convened a third day of talks between the Houthis and other political parties to try to form a government.Mohammad A. Abulahoum, the head of Justice and Building, one of the parties negotiating with the Houthis, said: “This is the time we most needed the international community here. But maybe this will be a wake-up call to certain groups in Yemen.”Over the weekend, Saudi Arabia and other countries denounced the Houthis’ plans to form a government as tantamount to a coup. On Tuesday, however, the Houthis’ top leader in Sana, Saleh Ali al-Sammad, said in an interview that they were willing to negotiate and wanted to share power, not to dominate the country.Some United Nations and international activities in Sana appeared to have been curtailed as well. Guards outside the offices of the United Nations Development Program, which has a large presence in Yemen, said the agency was closed for business.At the World Bank, no expatriate officials were present, although a security official said that they were just on a routine leave and that the bank was still functioning with Yemeni staff members. Efforts to reach the World Bank for comment were not successful.AdvertisementOther United Nations agencies, like Unicef and the World Food Program, were operating normally.The United States was also a major donor to Yemen, with more than $500 million in direct aid to the country annually. Those contributions will presumably be delayed as long as the embassy is closed, along with the United States Agency for International Development.Shuaib Almosawa contributed reporting from Sana, and Somini Sengupta from the United Nations.A version of this article appears in print on February 12, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: In Yemen, Militants Are Increasingly Isolated.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.