President Xi Jinping of China has capped a year resonant with echoes from the Maoist era by going back on Friday to where it all began.As China prepared to celebrate passing from the lunar Year of the Horse to the Year of the Goat next week, Mr. Xi visited Yan’an: the rural stronghold from where Mao Zedong pushed the Communist revolution to victory. And there Mr. Xi returned to the village of Liangjiahe, with its steep, yellow-earth hills and cave dwellings where Mr. Xi grew into adulthood during Mao’s Cultural Revolution, when he, like millions of urban youths, was “sent down” to the countryside.On the cusp of each Lunar New Year, Chinese Communist Party leaders make heavily publicized trips to mix with common citizens, sharing New Year’s greetings and traditional dinners, usually dumplings.
The initial, brief reports on Friday saying that Mr. Xi had made his trip this year to Yan’an, in the northwestern province of Shaanxi, did not quote him. The microblogs and reports on the Internet merely showed him and his wife, Peng Liyuan, mingling with ruddy-faced farmers and children, and a snippet of video circulating online showed Mr. Xi telling a crowd that he felt very moved to return to the area.“My first step setting out in life was made in coming here,” Mr. Xi said, according to the video, which showed the same backdrop and people as the photos. “After I came, I stayed for seven years, from 1969 to 1975, and when I left, I left physically, but my heart remained behind.”Even with only those brief remarks, Mr. Xi’s visit spoke abundantly. It was an unapologetic return to the party’s — and to Mr. Xi’s — roots after a year when the party’s revived reverence for Mao and Marxist orthodoxy has kindled contention, and jitters among many liberal intellectuals.“I truly see myself as a Yan’an native,” Mr. Xi said in a 2004 television interview, when he was still a provincial official. “Even now, many of the fundamental ideas and basic features that I’ve developed were formed in Yan’an.”Mr. Xi has shown no inclination to try to take China back to Mao’s era of a command economy and fervent Communist campaigns. But he has repeatedly said that the party would mortally damage its authority if it abandoned Mao’s legacy.“Imagine if Comrade Mao Zedong had been totally repudiated. Would our party be able to withstand that?” Mr. Xi said in a speech in early 2013, according to a collection of documents published last year. “Would our country’s socialist system be able to withstand it? They wouldn’t, and when they wouldn’t, it would be great turmoil under the heavens.”Critics have warned that Mr. Xi’s demands for unblinking obedience risk rekindling some of the ideological mania of Mao’s time. This week, the president of Nankai University in the northern city of Tianjin warned against reports in the party news media that have depicted universities as threatened by an infiltration of Western liberal ideas and values. “We cannot re-enact this history of ‘leftist’ errors against intellectuals,” said the university’s president, Gong Ke.Mr. Xi’s family also suffered under Mao, but his visit to Yan’an was another demonstration of his public reverence for the revolutionary past. For Mr. Xi, the pilgrimage to Yan’an also had a personal side. The reports said that he and his wife visited Liangjiahe, where Mr. Xi grew from a slim, shy teenager into a budding Communist Party functionary.Mr. Xi’s father, Xi Zhongxun, was a senior official driven from power in 1962, when Mao accused him of seeking to subvert the party. After the Cultural Revolution began in 1966, Xi Zhongxun was paraded and persecuted by Red Guards, and his family was driven deeper into the political wilderness. In early 1969, Xi Jinping joined other urban youths sent to Liangjiahe to work, when Mao sought to wind down the political turmoil he had unleashed.In the 2004 interview, Mr. Xi described his years in Liangjiahe with deep affection for its people and their homes dug into the hillsides. Getting used to the fleas and rough beds, unvarying food, and hard farm work also made him grow up, he said.“To start with, I was a square peg in a round hole,” Mr. Xi said in the interview. “Just after I first arrived, I saw our cave home on a hillside, with the twinkling kerosene lamps, and I said to my classmates, ‘Does it feel like to you that this is like cave men?’ ” he recalled. “But later we lived in this environment for seven years.”