
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
FEB. 12, 2015
Two Saudi women detained since early December for challenging the conservative kingdom’s ban on female drivers announced on Thursday that they had been released after 73 days.Loujain al-Hathloul and Maysaa al-Amoudi, who both have valid driver’s licenses from the United Arab Emirates, posted messages on social networks after news of their release was reported by The Wall Street Journal.Ms. Hathloul, who had documented her effort to drive into Saudi Arabia from the United Arab Emirates on Facebook and YouTube in late November, confirmed late Thursday to her 232,000 Twitter followers that she was free.
            السلام عليكم يا جماعة الخير ✋        Earlier on Thursday, Ms. Amoudi, a television journalist who had moved to Dubai in part so she could drive, updated her Instagram account for the first time since she was arrested along with Ms. Hathloul on Dec. 1 at a border crossing between Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. She posted a drawing celebrating her freedom along with a caption giving thanks to God.AdvertisementActivists behind the latest campaign to challenge the driving ban, the only prohibition of its kind in the world, wrote on Twitter that it was unclear if the case against the two women had been closed or if they still might face trial.
#الافراج_عن_لجين_الهذلول
@LoujainHathloul
#الافراج_عن_ميساء_العمودي
@maysaaX
ولا أخبار مؤكدة حتى الآن حيال انهاء القضية أو استمرارها        Supporters of the women argued in an open letter pleading for their release that they had been tricked into driving into Saudi Arabia by the authorities at the border who directed them into Saudi territory.AdvertisementMs. Hathloul’s husband, Fahad Albutairi, a well-known comedian, also shared the news with his 1.6 million fans on Twitter.
            اللهم لك الحمد حتى ترضى، ولك الحمد إذا رضيت، ولك الحمد بعد الرضا. اللهم أشغل الحاقدين بأنفسهم. #الافراج_عن_لجين_الهذلول #لجين_ميساء In late 2013, Mr. Albutairi was one of a group of young Saudi comics who voiced their support for the campaign against the driving ban in a satirical music video, “No Woman, No Drive.” That popular video mocked one of the excuses for the ban offered by religious conservatives, that driving could somehow damage ovaries.While there is no law against woman driving in the kingdom, the traditional ban — related to a strict system of behavior that restricts women from acting without the guidance and approval of a male guardian — is enforced by the police.Before the women were freed on Thursday, Faisal J. Abbas, the editor in chief of the Saudi-owned Al Arabiya English satellite channel, called a Saudi historian who recently defended the driving ban “a clown.”The historian, Saleh al-Sadoon, claimed in a recent interview on another Saudi channel that the ban protected women from being raped if their cars break down.When a female journalist pointed out that women drive in the United States, Europe and other Arab countries, Mr. Sadoon replied, “They don’t care if they are raped on a roadside, but we do,” according to a translation from the Middle East Media Research Institute, or Memri, an organization that draws attention to bizarre or embarrassing statements on Arab-language stations.The interview then took an even more bizarre turn when Mr. Sadoon went on to suggest that the best way to ensure that women would not be raped instead by their hired male drivers would be to “bring in female foreign chauffeurs to drive our wives.” As Mr. Abbas noted, the interviewer finally “couldn’t prevent herself from laughing” at the idea of solving the problems created by barring Saudi women from driving by importing other women to drive them.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »