By NICOLA CLARKFEB. 12, 2015
PARIS —  President François Hollande of France on Thursday announced the sale of nearly $6 billion worth of military hardware to Egypt, including two dozen Rafale fighter jets and a naval frigate.The contract represents the first foreign sale of the Rafale for its manufacturer, Dassault Aviation, which has been under intense pressure to find export customers for the warplane as France scales back its orders as part of government spending cuts.“The Egyptian authorities have just informed me today of their intention to acquire 24 Rafale combat planes and a multimission frigate, along with associated equipment,” Mr. Hollande said in a statement, adding that it would augment Egypt’s security and help serve regional stability.The weapons were dealt amid growing concerns across North Africa that instability and the rise of jihadist groups in Libya could spread to neighboring countries. Relations between France and the government of Egypt’s military-backed president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, have improved in recent years since the initial turmoil that accompanied the overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak in 2011.AdvertisementMr. Hollande said the contract would be signed in Cairo on Monday by Mr. Sisi and France’s defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian.AdvertisementA spokesman for Dassault confirmed the deal but declined to provide further details. The French Defense Ministry valued the combined weapons sale at roughly 5.2 billion euros, or more than $5.9 billion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Rafale has been in service with the French military since 2004, but Dassault had struggled to finalize deals to export the plane.The company won a critical victory in early 2012 when India selected it as the preferred bidder to supply a $10 billion order of 126 planes, beating out Eurofighter, a European consortium, as well as its American rivals Boeing and Lockheed Martin. But talks to complete that deal have stalled over questions about the plane’s joint development and the transfer of sensitive technologies.Dassault is also in negotiations to sell the fighter to prospective customers including Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait.Dassault’s Rafale sales had been dependent on the French military, which has ordered about 200 of the fighters and has received more than half of them. But in 2013, Mr. Hollande slashed his government’s commitment to the Rafale, capping France’s total projected fleet at 225, down from 286, and slowing the pace of delivery to around five planes a year, from 11 previously.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Egypt to Purchase Fighter Jets and a Warship From France.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.