By SUHASINI RAJ and NIDA NAJARFEB. 12, 2015
NEW DELHI —  Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India publicly distanced himself on Thursday from a gesture of idolatry from his followers, a group of whom recently attempted to inaugurate a temple in his honor in the western state of Gujarat.He told his more than 10 million Twitter followers on Thursday morning that he was “appalled” by the gesture, calling it “shocking,” and “against India’s great traditions.”“Building such temples is not what our culture teaches us,” he continued. “Personally, it made me very sad. Would urge those doing it not to do it.”The temple in question was constructed eight years ago in a village in the district of Rajkot, according to Shankar Bhai Manu Bhai Patel, a 40-year-old laborer who also works as the temple priest. Originally, it had been dedicated to Bharat Mata, or Mother India. Years later, Modi supporters decided to erect a bust of Mr. Modi in the temple, the first step in making it a shrine to him.AdvertisementIt took four years to collect the 165,000 rupees, or over $2,600, to construct the bust of Mr. Modi, said one of the temple donors, Ramesh Undhad, in an interview with ANI, an Indian news channel, on Wednesday. The formal inauguration of the “Modi temple” was to take place on Sunday, but after news of Mr. Modi’s condemnation spread, Mr. Patel said, those plans were called off.Advertisement“We immediately stopped all the work to convert this into a temple for him,” Mr. Patel said in a phone interview, referring to Mr. Modi as bhai, or brother, a sign of respect. “Narendra bhai Modi is god for me and us here and if the god himself is angry, then what good is a temple?”A district magistrate in Rajkot, A.B. Gor, said in a telephone interview that the temple was unauthorized construction built on government land, and that the authorities had gone there Thursday morning to remove it. When they arrived, temple organizers had already removed the bust, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In the semiopen temple, the bust had sat on a square platform in the sanctum sanctorum, sheltered by a roof made of locally found bamboo sticks and metal. Hindus make offerings of flowers and sweets at such temples, accompanied by chants during morning and evening prayers.India has a history of constructing temples in honor of figures not strictly divine: Last year, local media reported that an Indian National Congress party loyalist began construction in southern India of a temple devoted to the party president, Sonia Gandhi, complete with a bronze statue. Temples have been dedicated to local film stars and cricket heroes. Another temple was converted to honor Mr. Modi last year in the Kaushambi district of Uttar Pradesh State, according to local media reports.Mr. Modi, who soared to power after parliamentary elections last May, has a widespread appeal that was especially evident during the election campaign. After his victory, on a visit to New York in September, he addressed a crowd of 19,000, many chanting his name in unison, in Madison Square Garden.But Mr. Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party was trounced in the New Delhi assembly elections on Tuesday, winning just three of 70 seats, a reflection, some analysts said, of the first signs of dissatisfaction with a party that has yet to deliver on the economic promises of the campaign.Mr. Patel said he first became a fan of Mr. Modi 12 years ago, when the prime minister became the chief minister of Gujarat. He said 50 or 60 people gathered in the temple every evening, chanting prayers to Mr. Modi, which he called “NaMo sutras.” Mr. Undhad, the temple donor, said people visited the temple morning and evening, traveling from neighboring villages.“The grief that I and all of us are feeling, is fathomless,” said Mr. Patel. “I am drowned in a sea of grief.”A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shrine to Modi? No Thanks, India’s Premier Says.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.