AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — An Egyptian court on Thursday ordered the release of two journalists jailed for more than a year on charges of broadcasting false news in a conspiracy with the Muslim Brotherhood.The release followed the publication this week of a previously undisclosed opinion by Egypt’s highest appeals court condemning the journalists’ conviction as baseless when it ordered a retrial at the beginning of this year. The release also comes at a time when the Egyptian government appears to be trying to allay some of the international criticism it has received over a series of harsh and hasty criminal convictions issued during a crackdown on dissent after the military takeover in July 2013.Both journalists, Mohamed Fadel Fahmy and Baher Mohamed, were working for an English-language affiliate of the Qatar-owned broadcaster Al Jazeera when they were arrested at the end of 2013. Many analysts here, including the defendants, saw the case as part of a diplomatic standoff between Egypt’s new military-backed government and Qatar, which supported the ousted President Mohamed Morsi, a Brotherhood leader. A partial thaw in relations between the two states may have contributed to the release.After hearing brief statements on Thursday, the judge ordered Mr. Fahmy, who is a dual citizen of Egypt and Canada, released on bail of $33,000, apparently because the court believed his Canadian citizenship increased the risk he might flee; Mr. Mohamed and a group of Islamist student protesters tried in the same case are all Egyptian and had only to provide their addresses.A third journalist who was arrested with Mr. Fahmy and Mr. Mohamed, Peter Greste, an Australian, was released about two weeks ago under a presidential decree allowing the deportation of foreigners convicted of crimes here.All three were accused of broadcasting false reports of unrest in Egypt as part of a conspiracy with the Muslim Brotherhood to destabilize Egypt. But prosecutors never released any evidence of either collaboration with the Brotherhood or of inaccurate reporting.After Mr. Greste was deported, Egyptian officials speaking on the condition of anonymity said that Mr. Fahmy would soon be released. Mr. Fahmy said in court on Thursday that he renounced his Egyptian citizenship because the authorities had told him it was a condition of his deportation.A senior Egyptian official had told him “the state wants to close the case, which has become an embarrassment,” Mr. Fahmy told the three-judge panel, adding that another senior official had assured him “citizenship is not a piece of paper, but it is in the heart.” Turning to the packed courtroom, he unfurled an Egyptian flag.It was not clear why the Egyptian authorities revised their plans to deport him, but they may have come to expect his release on bail instead.Mohamed Hussein, a lawyer for Mr. Mohamed, told the judges that the Egyptian journalists deserved equal treatment with Mr. Greste, whose Australian citizenship had already won him release.“If a stranger to this country has been released, one who is of this country should be released as well,” Mr. Hussein said.“Based on the evidence presented in this case,” he added, “all of the journalists present right now in this courtroom could be put in prison.”As the defendants were led out of the metal cage that Egyptian courts customarily use to hold the accused, the families and friends of the defendants embraced.“I am going home immediately to tell the children, ‘Dad is coming home, and he will bring you all sorts of presents,’ ” said Jehan Rashed, Mr. Mohamed’s wife.He has yet to meet his youngest son, Haroun, who was born last August while Mr. Mohamed was imprisoned.“First thing I will do is go to Hazem and Fairouz and say Daddy is coming tomorrow and we must go and buy new clothes and nice things,” Ms. Rashed said, breaking into tears as she referred to the couple’s older children. “I’ve spent a year in terrible sadness.”The Islamist student protesters who were tried on charges that they were part of the scheme involving the journalists left chanting, “Down, down with military rule.”At least nine other Egyptian journalists remain in prison, according to a recent count by the Committee to Protect Journalists, a nonprofit group based in New York. Egyptian rights groups say they count dozens more.The Egyptian government has made it clear that it feels stung by the international criticism of the harsh verdicts handed down in a long series of politicized cases.As the journalists’ hearing was getting underway on Thursday, the Egyptian Foreign Ministry sent out an unusual appeal imploring international correspondents to report the news that an appeals court had ordered the retrial of 36 people, including the top spiritual leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, who were sentenced to death last year after a hurried mass trial for the sacking of a police station. It was one of several mass death sentences that have been issued here, some involving far larger numbers.“In the interest of fairness and journalistic professionalism, all of the newspapers and agencies that published screaming headlines regarding the initial verdicts are also obligated to publish headlines of their nullification,” the Foreign Ministry wrote in its appeal, arguing that “failure to do so would raise serious questions regarding the impartiality and professionalism of these media entities.”Merna Thomas contributed reporting.videoAdvertisement