By AUSTIN RAMZYFEB. 12, 2015
HONG KONG — After a prison hostage standoff in Taiwan that ended early Thursday with the suicides of six inmates, President Ma Ying-jeou condemned the hostage taking and called for a strengthening of prison oversight.“Compatriots have been shocked by the Kaohsiung Prison incident, which has revealed gaps in prison management,” Mr. Ma said in a written statement. He ordered a full review of the standoff at the penitentiary in southern Taiwan, with corrective measures to be put in place within a week.The six inmates shot themselves early Thursday, while two prison staff members were released unharmed after being held for 14 hours, said Chen Ming-tang, a vice minister in the Justice Ministry.Cheng Li-te, a convicted murderer with ties to the Bamboo Union crime ring, led the hostage taking, according to the Justice Ministry, which said that the five other prisoners were all serving lengthy terms for crimes ranging from robbery to drug trafficking.AdvertisementThe six inmates, who worked together in a prison shop, smuggled scissors into an infirmary on Wednesday, then stabbed two officers and took them hostage, the Justice Ministry said. They then used the officers’ keys to move through the prison, breaking into an armory and taking guns and ammunition.AdvertisementThe prison warden, Chen Shih-chih, and head guard, Wang Shih-tsang, then changed places with the two officers who had been taken hostage, Mr. Chen said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Taiwan news outlets broadcast a series of grievances from the men about their trials and the conditions inside the prison. The six men also complained that former President Chen Shui-bian, who was convicted of embezzlement and taking bribes in 2009, had been released on medical parole in January, which they saw as unfairly lenient.Hundreds of armed police officers surrounded the prison throughout the night. The two sides exchanged gunfire at two points as the hostage takers apparently sought to escape and then tried to ward off surrounding officers, according to Taiwan's Central News Agency.Judicial officials said they negotiated with the prisoners through the evening on Wednesday and also asked family members to confer with them. Chang An-lo, who has long had ties with the Bamboo Union and who served a decade in prison in the United States on drug charges, also came to the prison and offered to speak with the men.But early Thursday, the men turned their guns on themselves. Four shot themselves at about 5:10 a.m., while the two others took their lives at 5:30 a.m., said Mr. Chen, the Justice Ministry official.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Taiwan: President Urges Changes After Prison Standoff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.