By CHOE SANG-HUNFEB. 12, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  A former Korean Air vice president who ordered a plane back to its gate in a fit of anger over how she had been served macadamia nuts was convicted Thursday of violating aviation safety law and sentenced to a year in prison.The executive, Cho Hyun-ah, whose father is the airline’s chairman, became an object of international ridicule after the Dec. 5 episode, in which she forced a Korean Air plane taxiing at Kennedy International Airport in New York to return to the gate so the chief steward could be removed. She was said to have been angry that a first-class flight attendant had served the nuts without first asking her, then in an unopened package rather than on a plate.A district court in Seoul ruled Thursday that Ms. Cho had illegally forced the flight to change its route by ordering it back to the gate. Her conduct subjected the passengers to potential danger, the court said.“She forced the plane to turn around as if it were her own private plane,” Judge Oh Seong-u said in announcing the sentence.AdvertisementMs. Cho, who has been in custody throughout her trial, sat upright during most of the sentencing hearing, wearing a green jail uniform. But when the judge read the letter of repentance she had submitted to the court seeking leniency, she lowered her head and wiped away tears, her shoulders shaking with sobs.AdvertisementIn the letter, Ms. Cho, one of South Korea’s wealthiest women, described how she was adjusting to life in jail, where she was issued the bare minimum of necessities. She said she was humbled by the generosity of fellow inmates who shared lotion, shampoo and other toiletries with her.“I know my faults and I’m very sorry,” Ms. Cho said in her letter.But the judge said her tantrum, widely covered by international news media, damaged the “national image” of South Korea.“It is doubtful that the way the nuts were served was so wrong,” he said, adding that her verbal and physical assaults on crew members had violated their “human dignity.” He also questioned the sincerity of Ms. Cho’s expressions of remorse.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Prosecutors had asked that Ms. Cho be sentenced to three years.What became known as the “nut rage” episode set off outrage in South Korea, where many harbor deep misgivings about the perceived arrogance of the families who control the country’s major conglomerates, known as chaebol. The scandal escalated as prosecutors charged that Korean Air management had tried to silence the flight’s crew to protect Ms. Cho. Her father, Cho Yang-ho, apologized for her conduct and removed her as vice president of the airline.The court also sentenced a Korean Air executive, Yeo Un-jin, to eight months in prison on Thursday for pressuring crew members on the December flight to lie to government investigators and delete emails describing the episode. In their emails, crew members had accused Ms. Cho of using abusive language and throwing documents at one of the flight attendants, prosecutors said.Mr. Yeo also blamed the crew for the episode in order to “hide the wrongdoings of management,” the court said in a statement.A Transport Ministry official, Kim Un-seob, was sentenced to six months in prison for illegally briefing Mr. Yeo on what were supposed to be confidential details of an official inquiry into the episode. The sentence was suspended.Earlier this month, Park Chang-jin, the steward who was removed from the plane, said Ms. Cho had forced him and the junior attendant to apologize on their knees, “like slaves in a medieval era.”Korean Air had no immediate comment on the court’s rulings.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Instant of Nut-Fueled Rage Draws a Year in Korean Jail.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.