AdvertisementSupported byBy David M. HerszenhornMOSCOW — In some places, say New York, the panic over snow often begins as soon as there is a forecast for it. In Russia, where it is a bit more familiar, there is typically no fear, unless the snow on the ground happens to be blue, as it was in Chelyabinsk this week, or orange, as it was earlier this month in Saratov on the Volga River.In Chelyabinsk, a city on the eastern side of Ural Mountains and known as the gateway to Siberia, the authorities were trying to reassure residents that there was no cause for alarm from the blue snow. However, some people who walked through it complained of sore throats and said they had also detected a sweet taste in their mouths.It is perhaps understandable that people in Chelyabinsk, which was hit by a meteor in 2013, are a bit apprehensive about strange stuff falling from the sky. The meteor arrived with blinding light, and the accompanying shock wave blew out windows.“This snow melts inside, so we have blue water in all the offices around here,” said a woman interviewed on the local news site Telefakt. “We once had orange snow, but there hadn’t been blue before.”As it turned out, Viteks, a nearby food products manufacturer, had an innocuous explanation: powdered dye intended to color Easter eggs.“The bag with food coloring wasn’t leakproof,” Olga Gribova, a company spokeswoman, said in a telephone interview. “While the package was being opened, it spilled and got into the ventilation system.” The powder swirled in the air outside, and upon landing turned the snow a shade of baby blue.The color deepened, Ms. Gribova said, as the temperature rose — above freezing in recent days in a city where it ranges from a low of 3 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 16 Celsius) to a high of about 19 (minus 7 Celsius) this time of year.“It has been warm in Chelyabinsk, so the snow started to melt and the color turned very bright,” she said.About 10 days before the blue snow in Chelyabinsk, the city of Saratov experienced a storm of orange snow, which turns out to be a bit more common than blue snow, according to weather scientists.As Mikhail Boltukhin, the head of the regional meteorological service, explained to the Lenta.ru news site, a cyclone passing over the Western Sahara had carried sand across the Crimean peninsula and over southern Russia.“The air mass has come to us from North Africa,” Mr. Boltukhin told the site. “Ordinary sand gives such an unusual color.“There is absolutely nothing to be afraid of,” he added. “These weren’t rocks falling down.”In Russia, however, strange-colored snow is not always harmless. The city of Omsk, in southwestern Siberia, has experienced black snow at least twice, apparently caused by pollution from a local power plant. It once “snowed” in the summer in Omsk, in August 2012, when aluminosilicate dust was released from an oil refinery.In 2008, three northern regions of Russia experienced yellow snow, also apparently caused by sand, dust and other particles carried by wind from the Mediterranean. At the time, some residents of Arkhangelsk had worried that the yellow particles had come from a new space center, the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, which was under construction in a restricted area nearby.Alexandra Odynova contributed reporting.Advertisement