By ANDREW ROTHFEB. 13, 2015
MOSCOW —  Russian officials on Friday denied that there was any deal in the works to free the Ukrainian helicopter pilot Nadiya V. Savchenko from a Moscow prison, casting doubt on reports that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine had agreed on her release during peace talks this week.Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, said Friday that Ms. Savchenko was not covered by a clause in the agreements negotiated in Minsk, Belarus, requiring the release of all war prisoners, and that she might stand trial in Russia.“Savchenko is not a hostage,” Mr. Peskov said. “She is not illegally detained.”In Washington, the State Department insisted that Ms. Savchenko’s release was provided for in the Minsk agreement. In the American view, the Kremlin’s refusal to free her would be a breach of the accord.“We’ve called for Nadiya Savchenko’s release since she was first illegally spirited across the border and put on trial in Moscow,” said Jen Psaki, the State Department spokeswoman. “She’s a hostage of the Russian government, and she must be released immediately.”AdvertisementMs. Savchenko’s case has become a cause célèbre in Kiev, and in September she was elected to Ukraine’s Parliament.AdvertisementIn July, she mysteriously appeared in the custody of the Russian authorities, who accused her of directing an artillery strike that killed two Russian journalists. Ms. Savchenko denied the charges, saying she had been kidnapped in Ukraine by separatists before the journalists were killed and then handed over to the Russian police.In Minsk, the Belarussian capital, on Thursday, Mr. Poroshenko announced that as part of the cease-fire negotiations, Mr. Putin had agreed to free Ms. Savchenko. But the details of her release, including when and where, were left vague.“I was informed that it will be done shortly after the medical expertise and preliminary investigation,” Mr. Poroshenko said in a statement. “I insisted that it should be done immediately.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.An official briefed on the talks questioned whether Mr. Putin had committed to a deal. When Mr. Poroshenko insisted on Ms. Savchenko’s release, Mr. Putin said that her case was under Russian jurisdiction. Mr. Peskov gave a similar account of the negotiations, and said Mr. Putin had made no agreement.Ms. Savchenko’s lawyers on Friday said that Ms. Savchenko’s legal status had not changed since the negotiations. But there were informal signals that attitudes in Russia, where the state news media have vilified her, were shifting.Ilya Novikov, one of Ms. Savchenko’s lawyers, said Ms. Savchenko had been visited by three delegations of rights defenders on Friday, including Ella Pamfilova, Russia’s human rights ombudsman. “Three delegations in one day?” Mr. Novikov said. “It is incredibly rare.”Officially, the delegations were sent to check on Ms. Savchenko’s health. She has been on a hunger strike for more than two months and has lost more than 35 pounds, Mr. Novikov said.But in at least one case, he said, delegates urged Ms. Savchenko to write to Mr. Putin requesting a pardon.She declined, Mr. Novikov said.David M. Herszenhorn contributed reporting from Moscow, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington.A version of this article appears in print on February 14, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Ukraine Says Putin Agreed to Free Pilot; He Denies It.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.