By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 14, 2015
TORONTO —  The Canadian police foiled a plot by three suspects who were planning to go to a mall in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Valentine’s Day and kill as many people as they could before committing suicide, the police said Saturday.One of the suspects fatally shot himself on Friday as the police moved in to arrest him, and an American suspect confessed to the plot on Friday when she was arrested at the Halifax airport, a senior police official said.The police and Justice Minister Peter MacKay said the plot was not related to terrorism.“This appeared to be a group of murderous misfits” who were “prepared to wreak havoc and mayhem on our community,” Mr. MacKay said Saturday. “The attack does not appear to have been culturally motivated, therefore not linked to terrorism.”The Royal Canadian Mounted Police said that two friends, Lindsay Kantha Souvannarath, 23, of Geneva, Ill., and Randall Steven Shepherd, 20, of Nova Scotia, had been charged with conspiracy to commit murder.AdvertisementBrian Brennan, the commander of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in Nova Scotia, said the suspects planned to attack at the Halifax Shopping Center on Saturday.AdvertisementMr. Brennan told reporters that the police had found three long-barreled rifles in the home of a third suspect, a 19-year-old who died before he could be arrested. Mr. Brennan did not elaborate on how the suspect had died.But a senior police official told The Associated Press that the suspect shot himself early Friday after the police surrounded his home in a Halifax suburb.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While surrounding the house, the police saw two people leave, the official said. After determining that they were the suspect’s parents, the police pulled them over on a traffic check, the official said. They then called the suspect at his home.The suspect told the police that he did not have any guns, but he shot himself as he was on his way out of the house, the official said.Ms. Souvannarath was arrested as she arrived from Chicago at the Halifax airport, the official said. In addition to confessing, she had prepared a number of pronouncements to be posted on Twitter after her death, the official added.The official said the police worked with Canadian border officials to find the suspect on her flight. Mr. Shepard was also arrested Friday at the airport, where he had gone to meet his friend, Mr. Brennan said.The suspects used a chat stream, were apparently obsessed with death and had many photographs of mass killings, said the police official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly.The two surviving suspects are scheduled to appear in court Tuesday.The police moved to disrupt the plot after receiving information from the public on a Crime Stoppers tip line. They said that they first received information on Thursday, warning about a potentially significant weapons-related threat.A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Canadian Police Say They Foiled a Plot by 3 Suspects to Kill People at a Halifax Mall.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.