
OCT. 13, 2015

Related Article
Fifteen months after 298 people were killed when Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 was shot down by a missile over Ukraine, conflicting reports by Dutch and Russian investigators were released on Tuesday outlining just what happened and who is to blame. Here’s what we know:The plane was brought down by a particular type of Russian-made surface-to-air missile, fired by an SA-11 or Buk missile system and fitted with a 9N314M warhead. The warhead detonated just outside the cockpit on the left side of the aircraft, blasting it with projectiles and ripping the plane open. The manufacturer has acknowledged that its missile was used.That the plane could have been shot down by warplanes (as Russia initially claimed), or was destroyed by some mechanical failure, or by explosives planted on board, or by some other type of missile. Where the missile was fired, and therefore who fired it. The Dutch report said the evidence pointed to an area of about 125 square miles from which the missile was probably fired. Most of that area was reported at the time to be under rebel control, including the village of Snizhne, where an Associated Press reporter saw a Buk missile system on the day the aircraft was shot down. The Russians, in a report compiled by Almaz-Antey, the missile’s manufacturer, maintain that the missile was not fired from around Snizhne, but rather from the area of Zaroshenskea, a village they said was government-held at the time.The Russians also say that their tests led found a different damage pattern than the one described in the Dutch report, casting doubt on some conclusions the Dutch report reached. Russia and Ukraine are both known to have possessed and deployed the identified types of missile and warhead, which date from Soviet times. The Russians say they no longer use them.The Dutch do not decisively blame the rebels for the attack. And they fault the Ukrainian government for failing to close the airspace over the battle zone to civil aviation.There was sufficient reason to close the airspace as a precaution, but “the Ukrainian authorities failed to do so,” said Tjibbe Joustra, chairman of the Dutch Safety Board.Advertisement