AdvertisementSupported byYeongam JournalBy Choe Sang-HunYEONGAM, South Korea — Eight years ago, the South Korean province of South Jeolla, which includes this sleepy coastal county, cleared 1,000 acres of rice paddies and embarked on a $375 million experiment: building a Formula One track.In 2010, Yeongam hosted the first Korean Grand Prix. New hotels went up to accommodate what local officials hoped would be an unprecedented wave of foreign tourists. The screams of racing machines came to this flat, quiet land, which was more accustomed to the trundle of gigantic ship components on their way to the Hyundai shipyard.But only three more Grand Prix races followed, and today the quiet has returned. The biggest events now seen at the 3.5-mile Korea International Circuit, with its capacity for 120,000 spectators, are amateur races that draw modest crowds.“We started with a big dream of making lots of money,” said Park Bong-soon, a South Jeolla Province official whose title until recently was director of the Formula One support center, even though there is no longer a Formula One race to support. “Instead, we ended up with a spectacular flop.”Such failures are far from unheard-of in Formula One. The Turkish Grand Prix lasted from 2005 to 2011, and India’s third and last was in 2013. Low attendance in Turkey and a tax dispute in India were blamed for the early demises.But many in South Korea say the Yeongam circuit, which was funded mostly with public money, was ill-conceived from the start. As early as 2007, Parliament’s budget office and a government research institute warned that South Jeolla’s revenue forecasts for the project were exaggerated. In January, a civic group filed suit against former provincial officials over the track, asking prosecutors to bring criminal charges for breach of trust.“The Formula One race here was a nest of problems, a project that should never have been born,” said the group, whose English name is Good Society for Humans, accusing the officials of squandering tax revenue to pursue a “political showpiece.” The officials have denied such accusations.The Korean Grand Prix’s main problem, provincial officials like Mr. Park now say, was that most South Koreans were simply unfamiliar with Formula One — and, indeed, with auto racing in general. Some took “F1” to be a variant of K-1, a mixed-martial-arts competition. In Seoul, the capital, road racing is usually mentioned in association with so-called pokjujok, literally “tribes of violent speed” — fast-food delivery drivers on souped-up motorcycles who terrorize late-night drivers.South Jeolla officials had envisioned the Grand Prix as a multimillion-dollar advertising platform for Korean corporations like Samsung and Hyundai, but given the sport’s obscurity in the country, no major sponsors were interested.And ticket sales were disappointing — which perhaps should have been no surprise, given the track’s location in the remote southwest. (Both the location and the dearth of South Korean racing fans were cited by Parliament in its early warnings about the project.) Organizers wound up cutting ticket prices substantially, and they were accused of exaggerating turnout and of letting people into the races at no charge.By 2013, South Jeolla was deep in debt and unable to come up with the annual fees required by Formula One. The fees were reduced by about 40 percent that year, to $27 million (after which a banner went up in Yeongam thanking Bernie Ecclestone, the Formula One chief).But no more discounts were forthcoming, and that year’s Grand Prix was the last. In the fall, South Korea was mysteriously included on Formula One’s calendar for 2015, with no site specified for the race, prompting speculation that it would move to the Seoul area. But it was dropped from the calendar in January, with no explanation given. South Korean officials say there is no realistic prospect that the Grand Prix will return soon.Still, some say that the Formula One venture should not be seen as a complete failure. It left behind a legacy, they say: the seeds of a South Korean racing scene.“You see the car-racing mind-set suddenly picked up in Korea in the past two years,” said Michel Puchercos, 57, a French businessman in Seoul who has been competing in local amateur races for three years. “You see the number of racing cars increasing.”Boosters maintain that Formula One will prove to have done for South Korean racing what Se Ri Pak did for golf and Kim Yu-na did for figure skating. After those women became the first South Koreans to win fame in their sports, parents here began taking their children to golf ranges and, after Ms. Kim’s Olympic gold in 2010, to ice rinks. Today, the top ranks of women’s golf are studded with Korean names, the “Se Ri kids” inspired by Ms. Pak, and interest in skating lessons has soared here.Formula One has no Korean driver to inspire the masses, but the sport’s small following in South Korea does seem to be growing. Since 2010, the number of drivers licensed to use the Korea International Circuit — mostly amateur racers wanting to use a Formula One-quality track — has risen by 30 percent annually, to 3,000. Hundreds of car clubs have formed online, most of them since 2012, when the country eased restrictions on the modifications that can be made to automobiles (previously, all an owner could legally do was change the seats or the stereo system).Two new racetracks have opened near Seoul since 2010, and another one farther south of the capital has expanded. Songdo, a “new city” built on reclaimed land west of Seoul, hosted races on its streets in July and plans to do it again this year. And Hyundai, which declined to sponsor Formula One, has begun supporting some domestic races, seeing it as a low-cost investment that could pay off if interest in the sport keeps growing.“Ten years ago, when I first took to car racing, there was no track, and people like me contented ourselves with speeding dangerously on twisted country roads,” said Shim Woo-won, 35, an amateur racer who works for an electronics company. “What we see here is the birth of a car-racing culture in South Korea.”In the meantime, the Korea International Circuit hosts domestic races — and, at times, motorcycle, bicycle and even roller-skating competitions.“Right now, we may suffer so much criticism for our F1 project,” said Mr. Park, the South Jeolla official. “But in 10 to 20 years, people will see this place as a national landmark, a mecca of South Korean auto racing.”Brad Spurgeon contributed reporting from Paris.Advertisement