AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael ForsytheHONG KONG — For the better part of the last 60 years, Bishop Cosma Shi Enxiang was imprisoned in Chinese jails and labor camps. For the last 14, he was held without charge in a secret location.His offense: refusing to renounce his loyalty to the Roman Catholic Church, which ordained him in 1947.Now, as unconfirmed reports of his death have emerged, Bishop Shi, who was to turn 94 this month, may face the gravest indignity of all. No announcement of his passing. No body for his family members to bury. No urn with his ashes.The Chinese government has been so secretive about Bishop Shi’s detention that there is no certainty that he is dead.The Catholic news agency UCANews reported the bishop’s death on Feb. 2, citing his great-niece Shi Chunyan, who said the family had been informed by a local official. But a Hong Kong-based reporter for the agency, Lucia Cheung, said that after family members approached the local authorities to recover the bishop’s remains, they were told that the official who had told them he was dead had been drunk, or misinformed.“The public has a right to know what’s going on,” said Joseph Kung, who runs the Cardinal Kung Foundation in Stamford, Conn., named after an uncle, Ignatius Kung Pin-mei, the late bishop of Shanghai. “I am not sure whether he is alive or dead.”Bishop Shi is, or was, one of the last of a rare breed — Catholic bishops appointed by the Vatican decades ago who refused to cooperate with the state-sponsored Catholic Church, meant to supplant the church loyal to the pope.Only a handful are still living, many well into their 80s or 90s. At least one other is in  custody, and two are under close government surveillance. Their fate is one of the obstacles preventing China and the Vatican from re-establishing a centuries-old relationship that was severed with the Communist victory in 1949.“The Chinese government thinks the forced disappearances would scare people and stabilize the society, but this action will only lead to a more unstable and uncivilized society,” the Hong Kong diocese, which falls under the Vatican, not Beijing, said in an open  letter on Wednesday to the Chinese government, appealing for information about Bishop Shi.Just as Beijing seeks to control the selection of Tibetan Buddhist leaders, such as the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama, so, too, does it insist that the government-controlled church appoint Catholic bishops. That is unacceptable to the Vatican.However, in recent years, most of the bishops appointed by the official church were also, by tacit agreement, approved by the pope.But in the past five years, at least four bishops have been appointed without the Vatican’s approval, leading at least two to be excommunicated, raising tensions between the Chinese government and the Vatican.Starting shortly after the 1949 Communist victory, many Catholic clergymen, including high-ranking church officials such as Bishop Kung, were jailed.Father Shi — he did not become a bishop until the 1980s — first went to jail in 1954, according to a biography posted online by a Catholic priest in Hebei, the Rev. Peng Jiandao.For the next quarter-century, he was shuffled from one jail to another in northern China. During the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, he was sent to labor camps in the coal mines of Shanxi Province. In 1979 he was transferred to a jail in his hometown, Baoding, where the Roman Catholic Church had made deep inroads before 1949.He was in and out of jail in the 1980s and 1990s. On April 13, 2001, at the age of 80, he was taken into custody at his niece’s home in Beijing and held without being charged. Ms. Cheung, the journalist, said his relatives had no contact with him during the subsequent 14 years.A person answering the phone at the religious affairs bureau of Hebei Province, where Bishop Shi oversaw Catholics in a rural county, would not give his name and said he had no idea whether the bishop had died, only that he had “disappeared for many years.”Another official with the bureau’s Catholic Office said over the phone that he had only “heard of Bishop Shi” but did not know anything else. “In recent years, it’s impossible for us to just arrest a person based on his Catholic belief,” he added, refusing to give his name. “If a person is imprisoned, he must have broken some laws.”Ms. Cheung said Bishop Shi’s family had heard rumors as long as three years ago that he had died. “They are quite prepared to receive the news, but they at least want to get the remains back,” she said.The family could not be reached for comment.Despite the continued detentions of the bishops, the boundary between the official Chinese church and the Vatican has blurred significantly in recent years.“You can be a perfectly good loyal Catholic, loyal to the Vatican and in the official church,” said Henrietta Harrison, a professor of modern Chinese history at Oxford University who studies Catholicism in China. “The Catholic Church is a global institution. They’re all part of it.”Yet deep tensions remain over the appointment of bishops. Those tensions burst into the open in July 2012, when Thaddeus Ma Daqin, who had just been appointed bishop of Shanghai, announced at his consecration that he was resigning from the official church, the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association. He was then stripped of his title and spent 20 months in a seminary outside of Shanghai and was required to take Communist indoctrination classes, Reuters reported last year.The other bishop still in detention is Su Zhimin, who is from Baoding. He has been detained without charge since 1997.At least two other bishops who refused to join the Chinese church, Julius Jia Zhiguo in Hebei and Joseph Wei Jingyi in Heilongjiang Province, live under strict government surveillance, Mr. Kung said.The diocese of Hong Kong is appealing to Beijing to free Bishop Su and to release Bishop Shi’s body for burial if he has died.On Saturday, the diocese plans a protest march to the Chinese government’s liaison office in Hong Kong to demand that the authorities release information on their whereabouts.“Bishop Shi and Bishop Su sacrificed themselves,” the diocese said in its letter. “They’ve endured lifelong sufferings for the sake of religious freedom. We pay high respect to their great souls!”Kiki Zhao contributed research.Advertisement