Canada’s Atlantic lobsters, known for their hard shells and sweet taste, have become a coveted delicacy in China, with record quantities of the live crustaceans being flown into the country for Lunar New Year celebrations.Demand has been so great that China recently joined the United States as a top export destination for live Canadian lobsters, according to the Lobster Council of Canada. Shipments to China have almost doubled annually since 2010, and they have spiked during the Lunar New Year holiday season.Harvested in the wild from pristine waters, Canadian lobsters have become a hit among Chinese consumers whose fears of domestic seafood have created a growing market for crustaceans from countries with stricter environmental controls, like Australia and Canada.While Australian rock lobsters are also popular, and tend to be larger, they are considered by many Chinese to have tougher, saltier meat than their Canadian counterparts.With 15 days of Lunar New Year celebrations set to begin on Thursday, Canadian exporters have been working overtime to meet demand. Adding pressure is the tight supply of cargo space for air freight in the prelude to the holiday, Liu Yun, the sales director of World Link Food Distributors in Canada, said in an interview with Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency. She added that weekly exports of live lobsters to China from Canada were expected to total 100 tons a week during this year’s harvesting season, accounting for a quarter of Canada’s exports.Demand has risen even as the Chinese government has embarked on a frugality campaign targeting conspicuous consumption by government officials. The campaign has resulted in a sharp decline in China’s luxury goods market, with harsh punishments doled out to government officials caught in extravagant acts of culinary indulgence, such as a recent feast that reportedly featured an endangered giant salamander.But Canadian lobster, so far, appears set to stay on the menu. Viewed as a status symbol, live lobsters are still comparatively cheaper than delicacies such as shark’s fin. Live lobsters are available for purchase not only in markets and restaurants, but also through websites that offer home delivery.China’s huge online marketplace Taobao, which sold as many as 20,000 live Canadian lobsters in 2013 and even more last year, has been advertising two-day air delivery to consumers’ homes before the holiday. The lobsters, typically weighing around three pounds, are advertised as having “more meat, hard shells and very full bodies!”A Taobao user named Flower who bought a live lobster from the website returned to praise it after cooking it. “After my order, the lobster arrived the following day,” the user wrote. “I’m very happy, the lobster was still alive. That night, I burned the lobster while cooking it; it can really feed four people. I steamed the body, I fried the legs, and I used the shell to make rice-soup. The taste was wonderful!”