By SOMINI SENGUPTAFEB. 16, 2015
The United Nations Human Rights Council on Monday agreed to defer the release of a landmark inquiry into possible war crimes in Sri Lanka, after an intense lobbying campaign by the country’s newly elected government and what the United Nations’ top rights official described as “signals of broad cooperation” from Sri Lankan officials.The release of the report on suspected rights abuses during a quarter-century of war with the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam has been put off until September. The report’s release was originally scheduled for March.In a sense, this puts the onus on the Sri Lankan government not only to demonstrate cooperation with the United Nations inquiry, but also to show whether it can credibly mount its own investigation into possible wartime atrocities and whether it can take on criminal prosecutions of the most serious offenders.A United Nations panel of experts in 2011 found what it called credible allegations of serious human rights abuses by the previous government, including large-scale shelling of civilian areas. It also said it found credible allegations that the Tamil Tigers had used civilians as shields and killed those who tried to flee rebel-held zones.AdvertisementThe previous government had been accused of actively obstructing the United Nations inquiry, not least by barring its investigators from the country. Also, its critics pointed out, the government did not conduct a credible investigation into possible war crimes committed by its own officials as they defeated the Tamil Tigers’ notoriously brutal insurgency in 2009.AdvertisementAs a result, in 2014 the United States, Britain and European countries pushed through a resolution at the human rights council authorizing the United Nations inquiry.The new government was swept into office in January on a promise of reconciliation, and it immediately dispatched senior envoys to world capitals in an attempt to postpone the release of the investigation. Of particular concern to officials was the prospect that the United Nations report could affect domestic politics so close to parliamentary elections due to be held this spring.Under President Maithripala Sirisena, the government is taking pains to signal more openness to the United Nations, though it remains vehemently opposed to any outside inquiry into possible wartime abuses.In a letter sent on Friday, the foreign minister, Mangala Samaraweera, invited the United Nations’ high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, to visit the country, and agreed to a long pending request for a visit by the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. The government has not agreed to a visit by a panel of advisers to the United Nations inquiry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Samaraweera’s letter contained a list of steps that the government has said it is taking to promote reconciliation among the country’s majority Sinhalese and minority Tamils. Mr. Samaraweera’s letter also said that his government would undertake an investigation of its own with “technical assistance” from the United Nations rights office.Mr. al-Hussein appeared to have been sufficiently persuaded to ask for the deferral on the human rights report, which he told the rights council was based on the “signals of broad cooperation” he had received, as well as the possibility that new information would become available for the report.He did not specify what the new information might be or how it might become available. His investigators have had to collect evidence remotely until now.A senior State Department official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of diplomatic protocol, said the United States had agreed that “a temporary deferral is the best option and will allow space for the new government to demonstrate their willingness to cooperate.”The United Nations report would be the basis for the human rights council to recommend how to hold perpetrators of the most serious crimes accountable, which could include calling for a referral to the International Criminal Court.A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Grants Sri Lanka Deferral in Inquiry.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.