AdvertisementSupported byBy Taimoor Shah and Joseph GoldsteinKANDAHAR, Afghanistan — After an airstrike killed a prominent recruiter for the Islamic State in Afghanistan last week, the Afghan spy agency issued a triumphant news release announcing his death and providing a picture of a man it identified as the wanted militant, Mullah Abdul Rauf Khadim.Unfortunately, the spy agency sent news organizations a photograph of the wrong man. And not just any wrong man, but one who was struggling to lie low as he readjusted to life at home after 12 years of detention at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba: a Kandahar resident named Shawali Khan.Since the announcement, Afghan and American officials, as well as residents who knew Mullah Rauf, have reaffirmed that the militant commander was killed in the airstrike.After the photo was published by The New York Times and other news organizations, the mistake was brought to the attention of The Times by lawyers for Mr. Khan. When a reporter reached Mr. Khan for comment at his home, he confirmed that he was the man in the photo, and in person, the likeness was clear. Mr. Khan, who is in his early 50s, said it was an older picture, taken early in his time at Guantánamo Bay.When asked to comment, American military officials privately acknowledged that the Afghan government had distributed the wrong photo.The Afghan spy agency, the National Directorate of Security, initially insisted it had vetted the photo with its American counterparts before distributing it. On Monday, however, the agency released a statement apologizing to Mr. Khan and saying that it had released the wrong photo because the men looked similar and both had been at Guantánamo Bay.Though frustrated by the mix-up, which Mr. Khan thought might place him in cross hairs he was eager to avoid, he was not surprised: He already bore a grudge against Afghan and American officials for his arrest and detention at Guantánamo Bay in 2002, which he said had been brought about by false informers who wanted his store and property in Kandahar.At the time of Mr. Khan’s imprisonment, American officials accused him of being a member of the militant group Hezb-i-Islami. After being told by American officials in 2010 that he would be freed, Mr. Khan still was not able to return to Afghanistan until this past December. He said officials never explained the delay.“The Americans do not care about people’s lives,” he said. “They are a careless people. They are the bane of my existence.”Now, Mr. Khan said he feared that Afghan security forces “will pick me up and blame me for commanding ISIS, and I will spend another 12 years in custody.”Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar, and Joseph Goldstein from Kabul, Afghanistan. Azam Ahmed contributed reporting from Kabul.Advertisement