When the son of one of the richest men in China responded to a reporter’s question about what he sought in a mate, the response shouldn’t have surprised anyone. “That’s simple,” said 27-year-old Wang Sicong. “A big chest is enough.”Wang Sicong is the only child of Wang Jianlin, founder and chairman of the property conglomerate Dalian Wanda Group. As of Feb. 9, Wang Jianlin was worth $28.6 billion, according to Bloomberg, making him China’s second-richest man, and his son owns 2 percent of the company.王思聪择偶标准看胸 新华社评：不以为耻反以为个性 //t.co/XN3SuuqL0u pic.twitter.com/iXa8gr6um9— 河南郑州新闻 (@zhengzhouxinwen) February 15, 2015Wang Sicong at a Valentine’s Day charity event.The junior Mr. Wang has a reputation for crude commentary. A 2013 article by Capital Profile noted his tendency to pick fights online, attacking fellow scions of China’s business elite and sometimes referring to women by offensive anatomical references.More surprising than Mr. Wang’s comment was the critique it inspired from Xinhua, China’s state-run news agency.The official mouthpiece first called him out in a short post on Sina Weibo that criticized “certain second-generation rich” who “nakedly put money above everything” and “worship sex and violence.” It then published a lengthy commentary that expanded on the theme, saying Mr. Wang was “frivolous” and had a “Berlusconi-esque arrogance.”While physical desire is natural, the commentary argued, one shouldn’t parade it publicly. “There are some words that are true, but you can’t say them,” it said. “There are some things everyone knows, but they require covering up.” It also denounced the exposure of cleavage in the historical drama “The Empress of China” as exploitative: “This isn’t women’s liberation, it’s the male gender’s wanton consumption of the female body.”For Xinhua to take up such a feminist critique represents a new tack for the news agency. In recent years, it has become known in some circles as “Skinhua” for its racy photo galleries with English-language titles like “Russian models: pretty face as well as hot body” and “Top 10 female celebs with most pretty legs.”A search for the term Mr. Wang used for “a big chest” turns up pages of results on Xinhua. In January, for instance, one of its photo galleries attempted to answer the question, “Is it good or bad to not wear a bra in winter?”In Mr. Wang’s interview — which was done in conjunction with the auctioning of a Valentine’s Day date with Mr. Wang, to benefit an educational charity — he quickly followed up his comment by saying he only meant it as a joke.“For this sort of thing you should look to your feelings,” he said. “I don’t have any standard for choosing a spouse.”