Just what to call the next Lunar New Year has vexed English speakers, as the Chinese character can represent both sheep and goats. In his official New Year message, Hong Kong’s leader, Leung Chun-ying, opts for a little of both. The video of his statement is filled with goats of all varieties: live, stuffed, illustrated. But Mr. Leung asked residents to look to sheep, the meek creature that lives in flocks, as a guide.Mr. Leung, the city’s chief executive, told Hong Kong residents that sheep are “mild and gentle animals living peacefully in groups.”He continued:Last year was no easy ride for Hong Kong. Our society was rife with differences and conflicts. In the coming year, I hope that all people in Hong Kong will take inspiration from the sheep’s character and pull together in an accommodating manner to work for Hong Kong’s future.Happy New year #HongKong! May you all act like sheep, for the greater good! Love From #CYLeung. #umhk #occupycentral pic.twitter.com/NbYwvBRW5Q— Olivia Rosenman (@olivesophierose) February 18, 2015A Twitter post from a Hong Kong-based journalist noting Mr. Leung’s New Year message.His remarks came after a year that saw months of protests in the semi-autonomous Chinese city, including the weekslong occupation of major roadways by demonstrators angered over the narrow options for electoral change endorsed by the Chinese government.In recent weeks, some residents have protested visitors from mainland China who throng some districts to buy milk powder, jewelry and other products that are cheaper, or less likely to be tainted, than what is available at home.The remarks Wednesday by Mr. Leung — whose critics often liken him to the bane of the sheep’s existence, a wolf — triggered criticism that he was imperiously telling residents to keep their complaints to themselves.“It’s the most inappropriate remark to make when he’s being called a wolf, asking all Hong Kong people to behave like sheep so we could be eaten up by him,” said Alan Leong, leader of the Civic Party and one of the politicians who were arrested at the end of the street protests.Mr. Leong said he expected “another mobilization of Hong Kong people” when the government presents the local legislature with Beijing’s proposal for electoral change, which he said he and other pro-democracy legislators would vote against.“He should try his utmost to try to mend the very polarized divide in Hong Kong, and I don’t think he’s doing that,” Mr. Leong said of the chief executive. “I really think this man is out of his mind by suggesting we should behave like sheep.”Others pointed out that sheep are not as docile as their reputations suggest and have been known to issue bleats of protest — and, occasionally, occupy roadways.Be a good sheep this year, sheep are placid and non-confrontational. pic.twitter.com/CJ5ujLrwrf— CY Leung (@CYLeung2017) February 18, 2015A Twitter post from a parody account mocking Hong Kong’s leader.