Read in Chinese | 点击查看本文中文版Paul U. Unschuld, 72, is a leading scholar of the history and ideas that underlie Chinese medicine. He has taught at what was then the Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health and since 2006 has headed an institute at the Charité hospital in Berlin that studies the theories, history and ethics of Chinese life sciences.Dr. Unschuld is the author of several of the West’s most influential books on Chinese medicine, including “Medicine in China: A History of Ideas,” “What Is Medicine? Western and Eastern Approaches to Healing” and “The Fall and Rise of China: Healing the Trauma of History.” In an interview, he discussed Tu Youyou’s Nobel Prize and how Chinese officials view their country’s medical heritage. In “The Fall and Rise of China” you write: “From the very start (of the reform movement in the early 20th century), Chinese medicine was at the center of criticism. That is hardly surprising. Nowhere within a culture are fears and optimism expressed as swiftly and existentially as in the attitudes toward one’s own illness.” The Chinese Empire was subject to a series of humiliations beginning with the First Opium War, 1839-42. The sovereignty of China over its territory appeared to have reached its lowest point exactly 100 years ago, in 1915, when Japan made its 21 Demands [extending its control in China]. These exceeded anything the Western powers had ever demanded from China and marked the beginning of decades of Japanese annexation efforts, a large-scale invasion, including the most appalling war crimes against the Chinese people.Many Chinese intellectuals saw their country as ill, and writers like Ba Jin and Lu Xun identified Chinese medicine as a symbol of China’s illness. Reformers and revolutionaries were in complete agreement that it should have no future. Naturally, conservatives raised their voice, too, warning against elimination of such a central element of Chinese culture, but, in general, ideas like yin and yang or the Five Phases [the interaction among the five elements: wood, earth, water, fire and metal] were denounced as obsolete.And eventually the government shifted on Western medicine?The turning point was the Manchurian plague of 1910-11. The population burned vinegar and set off fireworks to drive out demons, but such traditional measures didn’t stop the plague. Finally, the authorities turned to an ethnic Chinese from Malaysia, Wu Lien-teh, a Western-trained microbiologist. He quickly brought the plague under control with basic public health policies unknown before in Chinese medicine. This was a big signal to the Chinese government: We have to get closer to Western medicine, or we’re finished.And China did move quickly.Once the superiority of such public health measures had been recognized, a very rational attitude towards Western science and medicine was adopted that may be characteristic of China. A victim needs to look at himself to realize why he was put down. If the West can do this to us, they must have something we don’t have. We’ll get it, and in the next round we shall see. There’s an old saying: “Wo ming zai wo, bu zai tian.” My fate is in my hands, not heaven’s. This principle has been applied in China both in politics and in health care for the past 2,000 years.In terms of Chinese medicine, do you see this continuing today?Certainly. In 2007, the government invited politicians and experts from 50 countries to draft the Beijing Declaration on Traditional Chinese Medicine and declared T.C.M. to be part of biomedicine. The future of T.C.M. was seen in molecular biological legitimation. I was the German delegate, and one high-ranking Chinese politician voiced amazement to me that some Westerners, exposed to modern science for centuries, believe in the Five Phases theory. You see, political decision makers in China can’t understand this because the Five Phases doctrine won’t make your mobile phone work. It won’t shoot a rocket to the moon. The government is not interested in promoting yin and yang and the Five Phases because it is convinced that people who believe in that are lost for the strengthening of China vis-à-vis the West. And we do see that young Chinese people are less and less open to these ideas. T.C.M. colleges in China have problems finding competent students.What about the Nobel Prize and Chinese medicine? I met Prof. Tu Youyou in the 1970s. She was a modern pharmacological researcher, working on harnessing certain herbs. She’s a perfect example for the successful modernization of Chinese medicine. Her successes are unrelated to yin and yang or the Five Phases. She had a great education in Western science, and she and her team searched through ancient literature for medications recommended to cure malaria. She used modern science to analyze Artemisia annua, figured out the active ingredient of the plant and modified it until it exerted an antimalaria effect never achieved in China before. That is what Mao Zedong had asked for: the unification of historical Chinese and modern Western medicine.These views contradict how many in the West see Chinese medicine.Professor Tu’s discovery had nothing to do with what most Westerners define as traditional Chinese medicine, except that the substance she examined is described in ancient pharmaceutical literature. The Chinese authorities are trying to strip historical Chinese medicine of superstition and nonsense. What is left can exist with molecular biology.That disappoints those in the West who see T.C.M. as an alternative to biomedicine. These people don’t understand why the Chinese authorities act like this. The trauma of the 19th- and early-20th-century humiliation is still present. For 100 years, China has been struggling on many fronts to catch up with the West. Professor Tu’s Nobel Prize is proof of the success of this policy.And yet many people in China opt for traditional medicine.
Western medicine can’t achieve miracles, and there are many everyday health problems it cannot solve. Many Chinese — and Westerners — know that there are recipes in Chinese medicine that work, regardless of whether there is scientific evidence. It is a characteristic common to all societies with a coexistence of modern and traditional health care options. Patients are aware of the strengths and weaknesses of the alternatives and oscillate between modernity and tradition accordingly.Follow Ian Johnson on Twitter @iandenisjohnson. 