AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. KirkpatrickCAIRO — The Islamist-backed faction in Libya’s civil conflict said Tuesday that it had carried out its first airstrike, targeting opponents in the town of Zintan in an escalation of the violence tearing the country apart.The attack occurred two days after the Islamic State, the extremist group also known as ISIS or ISIL, released a video showing fighters for one of its Libyan branches beheading as many as 21 Egyptian Christians. In retaliation, Egypt carried out an airstrike on Monday against a town in eastern Libya that is a hub of Islamist militancy and the home of another Islamic State branch.The extent of the damage was unclear. But the attack on Tuesday raised the possibility of an air war between the rival Libyan factions and diminished hopes for United Nations-sponsored talks about ending the conflict. “This may well upend the U.N.’s mediation efforts,” said Wolfram Lacher, a Libya researcher at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs.Word of the bombing on Tuesday came as Egypt’s foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, visited the United Nations in New York, intending to push for a Security Council measure to strengthen what he called the “legitimate government of Libya.” That government has moved to two towns near the border with Egypt because the conflict has left its Islamist-backed opponents, who call themselves Libya Dawn, in control of Tripoli. The Security Council plans to meet Wednesday and discuss the Libya crisis.Mr. Shoukry said, “We believe a more expanded form of assistance to the Libyan government is necessary in view of the threat terrorism poses.”With no effective government since the ouster of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in 2011, Libya has largely disintegrated into a patchwork of fiefs controlled by local or ideological militias. Over the past year, those militias have picked sides with one of the two warring coalitions.Libya Dawn includes moderate and extremist Islamists. The other coalition, calling itself Operation Dignity and vowing to eradicate the Islamists, includes former Qaddafi soldiers as well as fighters from Zintan, a powerful Western mountain town. That faction has the support of Libya’s internationally recognized government, which is under Operation Dignity’s protection. Operation Dignity’s main advantage in the fight has been the use of a small air force of helicopters and Russian-made fighter planes left over from Colonel Qaddafi’s military, which its officers have said the Egyptian military helped to repair and maintain. Operation Dignity has used the force to strike armed opponents and occasionally their civilian neighborhoods.Under pressure from the United Nations and the West, Dignity’s leader, Gen. Khalifa Hifter, recently suspended airstrikes against civilian targets in the opposing cities of Tripoli and Misurata in order to make the peace talks possible, Mr. Lacher said by email. But Libya Dawn’s airstrike on Tuesday “now threatens a spiral of retaliation,” he said. Leaders of the Libya Dawn coalition had long threatened to repair their own damaged jets and helicopters left over from Colonel Qaddafi’s air force and use them to strike back. It was unclear how they had made the aircraft flight-worthy.A spokesman for the provisional government that Libya Dawn has established in Tripoli said Tuesday night that its forces had used “two or three” Russian-made MIGs to hit a Zintan airstrip and another location where the city’s fighters had gathered.The spokesman, Jamal Naji Zubia, accused Zintan’s militia of using the airstrip to import weapons, ammunition and military support. A statement from the airport authority in Zintan said a warplane had bombed the airport around noon, just as a civilian flight was preparing to take off. The attack “created panic among the passengers and families” and forced the cancellation of the flight, the statement said. It asked Libya’s internationally recognized government to condemn “this terrorist crime” and to “ensure accountability for those who carried it out so that it is not repeated again.”Merna Thomas contributed reporting from Cairo, and Somini Sengupta from the United Nations.Advertisement