By RICK LYMAN and HELENE BIENVENUFEB. 17, 2015
WARSAW —  When Vladimir V. Putin played host at the Kremlin early last year to Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, the notion of a reciprocal visit that would bring the Russian president onto European Union soil seemed perfectly in keeping with a whole series of stick-in-the-eye moves toward Europe by the two leaders in recent years.But by Tuesday, when Mr. Putin and his entourage finally touched down in Budapest, the meeting seemed to demonstrate less a fresh diplomatic conquest than a demonstration of the Russian leader’s shrunken diplomatic reach.The combination of a festering Ukraine crisis, Russia’s growing economic woes and Mr. Orban’s desire to repair relations with the West made this latest stop in Mr. Putin’s increasingly active itinerary — he traveled to Egypt earlier this month, and stopped in India, Turkey and Uzbekistan in December — into a low-key, blink-and-you’ll-miss-it event.“I think it is not accidental that the Hungarian government did not want to over-promote this meeting right now,” said Peter Kreko, director of the Political Capital Institute, a Budapest research group. “Orban realized quite late that while it was completely O.K. to do business with Russia before the Ukraine crisis, it is not the same since.”AdvertisementIt was a far cry from Mr. Putin’s triumphant reception in Serbia in October, when the state news media celebrated his arrival and leaders threw a military parade, complete with aerial acrobatics involving Serbian and Russian jets, and presented him with the Order of the Republic, Serbia’s highest honor.AdvertisementIn Budapest, Mr. Putin arrived Tuesday with an entourage heavy with energy officials and then kept largely out of sight.He laid flowers on the graves of Russian soldiers killed in World War II, drawing some criticism because the same section of the cemetery contains a monument to Russian troops killed in 1956 while quashing an anti-Communist uprising. He had private meetings with Mr. Orban and with President Janos Ader of Hungary. Five bilateral agreements were signed.But Mr. Putin’s only major public event was an evening news conference with Mr. Orban.Mr. Putin confined the bulk of his remarks to economic deals between the two nations, and mentioned Ukraine and its fragile cease-fire only briefly, reacting mildly to a question about the United States’ possibly sending defensive weapons to Ukraine.“I am deeply convinced that no matter what weapons you provide to Ukraine, it is always bad to supply arms to an armed conflict,” he said.For his part, Mr. Orban refrained from his past praise of “illiberal democracy” and made no mention of his implacable opposition to “economic immigration.” Instead, he blandly praised the cease-fire agreement made in Minsk, Belarus, and advocated finding a way to repair Russia’s broken relationship with the European Union.“We are convinced that the isolation of Russia from Europe is not feasible,” he said.The cooler tenor of Mr. Putin’s visit to Budapest “will send a clear message to Russian politicians that this is not Serbia,” Mr. Kreko said.The visit, arranged last month, had become more important to Mr. Putin, who wanted to demonstrate that at least one European Union leader was still open to a bilateral visit, said Zoltan Sz. Biro, a historian who served as foreign policy adviser in a previous Socialist government.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Putin requested the visit,” Mr. Biro said. “Orban is embarrassed by it but couldn’t refuse.”AdvertisementSince Mr. Orban drew sharp criticism last year from Western leaders for his pro-Russian rhetoric and growing authoritarian moves, which opponents compared to Mr. Putin’s governing style, his government has softened its stance — outwardly, at least — stressing that it continued to vote for the European Union’s sanctions against Russia.“There is a definite sign of correction,” Mr. Kreko said. “You can see it in the rhetoric.”Last year, Mr. Orban drew flak from Western leaders for calling the sanctions against Russia counterproductive and for voicing concerns about the autonomy of ethnic Hungarians in Ukraine in language similar to that used by Mr. Putin to justify his support for ethnic Russian rebels.Now, he pointedly preceded the Putin visit with a trip to Kiev, where he met with President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine and reiterated his support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity.Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany visited Budapest this month in a high-profile event.The idea of warmer relations with Russia is a thorny one for many Hungarians, especially older ones who remember the long years under Communist rule. But financially struggling Hungarians are also eager for any economic lifelines that might provide investment and jobs.About 2,000 anti-Putin protesters gathered Monday evening outside Budapest’s eastern train station and marched through the streets to the western station.The crowd waved Hungarian, Ukrainian and European Union flags and carried signs with slogans like “Russians Go Home!” while loudspeakers played “Back in the U.S.S.R.” by the Beatles.Andras Nemeth, 31, an economist who joined the line of protesters, said he saw some disturbing similarities between Mr. Putin and Mr. Orban.“They like to be at the center of power,” he said, “and use their charisma to keep control of their population and convey easy, populist messages.”Rick Lyman reported from Warsaw, and Helene Bienvenu from Budapest.Rick Lyman reported from Warsaw; Helene Bienvenu reported from Budapest.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Hungary Keeps Visit by Putin Low-Key as It Seeks to Repair Relations With West.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.