By RAPHAEL MINDERFEB. 17, 2015
MADRID — A Spanish judge leading an investigation into accusations of sexual abuse against priests in the southern city of Granada has decided that the case can proceed against only one of the priests because the statute of limitations has expired for the lower-level criminal charges filed against 11 other people, including nine priests.The judge, Antonio Moreno, informed the regional court of Andalusia of his decision on Monday, saying that the statute of limitations had expired for all the charges faced by the other 11 indicted people.The main defendant, the Rev. Román Martínez, has been accused by one of his former altar boys of repeated sexual abuse, during a three-year period that started in 2004 when the boy was 14.Father Martínez and the other priests have denied any wrongdoing. Their lawyer, Javier Muriel, said Tuesday that the judge’s decision was “bittersweet” because while most of the cases were dismissed Father Martínez still faced serious charges. Mr. Muriel said the charges were unfounded and unprovable.AdvertisementThe case has become one of the most serious sexual abuse scandals to emerge under Pope Francis. It has also become a prime example of the pope’s more open and assertive approach to the issue as he shifts the tone in the Vatican, which has long been criticized for neglecting decades of abuses by priests in parishes around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The court investigation started after Francis responded to a letter sent last August by the former altar boy. Within days, the pope called him to urge him to pursue his claims, while also ordering a Vatican-led investigation into the accusations of a sex ring in the Granada area.AdvertisementThe main plaintiff, who is now 25 and a member of Opus Dei, a Catholic organization, disclosed the abuse only after deciding last year to leave Granada to complete his doctoral studies in the northern city of Pamplona. On Tuesday, Jorge Aguilera, the plaintiff’s lawyer, said that he would appeal the judge’s decision to apply the statute of limitations to the other people indicted in the case.In his decision, Judge Moreno said that the sexual abuse charges against Father Martínez carried a prison sentence of four to 10 years upon conviction. The priest posted bail of €10,000, about $11,400, after being briefly detained last November.The Roman Catholic Church’s investigation is led by the Vatican rather than Granada’s diocese, but Paqui Pallarés, a spokeswoman for the diocese, said, “We are the first who want the truth and who will show zero tolerance” toward any evidence of sexual abuse within the diocese.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.