By SOMINI SENGUPTA and ANNE BARNARDFEB. 17, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  In what could be a diplomatic breakthrough in the Syrian conflict, a senior United Nations envoy said Tuesday that he had persuaded President Bashar al-Assad to stop bombing and shelling the northern city of Aleppo as part of a proposed six-week truce.The announcement was made by the envoy, Staffan de Mistura, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s special representative for Syria, after he briefed diplomats during a closed session of the Security Council. It also came as Mr. Assad’s forces launched a new offensive that threatened to cut off the main supply route to insurgents in Aleppo, renewing the Syrian military’s push to encircle and besiege opposition-held areas of the city.“The government of Syria has indicated to me its willingness to halt all types of aerial bombing and artillery shelling for a period of six weeks, all over the city of Aleppo,” Mr. de Mistura told reporters. He said that the start date for the truce, which he described as a “freeze,” had not been determined and that he was heading to Damascus to discuss the details.He told reporters he would ask opposition fighters to halt their rocket and mortar fire as well.“I have no illusions, because based on past experience, this will be a difficult issue to achieve,” Mr. de Mistura said of the freeze. “Facts on the ground will prove if the freeze holds and can be replicated elsewhere.”AdvertisementIt remains to be seen whether the Syrian government will make good on its pledge to Mr. de Mistura, and opposition groups are likely to be wary.AdvertisementNajib Ghadbian, a senior official in the opposition coalition, said it awaited details. “The Assad regime’s compliance with any such proposal will be judged by actions, not words,” he said. “And thus far, his actions have been only brutality and terror.”Mr. de Mistura proposed a freeze last September and has pushed both sides in the nearly four-year conflict, along with their patrons abroad, to back it. Under his proposal, the warring parties do not have to lay down their weapons, as was the case with a truce last year in the besieged city of Homs. There, government forces had surrounded and starved insurgent-held areas. A two-year siege eventually pried insurgents from Homs but left the city center in rubble.If Mr. de Mistura’s proposal goes into effect, it will not only offer relief to residents of Aleppo, a war zone that was once Syria’s commercial capital, but will also create a platform for Mr. Assad to establish himself as a credible partner for a negotiated settlement of the war. And it would allow the government to show that it is committed to fighting the Islamic State and other extremist groups that have been drawn into the conflict and have expanded it into neighboring Iraq.The Syrian military’s advance Tuesday on Aleppo — said by insurgents and residents to be bolstered by Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite paramilitary group aligned with Mr. Assad — came just after Hezbollah declared that it was also fighting in Iraq, a further expansion of its military expeditions abroad.Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, declared for the first time, in a videotaped speech played at a ceremony Monday night, that the group had a “modest” presence in Iraq, where the group’s patron, Iran, has been openly battling the Islamic State.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Let’s go anyplace where we confront this threat, which is threatening our region,” said Mr. Nasrallah, the latest sign that he sees his group’s mission as broader than defending Lebanon’s borders and protecting Mr. Assad, a crucial ally.Hezbollah’s intervention in Syria, which has been overt and energetic since mid-2013, has played a crucial role in helping Mr. Assad. The move into Syria was a departure from Hezbollah’s customary focus on the conflict with Israel, and has sown divisions in Lebanon.Pro-government forces have been close to encircling Aleppo for months but have not been able to budge insurgents from a crucial supply route to Turkey north of the city. On Tuesday, according to insurgent leaders, pro-government forces attacked from behind their lines from two directions, from the villages of Zahra and Handarat, seizing a number of prisoners, including women and children.Advertisement“If regime forces manage to take these villages, this will lead to the complete siege of Aleppo,” said Islam Alloush, a spokesman for the Islamic Front, a faction that opposes both the government and the Islamic State. “Cutting this road means prevention of food and medicine to reach millions of people, but we emphasize that we will not let this happen.”A pro-government activist in Zahra, Montazer, who gave only a first name because he was not authorized to discuss operations, said the government was progressing toward putting a “military collar” on Aleppo, and insisted that only the Syrian Army was fighting.But Syrians involved in coordinating with Hezbollah have said the group is increasing its presence near Aleppo, and an opposition website posted a video in which a resident described being stopped at a checkpoint by gunmen politely identifying themselves as from Hezbollah.Somini Sengupta reported from the United Nations, and Anne Barnard from Beirut, Lebanon. Reporting was contributed by Karam Shoumali from Istanbul, Hwaida Saad and Mohammad Ghannam from Beirut, and Rick Gladstone from New York.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Envoy to Syria Announces Possible Truce in Aleppo.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.