AdvertisementSupported byBy Jodi RudorenJERUSALEM — Food costs at the Israeli prime minister’s residence more than doubled after Benjamin Netanyahu took office in 2009, reaching nearly $120,000 in 2012, a third of it in takeout meals. The state paid about $2,000 a month to clean the Netanyahus’ private home in the seaside town of Caesarea, though the family spent most of its time in Jerusalem.A report published Tuesday by Israel’s state comptroller said these and other expenses — including $68,000 over two years in makeup, hairstyling and “presentation” for Mr. Netanyahu and his wife, Sara — “strayed from the cornerstone principles of financial management and the principles of proportionality, reasonableness, saving and efficiency.”Noting that Mrs. Netanyahu had reimbursed state coffers $1,035 after she was found to have pocketed the deposit money from recycled beverage bottles, the comptroller, Joseph Haim Shapira, said he had handed his investigative material over to the attorney general because it raised “suspicion of a criminal act.”“This is public money, and the law for a penny is the law for 100,” Mr. Shapira said in the introduction to the 36-page report. “Public trust in government institutions is the foundation stone of every democratic regime.”The much-anticipated report came a month before Israel’s elections on March 17, and Mr. Netanyahu’s challengers seized on it to buttress their assertion that he is out of touch with Israelis struggling to buy apartments and pay grocery bills. The prime minister’s Likud Party called the surrounding media storm a slanderous campaign to topple him “through a focus on irrelevant minutiae” that “distract from the real issues at hand.”A statement by the Likud said, “There is absolutely no indication of any assault on the public’s integrity, and certainly no indication of any criminal transgression,” blaming an “embittered” former employee now suing for damages for the high expenses. Spending fell after that employee left, the statement noted, adding that many of the comptroller’s recommendations had already been adopted and that Mr. Netanyahu had “issued a directive to implement the remaining recommendations in the best and most effective manner possible.”The report’s publication came after weeks of critical news stories and commentaries about the first couple’s spending habits and treatment of employees, a recurrent theme of Mr. Netanyahu’s public life. Mrs. Netanyahu, a psychologist, has long been criticized as a mercurial boss who holds interminable grudges.The Netanyahus have survived previous spending scandals — in 2013 alone, there was the $127,000 installation of a rest chamber in the airplane that took the couple to Margaret Thatcher’s funeral, and the $2,700 annual budget for ice cream. (Pistachio for the prime minister; his wife prefers French vanilla.) The bottle-deposit affair, and the surreptitious transfer of new garden furniture from the official Jerusalem residence to Caesarea, threatened to take things up a notch.“If there is formally a suspicion of criminal activity, and Netanyahu himself is involved, that’s crossing the line — that’s going to change everything,” said Avraham Diskin, a political scientist at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya. “All these reports came before from the media, not from an official. Immediately afterward, we couldn’t really track any decline in the popularity of the Likud or Netanyahu himself, and, in fact, it maybe worked for his benefit.”Anticipating that the comptroller’s report would depict a life of luxury, Mr. Netanyahu posted a video on Facebook in which his wife toured the residence with a celebrity interior decorator, showing it more shabby than chic. The 15-minute video, highlighting frayed rugs, decayed doorjambs, cracked light fixtures, stained curtains and broken kitchen cabinets — viewed half a million times over two days — prompted a new cascade of criticism, including claims that it constituted both a severe security breach and an illegal campaign donation by the designer.Ben Caspit, a columnist who frequently criticizes the prime minister, called it a visit to “the royal cuckoo’s nest,” in which the couple showed “to what gutter level” they are “capable of lowering themselves and the country.”The vitriol rose after the release of the comptroller’s report. Zehava Gal-On of the leftist Meretz faction spoke of Mr. Netanyahu’s “hedonism” and “corrupt behavioral norms of a banana republic.” Others invoked Marie Antoinette. Shelly Yacimovich of the Labor Party asked: “What on earth were they eating there? Cornflakes with dolphin’s milk? Dinosaur-egg omelets? Rhinoceros steaks?”The centrist Yesh Atid party said the report revealed a prime minister “who is totally disconnected and for whom the real problems of the people of Israel are the last thing on his mind.”Besides what it called “exaggerated” spending, the comptroller’s report said the Netanyahus had bypassed regulations to hire a private electrician connected to the Likud to do repairs in Caesarea on weekends and even on the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur, which could also lead to criminal charges. It also said public employees “paid out of their own pocket for items purchased” for the Netanyahus and were never reimbursed.Mitchell Barak, a Jerusalem political consultant who worked for Mr. Netanyahu in the 1990s but who now often criticizes him, said the prime minister had “successfully made himself look almost like a victim” over allegations that pale compared with those made against a predecessor, Ehud Olmert, who is facing a prison sentence after being convicted of taking bribes.“The average person who lives in Tel Aviv, who leans to the left, is flabbergasted and offended by it, but they were never going to vote for him,” Mr. Barak said. “For his voter base, which is going to be right of center, more religious, poorer population, they will concentrate on the fact that someone is trying to bring him down rather than what exactly is the content of what seems to be petty criminal activity.”Myra Noveck, Irit Pazner Garshowitz and Gabby Sobelman contributed research.Advertisement