By MELISSA EDDYFEB. 17, 2015
Nearly three months after announcing that it would accept the gift of an art collection amassed by a Nazi-era dealer, including several pieces known to have been looted from Jewish families, the Kunstmuseum Bern expressed frustration Tuesday that a dispute over a will was preventing it from taking possession of the works.Matthias Frehner, the director of the Kunstmuseum Bern in Switzerland, and Christoph Schäublin, president of the board of directors, had announced in November that they would accept the 1,600 works left to them by Cornelius Gurlitt, the dealer's son, who died in May at 81.But hours before the museum made that announcement in Berlin, Uta Werner, a cousin of Mr. Gurlitt, filed a petition with a Munich court calling his will into question and challenging the museum’s right to the inheritance. Since then, the collection, which includes fine oil paintings by Renoir, Cézanne, Monet, Manet, Gauguin and Pissarro, has been in legal limbo.“The Board of Trustees regrets this delay, in particular because it will impede the settlement of restitution cases that have already been clarified and endorsed by the Kunstmuseum Bern, but the circumstances are beyond its control,” the museum said in a statement on Tuesday.AdvertisementThree paintings, a Matisse, a Liebermann and a Spitzweg, have already been identified as having been looted from Jewish families. The Kunstmuseum said that it would like to return them to the descendants of their rightful owners, but that it is legally prevented from doing so until the dispute over the will has been resolved.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Under German law, an estate passed directly to a relative of the deceased, including cousins, unless a will is left stating otherwise. Mr. Gurlitt had no children, but did have several cousins, including Ms. Werner.The works were found in Mr. Gurlitt’s Munich apartment during a routine tax investigation in 2012. For months the find was kept secret, coming to light only after a German journalist reported on their existence. A task force of art historians paid by the German government has been examining their provenance and was to work together with the Kunstmuseum to sort out ownership.AdvertisementThe museum has also set up a research team to help clarify the history of the works, as well as of its own permanent collection, once it is able to take possession of them. Oskar Bätschmann, a Swiss art historian, was named by the museum to lead the team.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.