AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BilefskyPARIS — A prosecutor asked a criminal court in Lille, France, on Tuesday to drop charges against the former International Monetary Fund chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn, saying there was not enough evidence to convict him of procuring prostitutes, according to news reports.The case against Mr. Strauss-Kahn already appeared to be falling apart, after five of the six plaintiffs retracted their accusations against him on Monday, citing a lack of evidence that he intended to break the law. Mr. Strauss-Kahn has consistently said that he did not know that the women at sex parties he attended were prostitutes. Prosecutors had accused him of participation in an international sex ring that extended from Lille to Paris and Washington.The prosecutor had earlier suggested that the case against Mr. Strauss-Kahn was weak, but he was overruled by investigating judges.While the prosecutor’s recommendation demonstrates how hard it would be to convict Mr. Strauss-Kahn, under French law the decision ultimately rests with the three judges in the case.A verdict is not expected for several months. If convicted, Mr. Strauss-Kahn could face up to 10 years in prison and fines of more than 1.5 million euros, or $1.7 million. But most legal experts believe Mr. Strauss-Kahn will be acquitted.The testimony during the trial often bordered on the burlesque, and featured a cast of characters including a sex club owner, former prostitutes called Mounia and Jade, and a former police chief. At the nexus of the sex ring, prosecutors said, was the faded and kitschy glamour of the Carlton Hotel in Lille, which features gilded statuettes, Louis XVI furniture and palatial suites. Orgies attended by judges, journalists and power brokers were said to have taken place at the hotel.Mr. Strauss-Kahn, who was once considered a favorite to become president of France, was accused, along with 13 other defendants, of aggravated pimping, and of using friends to obtain prostitutes for elaborate sex parties.Mr. Strauss-Kahn testified during the trial that he was too busy trying to deal with the ailing global economy to organize orgies. He said he attended such affairs at most four times a year.The trial signaled a new humiliation for Mr. Strauss-Kahn, who was forced to resign as head of the I.M.F. in 2011 after he was accused of sexually assaulting a hotel maid. Those charges were later dropped, and a lawsuit was settled. Buffeted by scandals, he was banished to the political wilderness.During the trial, Mr. Strauss-Kahn testified that he would never have taken the risk of knowingly attending orgies with prostitutes, given his standing and his political aspirations. Moreover, he argued that libertinage, or attending sex parties involving multiple and consensual partners, was an age-old practice and a matter of private taste.The French daily Le Monde noted this week that the chief judge had followed through on his pledge not to turn the court into an arbiter of public morality. Others, however, said the case had rightfully exposed Mr. Strauss-Kahn’s moral failures and a lack of judgment that made him unsuitable for higher office.Advertisement