AdvertisementSupported byBy Mujib MashalKABUL, Afghanistan — Four Taliban suicide bombers disguised in Afghan police uniforms stormed a heavily fortified provincial Police Headquarters in central Afghanistan on Tuesday, killing at least 20 officers and wounding eight others.The coordinated attack in Logar Province, about 40 miles south of Kabul, came as police officers were filing into the dining hall for lunch. Because of their uniforms, the attackers were waved past a preliminary checkpoint to a parking lot near the entrance of the building, said Din Mohammed Darwish, a spokesman for the provincial governor.One of the bombers then detonated his explosives, while the three others fought their way through additional checkpoints and concrete barriers, Mr. Darwish said. Although the police gunned down two of the attackers, the fourth reached the dining hall, where he set off his vest packed with explosives, claiming the lives of mostly lower-ranking officers.“The explosion was so strong that the metal roof of the dining hall was blown away,” said Abdul Wali Wakil, a member of the Logar Provincial Council.A Taliban spokesman claimed responsibility for the attack. While the Taliban have targeted smaller security posts across Afghanistan in recent months, the attack was the deadliest of its kind since 21 soldiers were killed in Kunar Province in the east of the country last April. In November, the Taliban targeted an army post in the Sangin district of Helmand Province in the south, leaving at least 14 soldiers dead after hours of fierce fighting.The Taliban have maintained an intense fighting tempo this winter, a season when the violence in Afghanistan typically subsides. The efforts have been devastating for the Afghan security forces, who are shouldering the responsibility for keeping the country safe with vastly reduced combat support from international forces. More than 5,000 security forces were killed in 2014, by far the deadliest year since the start of the war in Afghanistan in 2001 and more than the entire coalition death toll since then.Afghan and Western officials fear that 2015 will be worse. While coalition troops largely spent the last two years on the sidelines, allowing the Afghan forces to take the lead in combating the insurgency, this year signals a complete transition to Afghan control.From a height of nearly 130,000 foreign forces, roughly 13,000 remain in Afghanistan, largely confined to a training and support role. President Obama has promised to bring the remaining Americans home by the end of 2016 and has placed tight restrictions on the forces that remain in the country until then.Reduced air support has been especially troubling for the Afghan forces in rural areas. Without the threat of enemy planes looming overhead, the Taliban have been able to mass in large numbers and execute military operations unthinkable even a year ago. At least 171 members of the Afghan security forces were killed in January, according to a tally by ToloNews, a local television channel.Tuesday’s attack, however, was more in line with the urban assaults that have been the hallmark of Taliban violence in recent years. Unlike in attacks in parts of the south, such as Sangin, there did not appear to be any intent to claim the provincial headquarters, where hundreds of police officers live and work.But the attack raised fears among locals all the same, given the ease with which the insurgents penetrated the highly protected compound and the number of police officers killed.“Logar is like the gate to Kabul,” said Mohibullah Saleh, a member of the provincial council. “If Logar can’t protect itself, Kabul will also be threatened.”Advertisement