“Hi, I’m China,” a New Year’s video from a blogger endorsed by President Xi Jinping.“Hi, I’m China” is a New Year’s video directed by Zhou Xiaoping, a blogger praised last year by President Xi Jinping as a positive influence for the future of arts and culture in the country. Mr. Zhou is known for harsh criticism of the United States and diatribes against people he deems unduly critical of China.Unlike a slick Chinese Communist Party promotional video that has recently been popular online, Mr. Zhou’s four-minute work shows negative scenes in addition to positive images: polluted air and sunny skies, corrupt officials and meritorious leaders, poor villages and gleaming buildings. The images are not devastatingly critical, rather the sort of thing that most Chinese people encounter on the news and in their daily lives. But for a work meant to encourage national pride, they are unusually unvarnished.“Patriotism and squarely facing problems aren’t contradictory,” Mr. Zhou told Youth.cn, a website run by the Communist Youth League of China. “It’s like if our mother or father has problems, we still love them. Praise and criticism all come from ardently loving the country.”The video, which was largely made by volunteers, has Chinese and English subtitles and English narration. Mr. Zhou said the video had both subtitles so that it would appeal to audiences at home and abroad. “Some patriotic Chinese will see the hope and light, and hopefully foreigners who pay attention to China will change their point of view somewhat,” the Youth.cn article paraphrased him as saying.Mr. Zhou, 33, is a divisive figure. While the endorsement from China’s leader drastically raised his profile and ensured glowing coverage in state-run news media, he has also been criticized as unoriginal and inaccurate in many of his assertions. One nickname given to him by Chinese web users, “Cutlassfish Zhou,” refers to an error he made in describing fish farming in a denunciation of another writer.Mr. Zhou, however, prefers to see himself as a “sunshine boy,” someone who cheers people up and views China with optimism. And after the images of negative aspects of China’s rapid economic growth, his video ends with statistics showing great improvements in life expectancy and infant mortality since the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949. “Some people say this is the worst of times, while other people say this is the best of times,” the narrator intones. It is not hard to guess who he thinks is right.