Decipher this sequence: 831, 87, 689.The mathematically inclined might observe that its components are all odd composite numbers, but otherwise apparently inconsequential. In Hong Kong, however, they are familiar figures that tell political stories.Such symbolism was on display — and often for sale — at the city’s annual Lunar New Year Fair leading up to Thursday’s holiday, amplifying the demands of those who want more democracy than Beijing has offered. “You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one,” read a pillow being sold at one stall, quoting a John Lennon lyric that some protesters favored during last year’s street protests, after their dream of fully democratic elections for the city’s top job was bluntly denied.On Aug. 31 of last year, China’s top legislative body ruled that while the Hong Kong public will for the first time be allowed to vote for the city’s leader, or chief executive, in 2017, the candidates must be selected by a committee dominated by Beijing loyalists. To protest that decision — often known as “the 831 decision,” after the date of the ruling — activists occupied streets near the government headquarters, and in two other parts of the city, for months. Supporters of the protest deplored the police’s use of tear gas — 87 canisters of it — on the unarmed, mostly young protesters.While neither the local nor the central Chinese government gave in to their demands, the protesters’ wishes lived on at the fair in Victoria Park, printed on and woven into numerous items and banners. It was an important time of year for traditional florists — buying flowers is a pre-New Year tradition — as well as for political parties trying to make money.Not all of the political symbols were numerical. Shades of yellow, which became the emblematic color of the protest, competed with New Year’s red for dominance. Umbrellas were unfurled whether it was raining or not, since they had been the protesters’ shield of choice against the police’s pepper spray. That was also the reason the protest was called the Umbrella Movement, or Revolution.Lighters resembling the tear gas canisters used by the police were a hot item at the fair. Key Ng, one of several 20-somethings behind that idea, said they were the same size as the real thing.“I’ll never forget that they used this weapon on us,” Mr. Ng said, referring to the night of Sept. 28, when the police’s use of tear gas in an attempt to disperse protesters backfired by drawing more people into the streets. “It was the most memorable moment of my life.”The Hong Kong government is carrying out a last round of consultation on the finer details of its proposal to change how the city’s next chief executive will be selected, starting in 2017. But opposition political parties have said they will veto the proposal when it is presented in the local legislature, contending that the nominating procedure rules out a real choice for voters. Activists, including the 18-year-old leader of the student group Scholarism, Joshua Wong, have said that there will be a new wave of protests then.Wong Yeung-tat, the leader of the protest group Civic Passion, is one of the veterans of last year’s street demonstrations who say they did not go far enough. “We’ve failed in the Umbrella Revolution. We had won nothing,” Mr. Wong said at the fair. “We’re not aggressive enough.”Though he was convicted last month of unlawful assembly in connection with an earlier demonstration, Mr. Wong has not been shy about advocating more confrontational protests. He is expecting to face more charges over his involvement in the street occupations, and he has said that the money Civic Passion raised at the fair — alongside comic books and hoodies, a black neck gaiter was selling well — will help cover his legal fees.On one side of Victoria Park, a political party erected a miniature version of the protesters’ “Lennon Wall,” a site at the government complex where protesters posted wishes (and curses) scribbled on colorful sticky notes.“Step down, 689,” some of them read. The number is a jab at Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, referring to the number of votes, out of a committee of about 1,200 electors, that put him in office in 2012. If the Hong Kong government and opposition legislators fail to come to terms on how to change the city’s elections, the same system will be in place in 2017.Political messaging at the fair. The man dangling from the umbrella is meant to be Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying. 