AdvertisementSupported byBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — The Israeli Supreme Court’s rejection of an appeal for damages by the family of Rachel Corrie, a young American woman who was run over by a military bulldozer in Gaza in 2003 as she protested Israeli Army actions there, has prompted criticism from the family and from Human Rights Watch. The ruling “sends a dangerous message to Israeli armed forces that they can escape accountability for wrongful actions,” Human Rights Watch, based in New York, said this week in a statement. Last week Israel’s Supreme Court upheld a 2012 decision by the Haifa district court that determined that the state bore no responsibility for Ms. Corrie’s death, an event that resounded internationally, on the grounds that it had occurred as a result of wartime activity. The Haifa court characterized her death, during a ground-clearing operation in an area of southern Gaza near the Egyptian border, as a “regrettable accident.” The Israeli authorities said the area in question was one of the most dangerous in Gaza, where the military came under frequent sniper and grenade attack while trying to prevent infiltrations and weapons smuggling. The Corrie family has argued, among other things, that Ms. Corrie’s death was the result of negligence, that the soldiers were not in immediate danger and were involved in routine activity at the time, and that the episode did not qualify as having occurred during wartime.  The family also argued in its civil suit that the investigation into Ms. Corrie’s death had been flawed. In a separate case, the family had sought compensation relating to the autopsy on Ms. Corrie’s body at Israel’s forensic institute. Her relatives have asserted that some body parts that were removed during the autopsy have not been handed over for burial. In the matter of the autopsy, the Supreme Court ruled that a lower court should re-examine the family’s claims, meaning that after a decade, the legal proceedings have still not come to an end.  “Our family is disappointed but not surprised,” the Corrie family said in a statement last Thursday, the day of the Supreme Court ruling. “We had hoped for a different outcome, though we have come to see through this experience how deeply all of Israel’s institutions are implicated in the impunity enjoyed by the Israeli military.” Ms. Corrie, who was from Washington State, was 23 and dressed in an orange vest at the time of her death in March 2003, at the height of the second Palestinian uprising. The Israeli investigation determined that the driver of the bulldozer could not have seen her from where he was sitting when she was hit, a point long disputed by Ms. Corrie’s supporters. Advertisement