AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneThe Iranian judge overseeing the case of Jason Rezaian, the Washington Post reporter imprisoned in Iran for nearly seven months, has frustrated his family’s effort to hire a lawyer for him, Mr. Rezaian’s brother and the newspaper said Wednesday.The brother, Ali Rezaian, said the family had asked Masoud Shafiei, an Iranian lawyer experienced in handling foreign and dual-national clients, to represent Mr. Rezaian.In what amounts to a Catch-22, Mr. Shafiei must first meet with Mr. Rezaian and obtain his signed consent. But under Iranian law, prisoners can meet only with immediate relatives or lawyers who have signed consent.The judge, Abolghassem Salavati of the Tehran Revolutionary Court, must give his permission for Mr. Shafiei to visit Mr. Rezaian in prison to get the signed consent. But so far he has not done so, Ali Rezaian said.“He hasn’t even been able to meet with the judge, much less with Jason,” the brother said in a telephone interview from California, where the Rezaians grew up.Mr. Shafiei, reached by telephone in Tehran, confirmed that he had been asked by the family to represent Mr. Rezaian. “Yes, I am trying to get my client to sign necessary papers confirming I will be his lawyer,” Mr. Shafiei said. “But the presiding judge, Mr. Salavati, has not allowed me to meet with Mr. Rezaian.”Adding more confusion to the issue, Mr. Shafiei said he had heard through a judiciary official that Judge Salavati thought Mr. Rezaian’s relatives did not want Mr. Shafiei as a lawyer. “But they have told me they do want me to take on the case,” he said.Iran’s secretive judiciary does not make judges available for comment and, in Mr. Rezaian’s case, has not even officially announced that Judge Salavati is the presiding judge, which lawyers first reported a few weeks ago.Mr. Rezaian, 38, a dual Iranian-American citizen, and his Iranian wife, Yeganeh Salehi, 30, a reporter for a United Arab Emirates newspaper, were arrested on July 22. Ms. Salehi was released on bail after a few months, but Mr. Rezaian has remained in Evin Prison in Tehran, much of the time in solitary confinement. He has been repeatedly questioned with no lawyer present, according to family members.Iran’s hard-line judiciary has not explained the arrests nor revealed the accusations. Ms. Salehi has been forbidden to talk about the case or work while on bail.The Post’s executive editor, Martin Baron, said in an emailed statement that it was “outrageous that the Iranian court is blocking a well-regarded lawyer chosen by Jason’s family from gaining access to him.”Mr. Rezaian, he said, “has now been incarcerated for nearly seven months without public disclosure of the charges against him, and he has endured harsh interrogation without access to legal counsel.”“He should be permitted to meet at once with his lawyer,” Mr. Baron said. “Iran’s handling of this case bears no resemblance to justice; it has been a sham and a tragic farce.”There have been hints that the prosecution of Mr. Rezaian may be a politically motivated attempt by Iran’s anti-American conservatives, who control the judiciary and some other important parts of the government, to hurt Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, and his associates, including Mohammad Javad Zarif, the foreign minister. Mr. Zarif knows Mr. Rezaian and has said he considered him to be a good reporter.One such hint was the selection of Judge Salavati — known by rights activists as the “judge of death” for the harsh sentences he has imposed and an apparent disregard for standard judicial practice — to oversee the Rezaian case.There was another hint on Saturday in published remarks by a member of Iran’s Parliament, Hamid Rasaei, an outspoken critic of Mr. Rouhani and the Foreign Ministry. Mr. Rasaei was quoted by the Fars News Agency as saying that Mr. Rezaian and his wife had been accused of collaborating with someone close to Mr. Rouhani, whom he did not identify, to penetrate “the most sensitive sections at the president’s office.”The incarceration of Mr. Rezaian has received widespread publicity outside Iran, and nearly 124,000 people have signed an online petition requesting his “immediate and unconditional release.”Thomas Erdbrink contributed reporting from Tehran.Advertisement