AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas ErdbrinkTEHRAN — Iran’s supreme leader said on Wednesday that he did not believe that all sanctions against his country would be lifted, a move he had previously said was an essential condition for nuclear talks to succeed.The supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has the final say in Iran on any nuclear agreement between his country and world powers, and who has commented regularly on the negotiations, has stressed that he is not optimistic about whether a compromise can be reached. But in a speech on Wednesday, referring to the United States, he said he did not believe that sanctions would be lifted “even if the talks continue on the basis of what they dictate.”In January, Ayatollah Khamenei called Iran’s opponents in the talks “greedy” and emphasized that sanctions must “really be lifted” for any agreement to be accepted by the Islamic republic. If not, he said, Iran would challenge the sanctions by further developing its own economy, which has suffered from isolation and mismanagement.Last week, the European Union reimposed sanctions on the National Iranian Tanker Company after they were lifted in July when the company’s lawyers argued that it was privately owned. The European Union overturned the decision, arguing that the company has close ties to the state.Whether Iran is racing toward nuclear weapon capabilities is one of the most contentious foreign-policy issues challenging the West.The continuing nuclear talks face two deadlines: one for a political agreement around the end of March, the other for a final agreement by the end of June involving technical details, an overview of sanctions that would be lifted and Iranian guarantees.Hamid Reza Taraghi, an Iranian political analyst close to Ayatollah Khamenei, said on Wednesday that the supreme leader’s remarks last month meant that if all sanctions were not lifted, there would be no compromise. “Just recently, new sanctions were imposed against Iranian tankers,” Mr. Taraghi said. “Our leader suspects that sanctions will not be lifted in one go, and if such measures continue there will clearly be no nuclear solution.”Ayatollah Khamenei has also spoken out against what he has called a solution in two phases, in which a deal would be reached but sanctions would stay in place for an interim period. He has proposed one single agreement instead of multiple deadlines.On Wednesday, Marziyeh Afkham, a spokeswoman for Iran’s Foreign Ministry, said that her nation’s negotiators were seeking a permanent solution but that discussions would be possible between deadlines.“I emphasize that the Islamic Republic of Iran is pursuing one agreement that should be the final agreement,” Ms. Afkham said at her weekly news conference. “Of course, this does not contradict with creating understanding.”Irannuc.ir, an influential website that is critical of the negotiations, wrote that Ms. Afkham’s language was “worrying” and actually meant that there could be an agreement in phases.Advertisement