AdvertisementSupported byBy Salman MasoodISLAMABAD, Pakistan — At least three people were killed and two wounded on Wednesday when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside a Shiite mosque on the outskirts of Islamabad, officials said. A faction of the Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility.Muhammad Yousaf, a private security guard, told reporters that the assailant opened fire before trying to enter the mosque but met with resistance from guards and other people at the entrance. One of the three killed was a security guard who was shot by the attacker, according to initial reports, and the others were bystanders. Mr. Yousaf said he quickly locked the door of the main prayer hall after he heard gunshots at the entrance, enabling worshipers to move further inside the building.The mosque, Imam Bargah Qasar-e-Sakina Bint-e-Hussain, is in a congested neighborhood, New Shakrial, just off the Islamabad Highway, between Islamabad, the capital, and neighboring Rawalpindi. Evening prayers were underway at the time of the attack. At least 40 people were inside the mosque, officials said.Soon after the attack, police officers and paramilitary troops cordoned off the area. The wounded were taken to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences in Islamabad for treatment.Angry protesters spilled onto the Islamabad Highway and blocked traffic between the two cities.Jundullah, a faction of the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility for the attack. Fahad Marwat, a spokesman for the group, told Reuters that it was meant as revenge for the Pakistani military’s continuing operations in North Waziristan, a northwestern tribal region that is a militant stronghold.The attack comes just a day after a suicide attack in the eastern city of Lahore, where a bomber detonated his explosives near the Police Headquarters. Five people were killed and 23 were wounded in the attack.There has been a spike in terrorist attacks in recent weeks, especially against Shiites. Last week, Taliban militants, heavily armed and wearing vests rigged with explosives, stormed a Shiite mosque in Peshawar, in the northwest. At least 19 people were killed in the attack, during the busy Friday Prayer.Pakistani officials say that continuing military operations in the country’s northwest have disrupted the militants from their main haven, North Waziristan, and that the terrorist attacks are in retaliation for the military’s advances.However, critics say the government is failing to protect the country’s minorities, especially Shiite Muslims, who have been constantly targeted by Sunni Taliban militants across the country.Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who is visiting the southwestern city of Quetta, said Wednesday that civilian and military leaders were assisting one another to defeat terrorism in the country.Rana Tanveer Hussain, the federal minister for defense production, said the government would not be deterred in its efforts.“We will fight till the last terrorist on our soil,” Mr. Hussain said. “The prime minister has taken some stringent measures against these terrorists. Therefore they are making these retaliatory moves.”Advertisement