AdvertisementSupported byBy Ceylan YeginsuISTANBUL — “You are free to throw snowballs at this window,” the signs say in the Kadikoy district on the Asian side of Istanbul, and not because the shopkeepers here love the sound of breaking glass.It is all about a freak snowstorm, a quick temper, a deadly encounter and — inevitably — politics.A two-day blizzard had dropped 24 inches of snow on Istanbul before it finally let up on Thursday, catching off guard a city of 14 million that rarely gets more than a short-lived dusting.Traffic and transport ground to a halt. Trees fell and blocked roads. Schools and businesses shut down, leaving the people of the city free to pour outdoors in search of snowy fun.Some took to the hilly back streets on makeshift sleds made of brooms, trash bags and sheet plastic. Some built Turkish-style snowmen with fezzes on their heads and red peppers for noses. And some filled buckets with hand-packed snowballs, in preparation for the friendly neighborhood free-for-alls they knew would soon erupt.Then, in Kadikoy, came trouble. A group of 10 friends were merrily pelting one another on Tuesday night when a snowball thrown by one of them, a journalist named Nuh Koklu, 49, hit the window of an herb shop.“The shopkeeper came out of his shop swearing and waving a bat,” said Alper Kamisli, a local resident who said he had witnessed the episode. “There was a big commotion. It was hard to see, but he ended up going back into the shop, getting a knife, and came back to stab the young man. I heard that he died on his way to the hospital.”Mr. Koklu’s death sent shock waves across the city, and immediately took on political overtones.His relatives said they saw a deeper motive for the stabbing: Mr. Koklu was on his way home from a demonstration against a government-backed bill to increase police powers, they said, and that might have made him a target for the shopkeeper, who was arrested.The Turkish Journalists’ Association even pointed a finger of blame at President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, saying that the president may have planted the seeds of the episode with a remark in a November speech about how the country’s shopkeepers were not mere vendors, but the “soldiers, guardians and police of the streets.”The residents of the Kadikoy district, though, reacted in a way that might have been closer to their slain neighbor’s heart: they organized more snowball fights on Wednesday and Thursday. And shopkeepers who felt the same way posted the signs.“Even something as pure as snow becomes tainted by Turkish politics,” said Husnu Tuncer, a hairdresser. “But we’ll keep coming out and playing in it until it melts, in solidarity with our brother Nuh Koklu.”Advertisement