AdvertisementSupported byMemo From IsraelBy Isabel KershnerJERUSALEM — With a month to go before Israel’s elections on March 17, the race has turned into a contest of cheeky online videos, with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in the role of an eager babysitter, and from the studios of the center-left Zionist Union a decidedly unsexy “Fifty Shades of Black.”The campaign has so far barely touched on the looming deadline in the Iranian nuclear talks, the festering Palestinian conflict or the heightened tensions with the White House over Mr. Netanyahu’s planned address to Congress. Instead, the candidates are playing for “likes.”Last weekend, Mr. Netanyahu’s Likud Party released a contentious, 41-second spoof of Islamic State fighters in a pickup truck bearing a bumper sticker that reads, “Anyone but Bibi” — an opposition slogan referring to Mr. Netanyahu by his nickname. With Arabic rap music, apparently used without the band’s permission, playing in the background, the fighters ask for directions to Jerusalem and are told, “Take a left.”Many political commentators have credited the often dour Likud with having outpaced its rivals in wit and creativity. Even more surprising, many say that Mr. Netanyahu, better known for his stern and forbidding demeanor in past campaigns, has stolen the show with a series of relaxed performances in which he has not only poked fun at his opponents, but also gently parodied himself.Israeli campaigns have traditionally relied on official television ads, jingles and slogans pasted on the sides of buses, supplemented in recent years by candidate appearances in Tel Aviv bars and on prime-time political comedy shows. Now the action has shifted to Israel’s vibrant social media, with the parties uploading their videos to Facebook and YouTube with the hope of them going viral.“The parties are not waiting for the television satire shows,” said Yuval Karniel, an expert in law and communications at the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, Israel. “They are doing their own.”Mr. Netanyahu made his YouTube comedy debut in January in the role of a kindergarten teacher trying to control his unruly charges — mini-caricatures of the leaders of rival parties played by children younger than 15, running afoul of Central Elections Committee rules. He appeared this month as the “Bibi-sitter,” reassuring new parents that he was their safest bet, in a comedy sketch rich with political innuendoes against his main competitors, Isaac Herzog, the leader of the Labor Party, and Tzipi Livni, the former justice minister and leader of a small centrist party. They are running on a joint slate called the Zionist Union.Next came the video of a flustered aide running in and out of Mr. Netanyahu’s office to relay the latest reports of supposed scandals involving the prime minister’s residence — the snails in the garden, the dirty cups in the sink — in an attempt to ridicule accusations of profligate domestic spending. (The video ends with Mr. Netanyahu asking for ice cream — “but not pistachio” — in reference to an episode in which he was accused of dipping into state coffers for an ice cream budget of nearly $3,000 a year, and a local ice cream parlor revealed his penchant for pistachio-flavored gelato.)Naftali Bennett of the right-wing, pro-settlement Jewish Home party dressed as an apologetic, liberal Tel Aviv hipster in a sarcastic critique of what the right here views as leftist defeatism. In response, Zehava Galon of the left-wing Meretz Party dressed as a religious settler.“It’s about who is cooler and nicer, who you would rather drink a beer with,” said Mr. Karniel, who has researched Israel’s last few election campaigns. “It is a conversation of humor and entertainment that blurs any real debate of the issues of the day.”Mr. Netanyahu, who has served three terms in office and who has strong security credentials in the eyes of many Israelis, can probably afford to joke a bit, Mr. Karniel said. Contenders who are still trying to build their image as potential leaders might not have that option.Mr. Herzog, of the Zionist Union, is a seasoned politician who has been fending off jokes about his boyish looks and relatively high-pitched voice, and who has been trying to shed his own longstanding nickname, Buji. He responded to the Likud campaign with a somber video declaring that the economic and security problems facing Israelis were “not funny.”In the Fifty Shades video a deep-voiced narrator intoned about the situation being “black” for Israel’s struggling middle class and the residents of the south who spent last summer in bomb shelters. And Mr. Herzog released a new video this week recounting his accomplishments, his own voice replaced by a voice-over track with a stately baritone.Yesh Atid, a centrist party led by Yair Lapid, the former finance minister, produced what it called an “anti-viral” video with an actor in an armchair recapping — for three hours — the party’s actions during its two years in government.Noy Alooshe, an Israeli musician who became the country’s king of electro hip-hop political remixes with a YouTube clip, “Zenga-Zenga,” mocking Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya in 2011, complimented Mr. Netanyahu’s videos for their quality. Still, Mr. Alooshe said there was something “bizarre” about Likud politicians chalking up Internet hits “like the Kardashians.”“Everybody’s talking about it,” he said. “It’s as if Bibi has turned into a buddy and Buji and Tzipi are like two cold Tel Avivians from the left.”Mr. Alooshe and a friend created “Livni Boy,” one of Israel’s first political YouTube hits, for Ms. Livni’s 2009 campaign. Mr. Alooshe worked for her party in the 2013 election, but this time he decided to retain his independence.He is now uploading his own election clips to Ynet, the popular Hebrew news site. A recent video focused on the tensions between Mr. Netanyahu and President Obama.“I’m the one who is supposed to provide the humor,” Mr. Alooshe added.Amit Segal, the political correspondent for Israel’s popular Channel 2, said Likud’s video campaign was mostly aimed at making Mr. Netanyahu a more likable figure.“Bibi is the guy from the ‘90s who speaks about Iran and, as the joke goes, for small talk speaks about Hamas,” Mr. Segal said.In the past, he said, Mr. Netanyahu appeared to take on a cold persona, in a jacket and tie with an Israeli flag behind him, detached from ordinary Israelis.“The main purpose of the ads is not only to say that Herzog and Livni cannot save your children from the Islamic State, but that Bibi is warm, friendly and humorous,” he added.At least one prominent citizen was not buying it. Israel’s president, Reuven Rivlin, a longtime rival of Mr. Netanyahu from within the Likud Party, gave a speech at the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv this week in which he listed Israel’s security and economic challenges.“Yet despite this painful reality,” he said, “the politicians are engrossed in the ‘creative’ — making viral clips and slogans. The Israeli public, I feel, are tired. They are fed up with attempts to drug them with satire and stardom. The Israeli public is looking for outlook, for hope. It wants to hear solutions.”Myra Noveck contributed research.Advertisement