AdvertisementSupported byLetter From AfricaBy Alan CowellJOHANNESBURG — There was a time when public discourse here turned virtually exclusively on weighty matters of race and survival, of oppression and its legacy, as South Africa struggled to emerge from the shadow of apartheid.These days, a newer concern has entered the debate: load-shedding.Load-shedding?That is the term for a series of rolling power shutdowns that steep homes in darkness and leave offices in suspended animation. Candles are lit. Generators rumble. So do public complaints.The cuts themselves, though, are part of the post-apartheid narrative: After the first democratic elections in 1994, the authorities pledged to electrify the homes of the poor — and did so for many people — only to discover that the power grid could not bear the strain. A promise boomeranged on the politicians who made it.And so, in the annual state of the nation address, marking the start of a new political season last week, President Jacob G. Zuma devoted considerable attention to promising enhanced power capacity for Africa’s most sophisticated economy. Gone was the epic language of South Africa’s remarkable transition from white supremacist rule.Did that mean that, after all the high drama and exceptionalism, an almost banal matter had nudged the big issues aside? Was normal business asserting itself?Well, not quite.In the days that followed Mr. Zuma’s speech, most South Africans recalled it not so much for its content as for the cascade of chaos that preceded it.First off, journalists and lawmakers joined a raucous chant — “bring back the signal” — after discovering that a jamming device had been planted in the august chamber of Parliament in Cape Town, blocking electronic communication from a body that insists on its members’ right to text and tweet at will.Then, invoking parliamentary protocols, a small but vocal left-wing opposition group, the Economic Freedom Fighters, led by the firebrand Julius Malema, prevented the president from starting his speech on time. One after another, lawmakers rose and demanded to know when Mr. Zuma planned to repay state funds used to improve his private residence at Nkandla, in his home area of KwaZulu-Natal.Such was the rumpus that the speaker of Parliament — from Mr. Zuma’s dominant African National Congress — called on security personnel to evict Mr. Malema and his lawmakers, who distinguish themselves and their claim to proletarian credentials by wearing red coveralls and hard hats to Parliament.As if by a prearranged plan, scores of corpulent men in white shirts and black trousers swarmed into Parliament, offering a sartorial counterpoint to the coveralls. Scuffles broke out. There was talk that some of the men were armed.That persuaded the Democratic Alliance, the biggest of the parliamentary opposition parties, to ask whether Mr. Zuma’s government had denied democracy by inviting armed police officers into the chamber, undermining the constitutional separation of powers. When no reply was offered, those lawmakers, too, marched out, all dressed by prearrangement in mourning black.That left Mr. Zuma to deliver a lackluster address an hour late to a reduced assembly.“State of Chaos,” read headlines in at least two newspapers the following day. The big themes — democracy and its denial — were back.The turmoil, some suggested, showed that a kind of freedom had been exercised, albeit with scant regard for decorum. But had South Africa’s democratic experiment frayed? “It was hard to believe that South Africa is a functional democracy,” The Times of South Africa said in an editorial.The imbroglio unfolded a day after the 25th anniversary of Nelson Mandela’s release from prison, eliciting dire musings of promise denied and hope deferred. Some reached back further, likening disappointment with the Zuma speech to 1985, when spin doctors suggested that P. W. Botha, a hard-line white president, was about to cross a Rubicon to ease apartheid.“It did not happen,” a columnist, William Saunderson-Meyer, wrote in The Citizen. “A few years later, P. W. was history.”Advertisement