By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDTFEB. 20, 2015
KABUL, Afghanistan — Four days after he was sworn in as defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter arrived in Afghanistan on Saturday morning to begin his own assessment of the security situation here since the United States wound down its combat mission last year.Mr. Carter said that he had seen varying reports about Afghanistan, including some that said the Taliban were undergoing a resurgence and others that claimed that a small group of militants had rebranded themselves as members of the Islamic State.He said that he needed to travel to Afghanistan so that he could meet with senior American and Afghan officials and make his own assessment of the situation. He will begin with meetings with President Ashraf Ghani and with Mr. Ghani’s chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah.Speaking with reporters on his military plane on the flight to Afghanistan, Mr. Carter said that he had a number of questions: “How are the Afghan security forces doing? What is their assessment of the battlefield situation? What is their assessment of their prospects going forward? And what’s the best way that we can support them going forward?”AdvertisementMr. Carter said that when he met with President Obama on Tuesday, the day he was sworn in, they discussed Afghanistan.Advertisement“We’re looking for success in Afghanistan that is lasting, the lasting accomplishment of our mission here and how to do that,” Mr. Carter said. “And the best way to do that is precisely what I’m here to assess.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He said that although the United States ended its combat mission a month and a half ago, there were still 10,000 troops here. The troops are now conducting counterterrorism operations and advising the Afghan military. Most American troops are scheduled to be withdrawn by the end of 2016.“They come first in my mind always — their welfare — particularly in circumstances like this,” Mr. Carter said of the troops. They are “what I wake up to, and wake up for every day, and I feel that — and want them to know that — and that is where this trip began and begins in my mind.”In response to a question about Iraq, Mr. Carter said any efforts to push the militants of the Islamic State out of the northern city of Mosul would be led by Iraqis and supported by the American military. He did not say when such action would begin, although some American military officials have said it will occur sometime this spring.Mr. Carter said that he was open to hearing recommendations from his military commanders about whether a limited number of American troops should be used to retake the city.“I think what’s important is that the campaign to retake Mosul succeeds, and we’re committed to that success and not to a particular timetable,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.