AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneThe top two health officials managing the Ebola epidemic cast doubt Friday on a pledge by West African leaders to reduce new cases to zero by mid-April, and expressed concern about a possible rebound of the disease.The officials, Dr. Bruce Aylward of the World Health Organization and Dr. David Nabarro, the United Nations’ special envoy for Ebola, said that the incidence of new cases was no longer plunging, and that the anti-Ebola effort was facing a $900 million shortfall for 2015.Their remarks, at a United Nations news conference, emphasized a sobering message they had delivered during meetings at the organization's headquarters this week.The Ebola crisis has ravaged Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone over the past year, leaving nearly 9,400 people dead.The men and women of one Ebola clinic in rural Liberia reflect on life inside the gates.Asked about the goal set by the leaders of the three afflicted nations on Sunday to stop transmission of Ebola in two months by isolating all known cases, Dr. Aylward said it was theoretically possible but would be “extremely difficult.”He said many people suspected of having been infected were reluctant to be included on so-called contact lists, which are a critical tool for health workers to track transmission of the disease and isolate the sick.Some potentially infected people, Dr. Aylward said, “go through extraordinary measures to not get on a contact list because of the stigma.”While the first three to four weeks of 2015 were encouraging because of the rapid decline in new cases, he said, “the story of the last four weeks has been different.”In that period, the decline flattened out, and health officials began recording 120 to 150 new cases per week. “This is not what you want to see with Ebola,” Dr. Aylward said.Questions and answers on the scale of the outbreak and the science of the Ebola virus.Dr. Nabarro echoed those remarks, saying, “The slowdown that Dr. Aylward referred to in the journey toward zero is a worry, and it shows that we have to maintain constant vigilance and surveillance to get to zero.”Dr. Nabarro also said that the fund for the United Nations-led effort to combat Ebola contained $600 million, but that the estimated cost of defeating the epidemic in 2015 was $1.5 billion. “We continue to need resources,” he said. “Obviously, if we don't get the full amount, we’ll do what we can. But for the moment, we're worried.”Asked about a new diagnostic field test kit for Ebola that the W.H.O. approved on Friday, which can determine in 15 minutes if someone is likely to have been infected, Dr. Aylward said it would be helpful, but “I wouldn't say it's a game changer.”The new test, announced on the W.H.O. website, is based on detection of an Ebola protein rather than the virus’s genetic material. Genetic-material tests can take 12 to 24 hours and must be done in a laboratory, but they are more reliable than the protein test. The protein test would require backup testing to confirm that a patient has Ebola.“With Ebola, this is an incredibly unforgiving disease,” Dr. Aylward said. “The whole thing started with one case.” He expressed caution about placing hope in “any test that can't find every virus reliably every single time.”Advertisement