AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — His exceptional longevity and vigor had made Ernest Côté something of a celebrity among Canadian military veterans. So in December, when someone posing as a city employee invaded Mr. Côté’s luxury apartment here, tied up the 101-year-old veteran, pulled a plastic bag over his head and left him for dead, the news attracted national attention.Mr. Côté, who fought on D-Day, managed to free himself, remove the bag and avoid suffocation. But the shock of the episode was compounded by surprise when the police arrested the suspect, Ian Bush, a 59-year-old human resources manager and consultant from suburban Ottawa who had no criminal history.The mystery surrounding Mr. Bush grew on Friday when he was arrested again after a court appearance and charged with the murder of a retired federal court judge, his wife and a neighbor in 2007. That triple homicide also involved the invasion of a condominium. The couple, Alban and Raymonde Garon, and the neighbor, Marie-Claire Beniskos, were tied up, beaten and then suffocated with plastic bags. The Ottawa Citizen and other news organizations say Mr. Bush is also under investigation in connection with a fourth suffocation killing.The police on Friday also charged Mr. Bush with 11 firearms offenses after a raid on his home. “This is an important development in a case that has troubled the community, investigators and the family and friends of these people for several years,” said Jill Skinner, the acting chief of the Ottawa police, at a news conference on Friday.Mr. Bush’s court appearance followed a psychiatric examination that found him fit to stand trial. He chose to be tried by a judge and jury in connection with the attack on Mr. Côté.Geraldine Castle-Trudel, Mr. Bush’s lawyer, said her client strongly denied the new allegations. She also suggested that a leak of Friday’s additional charges to The Citizen earlier this week had jeopardized his right to a fair trial. The police made public a security camera image that they said showed a man trying to use one of Mr. Côté’s credit cards in December. Several news outlets reported that one of his relatives contacted the police after seeing the picture. But because the police did not previously disclose that the triple-murder victims had been suffocated using plastic bags, there appeared to be no obvious link to their deaths and the attack on the war veteran.During the news conference, at which relatively little information was released, the police said they had quickly made a connection. Ultimately, they said, DNA tests provided the evidence that led to Friday’s arrest.While the police declined to describe that evidence, The Ottawa Citizen reported that it involved duct tape used in both crimes.The police repeatedly declined to discuss Mr. Bush’s motive. But tax records found by the newspaper suggest a possible link to the retired judge. In 2000, the Tax Court of Canada, where Mr. Garon was chief justice at the time, threw out an appeal filed by Mr. Bush over denied deduction claims for moving expenses and losses from his human resources consulting business. The following year, Chief Justice Garon received a fake summons to a hearing of the “High Court of Humanitarian Justice” to be held at Mr. Bush’s home. It was filed away, and apparently forgotten, with his tax case records.Mr. Bush is married, a father and a grandfather, but little is known of his immediate family. “Ian has always been a very strong family person,” Norm Bush, his brother, told reporters after Mr. Bush’s arrest in December. “So for something like this to come forward, these kinds of allegations and accusations, for all of us, it’s a big shock.”Mr. Bush grew up as the son of a manager at a paper mill in Dryden, a remote town in Ontario. After studying economics, he worked for several years at a large mill owned by the paper company Domtar, south of Ottawa in Cornwall, Ontario, near the border with the United States. While with Domtar, he earned an M.B.A. at McGill University in Montreal and eventually handled labor relations at 15 of the company’s mills.During the 1990s, Mr. Bush held a variety of jobs, including one as a school board administrator in Dryden, while also running his consulting firm. He settled in Ottawa in 1999.He was a Twitter user, posting 4,712 times from November 2010 until his arrest last December. While the posts show he held little regard for many politicians, women’s rights, the World Bank and Google, he appears never to have advocated violence.On Dec. 18, the day of the attack on Mr. Côté, he reposted links to four business-related news articles as well as an article from Reason, an American libertarian magazine, with the headline, “When Guns Are Outlawed, Only Outlaws Who Pay Off the Cops Will Have Guns.”Advertisement