By NIDA NAJARFEB. 20, 2015
NEW DELHI — Amartya Sen, the Nobel-winning economist and Harvard professor, confirmed on Friday that he would step down as chancellor of Nalanda University this summer, ending his role as head of an ambitious academic project he helped start last year.Mr. Sen, in a letter to the university’s governing board that was published in the Indian news media, wrote Thursday that the president of India had failed to sign the renewal of his chancellorship, which the board unanimously approved a month ago. The delay, he said, is an indication that “that the government wants me to cease being the chancellor of Nalanda University after this July, and technically it has the power to do so.”Mr. Sen also wrote that the government had indicated its intention to reconstitute the board, an action that he said would violate the parliamentary act governing the university.“The issue is academic freedom,” Mr. Sen said in an interview on Friday in New Delhi. He said that though the university had faced political interference from the new government before, its frequency “has dramatically gone up, and the voice of the academic community has dramatically gone down.”AdvertisementMr. Sen, 81, has been a vocal critic of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, particularly during the period leading up to the parliamentary elections last year. In 2013, Mr. Sen said he did not want Mr. Modi to become prime minister, accusing him of not doing enough to make minorities feel safe and referring to the Gujarat riots during Mr. Modi’s tenure as the state's chief minister in 2002. The riots left more than 1,000 people, mostly Muslims, dead.AdvertisementMr. Sen’s departure leaves the future of the university in doubt. Mr. Sen has said that a boyhood visit with his grandfather to the ancient ruins of Nalanda University inspired his vision for the new project. Described as the India's oldest university, the original institution drew thousands of students from all over Asia.Its new iteration was intended to carry on that tradition, drawing on the support from various countries that endorsed its creation at the East Asia Summit in Thailand in 2009. In addition to Mr. Sen, the governing board includes academics from Britain, China and Singapore. George Yeo, the former foreign minister of Singapore, was one of its earliest champions.Mr. Sen’s stewardship was seen as a way to draw researchers and scholars from around the world to what was envisioned as a high-caliber academic institution in India, which has largely lacked such globally competitive institutions. The government pledged more than $330 million to the university, but concerns grew over the level of autonomy that Mr. Sen and others sought.“It was Nalanda that needed a man like Amartya Sen at the helm, not the other way around,” said Sugata Bose, who is a member of the university's governing body, a member of Parliament from West Bengal and a professor at Harvard. “We met the faculty at Nalanda, many of whom made it clear that they were attracted to this new university because they saw Amartya Sen at the helm.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Sen, who admitted he was not a born administrator, said he was initially reluctant about assuming leadership at the university when he was approached with the idea in 2007.“When I was originally asked by someone in the government, how would I like to be chancellor, I said I’d like it like a hole in the head,” he said. “I wanted the thing to be done, but I didn’t want to do it myself.”But the ethos of the university, particularly connecting India to the rest of Asia on the basis of ideas, as opposed to trade, appealed to him, and he said he eventually came around to the idea.The ambitions of the university often clashed with the realities of getting such a project off the ground in India. Classes began in September, but construction of the university’s main building is scheduled to begin later this year. As it stands, there are just two dozen faculty members and students on the interim campus involved in courses in environmental studies and history.AdvertisementSyed Akbaruddin, a spokesman for the Ministry of External Affairs, which oversees the university, said in a telephone interview that there had been no effort by the government to end Mr. Sen’s tenure. The deadline for the final minutes of the governing board’s meeting in January is at the end of this month, he said, after which the president is set to receive a formal letter on Mr. Sen’s renewal.“We haven’t received the approved minutes of the meeting in January, and therefore haven’t moved the president to inform him of the outcome to that meeting,” Mr. Akbaruddin said.He also denied knowledge of any government attempt to reconstitute the board.Mr. Bose said that the board had expedited a request for Mr. Sen’s renewal to the president in January, but that the ministry had failed to provide a document making the renewal request official.Mr. Sen said he did not know how his departure would affect plans for the university.“Part of my sense of loss was that it had been a kind of dream of mine since the age of 11 when I first saw it,” he said. “I mean it may still happen, and I will do my best to help it.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.