AdvertisementSupported byBy Ellen BarryNEW DELHI — Indian tycoons jockeyed on Friday to demonstrate their allegiance to Prime Minister Narendra Modi by bidding on a widely discussed item of clothing: the tailored suit that Mr. Modi wore last month to meet President Obama. The suit’s yellow pinstripes, upon closer examination, proved to be tiny lines of script spelling out Mr. Modi’s name.After an afternoon of intense bidding, a diamond trader from Mr. Modi’s native state of Gujarat purchased the suit for 43.1 million rupees, or $693,234.The proceeds of the auction, which included more than 450 gifts to Mr. Modi, are to benefit his campaign to clean the Ganges River. During more than a decade as Gujarat’s chief minister, Mr. Modi regularly auctioned off gifts he had received, using the proceeds for social programs. This time, however, the event also served to cauterize a political embarrassment.Political rivals of Mr. Modi seized on the pinstripes, and the suit’s reportedly exorbitant cost, as evidence that he was narcissistic and out of touch with the concerns of the poor, a charge made just before state elections in Delhi this month that his party lost badly. Though a wealthy Gujarat businessman later said he had given the suit to Mr. Modi as a gift, some damage had been done.Opposition politicians scoffed at Friday’s auction.“It reeks of more arrogance,” Ajay Maken, a senior leader of the Indian National Congress Party, told The Times of India, dismissing the auction as “a damage control exercise.”And there was no shortage of Modi fans willing to pay handsomely for the suit, and the aura of beneficence that would presumably accompany it. Real estate developers, factory owners and a number of diamond merchants bid on the suit, which was displayed on a mannequin that resembled Mr. Modi. One enthusiastic television newscaster described it as “the suit that wowed the fashion police.”“I will keep it in my house; it is something the entire country must see,” said Raju Aggarwal, a businessman who bid 5.1 million rupees, or $82,003. Mr. Aggarwal was outbid by Rajesh Juneja, a Gujarat-based textile merchant, who said in a TV interview that “a suit worn by Narendra Modi is like having a piece of Modi himself.”In the end, however, it was Hitesh Patel who made the winning bid on behalf of his father, Lalji, who owns Dharmanandan Diamonds, noting later that he had expected to pay much more.“We will keep the suit at our factory, and it will be a source of inspiration,” he told the BBC. The elder Mr. Patel was nearly overcome, telling reporters that “this event gave me a chance to do something in the national interest. I never thought that this incredible suit will come to me.”Advertisement