By ALAN COWELLFEB. 20, 2015
The boy was just a year old when five men with machetes snatched him from his home. Two days later, the police found his body with the arms and legs lopped off.The reason for the atrocity? The baby’s pale skin marked him as an albino, and, where he lived in southeast Africa, albinos are at risk because their body parts are used for witchcraft. They also face discrimination and are often shunned as outcasts.The abduction, killing and mutilation of the child, Yohana Bahati, in the Geita region of northwestern Tanzania last weekend sent a chill of revulsion across the globe.“Violence and discrimination against people with albinism must be halted,” the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, said in a statement from his office in Geneva on Thursday, calling the killing “horrific.”AdvertisementBut the fear persists that, with Tanzanian elections set for October, the risk to the country’s albinos will grow as politicians turn to witchcraft to enhance their prospects.Advertisement“This is the year of elections in Tanzania and, as some analysts have suggested, it could be a dangerous year for people living with albinism,” Alvaro Rodriguez, the United Nations’ ranking official in Tanzania, warned on Wednesday.Since 2000, according to United Nations estimates, 75 albinos have been killed and the frequency of attacks on them seems to be increasing. In the past two months, three such attacks have been reported. In December, a 4-year-old girl, Pendo Emmanuelle Nundi, was taken by an armed gang. She has not yet been found.Witch doctors will pay as much as $75,000 for a complete set of albino body parts, according to a recent report from the Red Cross.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The persecution of albinos has been a longstanding feature of life in parts of Tanzania, and advocacy groups complain that the authorities, despite a recent ban on witchcraft, have shown little interest in curbing the lucrative trade in body parts.“These attacks are accompanied by a high degree of impunity,” Mr. Rodriguez said, according to Agence France-Presse, “and while Tanzania has made efforts to combat the problem, much more must be done to put an end to these heinous crimes and to protect this vulnerable segment of the population.”Vicky Ntetema, executive director of Under the Same Sun, a Canadian nonprofit working to defend albinos, told Reuters: “There’s absolutely no political will among leaders to end these macabre killings.” She said family members were often linked to abductions.“Albinism is not a disease,” she said. “People must understand albinos are normal people like everyone else, and the government has a role to play to ensure this education reaches many people since most of the killings involve members of the family.”Albinism is a hereditary genetic condition that causes an absence of pigmentation in the skin, hair and eyes and is often linked by researchers to inbreeding. It is particularly prevalent in Tanzania, affecting one person in 1,400, compared with one in 20,000 in the West.After the abduction of the baby last weekend, his mother was taken to a hospital to be treated for cuts to her face and arms inflicted as she sought to shield the baby from the attacks, news reports said. The police were said to be questioning the baby’s father, but no charges have been filed.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.