By JIM YARDLEYFEB. 21, 2015
VATICAN CITY —  The Islamic State’s beheading in August of the journalist James Foley stirred global outrage, fury and despair. But for many of his fellow Roman Catholics, Mr. Foley’s death in Syria transformed him into a symbol of faith under the most brutal of conditions.One Catholic essayist compared him to St. Bartholomew, who died for his Christian faith. Others were drawn to Mr. Foley’s account of praying the rosary during an earlier captivity in Libya. Even Pope Francis, in a condolence call to Mr. Foley’s parents, described him as a martyr, according to the family.Then came an unexpected twist: It turned out that Mr. Foley was among several hostages in Syria who had converted to Islam in captivity, according to some freed captives. What had been among some Catholics a theological discussion of faith and heroic resistance quickly shifted to a different set of questions:Is any conversion under such duress a legitimate one? Why would a man who had spoken so openly about his Catholic faith turn to Islam? Given his circumstances, is it even surprising if he did?“How do we assess that?” asked the Rev. James Martin, a Jesuit priest and editor at large of the Catholic magazine America, who described Mr. Foley as “a good and holy man” and expressed doubts about the genuineness of his conversion. “The answer is we can’t assess it. We cannot look at what is in someone’s soul.”AdvertisementReligious faith is often described as a deeply sustaining force for people in captivity, providing comfort, strength and hope. The family of Kayla Mueller, who died this month while being held hostage by the Islamic State in Syria, recently released a letter Ms. Mueller had written in captivity in which she described surrendering herself to God and feeling “tenderly cradled in free-fall.”AdvertisementFaith can also be a practical force, experts say, in that prayer or reading religious texts can provide order and discipline to days otherwise defined by fear or brutality, or even just boredom. And practical, also, as a means of survival: Some freed hostages describe converting to Islam as a tactic to win favor and sympathy from their captors.For many Catholics, issues such as religious persecution, forced conversion and martyrdom are distressingly current. Pope Francis has frequently inveighed against the persecution of Christians in the Middle East, where militants with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, have ordered some Christians to convert or face death.This month, Francis invoked the death of John the Baptist as the model of Christian sacrifice, citing the “men, women, children who are being persecuted, hated, driven out of their homes, tortured, massacred.”Martyrdom, he added, “is not a thing of the past: This is happening right now.”To many Catholics, Mr. Foley’s death seemed infused with religious overtones. A former altar boy who grew up in a Catholic family, Mr. Foley had volunteered in low-income schools while attending Marquette University in Milwaukee, and then joined Teach for America. Shifting to photojournalism, he immersed himself in conflict reporting, working as a freelancer in Iraq and Afghanistan and then covering the Libyan civil war in 2011.Pushing to the chaotic front lines, Mr. Foley and three other journalists were ambushed by forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, then Libya’s ruler. A photographer, Anton Hammerl, was killed. Mr. Foley and the other two surviving journalists were taken hostage and spent 44 days in captivity as family members and former classmates at Marquette campaigned for his freedom and organized prayer vigils on his behalf.Upon his release, Mr. Foley wrote a letter of thanks to Marquette in which he also described the importance of his Catholic faith during his captivity. He and a cellmate prayed aloud “to speak our weaknesses and hopes together, as if in a conversation with God,” he said, and he also prayed the rosary to connect with his mother.“I prayed I could communicate through some cosmic reach of the universe to her,” he wrote. “I began to pray the rosary. It was what my mother and grandmother would have prayed.”AdvertisementHis open discussion of his spirituality would resurface after Mr. Foley was taken captive again in 2012, in Syria, and then after his grisly death last August. On social media, many Catholics found inspiration in his earlier words and in accounts by freed captives describing Mr. Foley as someone who often gave away his food or blanket to others but never buckled to his captors.Some Catholic commentators suggested Mr. Foley might be a candidate for Catholic martyrdom, a complicated process that involves determining if a person was killed because of his or her faith. Others praised him but questioned whether such talk was appropriate and whether his killers’ motivation had been more political than religious.Then, in October, an article in The New York Times  detailed the brutality endured by Mr. Foley and others in captivity, while also quoting freed hostages as saying Mr. Foley and others had converted to Islam. Mr. Foley was described as particularly devout and as a fervent reader of the Quran. In an interview earlier this month, one freed captive, Nicolas Hénin, said Mr. Foley seemed the most interested of the group in learning about Islam and that his conversion appeared genuine, even if Mr. Hénin could not be certain.“I was not inside his mind,” he said.Some Catholics were startled. But for Mr. Foley’s mother, Diane, the disclosure was not new. She said that she had spoken months earlier with Jejoen Bontinck, a Belgian former captive who is Muslim, after his release, and that he had described her son’s conversion as a genuine act. Then, after French and Spanish captives were released, Ms. Foley said she received a somewhat different version of events.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What the hostages had told me was that by saying that he had converted to Islam, he would be left alone five times a day, without being beaten, so that he could pray,” she said in an interview.Like others, Ms. Foley, who is a Eucharistic minister at her parish in New Hampshire, described her son as deeply interested in spirituality and the faiths of other people. But she still strongly believes that her son died as a Christian and that his conversion was an act of practicality.“Only God and Jim know what was going on in his heart,” she said. “I think the Lord used Jim in a magnificent way in the last two years of his life. He gave hope to his fellow captives.”The issue also arose after Mr. Foley’s captivity in Libya. In a series of articles in Global Post, as well as during an appearance at Marquette, Mr. Foley described how he had agreed to pray with his Muslim cellmates, jailed as enemies of the Qaddafi government. He was surprised when, after he had washed himself, they declared him converted.“So, from then on out, I prayed with them five times a day,” he said at Marquette. “It was so powerful, and it was something I needed to do to commune with these guys who were relying on their faith in Allah. But it was difficult. I was thinking, ‘Jesus, am I praying to Allah? Am I violating my belief in you?’ ”Advertisement“I don’t have an answer to that,” he continued. “I just know that I was authentically with them, and I was authentically praying to Jesus. I don’t know theologically. But I thought I was being authentic.”His family said his Syrian captivity was much the same.“I believe, much like in Libya, Jim ‘converted’ for the purpose of surviving and being close to some of the others there, and to have some discipline,” said Michael Foley, one of his brothers, adding, “I’ll bet you and I would strongly explore ‘converting’ in that situation.”At the Vatican, Cardinal Angelo Amato, prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, said he was unaware of any discussion of martyrdom for Mr. Foley, noting that such a process can take decades or centuries. But he did say that any religious conversion “not done freely does not indicate a conversion.”“You can’t condemn people who are afraid of dying and so don’t show themselves as Catholic,” Cardinal Amato said. “A Christian is not obliged to be a martyr.”Nicole Tung, a photographer who worked closely with Mr. Foley in Syria, described his faith as “deep within him” and said he knew the Bible so well that he often had broad discussions with Syrians comparing Christianity with Islam.But Ms. Tung said she thought Mr. Foley would be uncomfortable with being considered a martyr. She described his journalism as commingled with a powerful compassion: He helped raise $14,000 to buy an ambulance for children in Aleppo, Syria, just as he helped organize an earlier fund-raiser for the family of Mr. Hammerl, the photographer who was killed in Libya.“As a humanitarian and as a journalist,” Ms. Tung said, “was really how he conducted himself.”A version of this article appears in print on February 22, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Test of Faith in Brutal Captivity.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.