Since Zhu Rongji stepped down as premier of China in 2003, he has pursued interests including playing a type of fiddle called the huqin, writing best sellers and practicing philanthropy. It is this last activity, in particular, that returned Mr. Zhu to the spotlight, while also drawing attention to how unusual such charity is among former Chinese politicians.The China Philanthropy Research Institute, which is affiliated with Beijing Normal University, announced this month that Mr. Zhu, 86, had landed a spot for the second consecutive year on “China’s 100 Outstanding Donors List,” a lineup overwhelmingly dominated by wealthy businesspeople. In 2013 and 2014, he had donated a total of 40 million renminbi, or $6.5 million, making him the country’s most philanthropic retired politician.The money, from Mr. Zhu’s book royalties, has gone to a foundation seeking to improve education in poor rural areas. Mr. Zhu’s charity work has elicited glowing comments on Internet sites.
“To see the most respected person do the most touching thing, I’m very moved,” a person with the user name 904hw1kte wrote on Sina, a popular news portal. “I wish you good health, China’s good premier. I miss the times when you were in office.”A Shanghai user named Xu Zu Fa Wu Hui wrote: “Premier Zhu, your actions represent those of an honest and upright official. Your character represents the great moral fortitude of the people’s premier, and your thinking represents a generation of great men.”While Mr. Zhu’s donations have won praise, they have prompted discussions about why so few of his political colleagues have followed suit. Some Internet users bemoaned a lack of honest officials working to benefit the lives of ordinary people.“Before we had Premier Zhou Enlai, who saw the founding of China, then we had the upright Premier Zhu Rongji,” wrote Stephen Sen of Beijing. “For officials to have clean hands and remain uncorrupted, who can compare? Sometimes corrupt officials easily overlook the existence of the people, but in fact the peoples’ eyes are very sharp.”Charitable donations by Chinese politicians are few when compared with those of their Western counterparts. Li Ruihuan, a former member of the Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee, set up a fund for students in his native Tianjin in 2004, and by 2013 he had contributed more than 35 million renminbi. Last December, Qiao Shi, once a contender for the top Chinese leadership, donated 11 million renminbi to the China Legal Exchange Foundation, which was established in 1985 to promote justice and advance the legal system.But these are exceptions. Discussions of Mr. Zhu’s case have raised questions about whether limited donations by public figures are a reflection of a weak civil spirit in Chinese society or of a culture specific to government officials.The Chinese news media has long attributed the relatively feeble state of philanthropy in China to the insecurity of the country’s nouveau riche, as well as to the fading of the charitable culture that prevailed in imperial times. They also point to a lack of legal or financial incentives for giving, such as tax deductions.In a recent article, The Beijing Times noted that a turning point came in 2004, when relatives of the deceased leader Deng Xiaoping donated 1 million renminbi from his book royalties to support innovative endeavors by Chinese youths in the fields of science and technology — a high-profile act that inspired several politicians to donate.The state-run People’s Daily reported this month that book royalties remain the primary source of charitable donations by Chinese politicians, and that education is their most popular cause.Rupert Hoogewerf, the founder of the Hurun Report, which compiled its own list of Chinese philanthropists in 2014, on which Mr. Zhu ranked 60th, called the former premier’s donations “groundbreaking.”“This was the first time we’ve ever seen a politician on our list,” he said. “To be donating that much money from book royalties is not easy with the industry shifting to online. It means that Zhu’s book was pretty successful.”Mr. Hoogewerf noted that former politicians in China seldom accepted paid speaking engagements or did business consulting, important sources of income for many retired leaders in the West, including the former British prime minister Tony Blair.The anticorruption campaign of the past two years and the recent ban on military officers earning outside incomes have also narrowed the channels by which officials can amass wealth, experts said.Mao Xiaowei, who directs a cultural research institute in Beijing, said that the relatively low salaries of officials and the public scrutiny that donations would invite had deterred officials from giving more.“Chinese officials are not willing to donate because Chinese people will soon look at them and will want to investigate whether the source of income is good or not,” Mr. Mao said in an interview. “Just think, how many years would it take for an official just to earn 100,000 renminbi? Not all government officials can do it.”Mr. Zhu has kept a low profile since leaving office, which is typical for retired members of the Standing Committee, who often continue to exercise considerable power behind the scenes. He nevertheless returned to public view with the publication in 2009 of “Zhu Rongji Meets the Press” and “Zhu Rongji’s Answers to Journalists’ Questions” and in 2011 with the release of a four-volume compilation of speeches, letters and articles. An English-language edition of the latter, titled, “Zhu Rongji on the Record: The Road to Reform, 1991-1997,” was published in 2013. That same year, he wrote a public letter for a ceremony at his alma mater, Tsinghua University, in which he urged students to visit China’s remote, poor areas to better understand conditions and attitudes there.Whether Mr. Zhu’s actions can inspire other Chinese political figures to take up philanthropy has been the subject of debate. The state-run news media has expressed hope that his generosity might set an example, but Mr. Mao, the cultural institute director, has voiced doubt.“Zhu Rongji’s philanthropy won’t have that much of an effect on other politicians,” Mr. Mao said. “Premier Zhu was setting a good example, but by writing his book he was also seeking to leave a good name for himself.”It is likely that successful business leaders will continue to lead the philanthropy lists in China for some time. The most recent research of donors by China Philanthropy Research Institute listed 24 people as having given more than 100 million renminbi in 2014. The two biggest donors were identified as Jack Ma, the founder of the e-commerce giant Alibaba, and Joseph Tsai, Alibaba’s chief financial officer.But the list also saw the arrival in the Top 100 of several donors with different backgrounds, including a renowned calligrapher, Shi Shiqi, and two unidentified winners of the lottery, one from the northern province of Shanxi and the other from the northeastern province of Shandong.