In China, not all things that are lost are necessarily lost forever.A digital hunt for an iPhone that was lost in a New York City bar a year ago and that ended up in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong has brought together two unlikely strangers: Matt Stopera, an editor at BuzzFeed, and a man who has become known online in China as “Brother Orange.”Mr. Stopera, who lost his phone in February 2014, believed he would never see it again after he walked out of an East Village bar one night where he had spent some time after work with colleagues.But then strange images including hundreds of pictures of fireworks displays, menus, the Canadian singer Avril Lavigne and, perhaps most tellingly, a mysterious Chinese man standing before an orange tree started showing up on his photo stream on the new phone he had bought from Verizon.How I Became A Minor Celebrity In China – (Matt Stopera & the Power of the internet)!- //t.co/e0Xsn4alBM via @mattstopera— Phay Yeo (@phayyeo) 23 Feb 15Alarmed but also pleasantly surprised by the stranger’s photos, Mr. Stopera eventually went to an Apple store, where he was advised to log onto his iCloud account and to delete everything on his old phone. The iPhone thus became unusable for the stranger who was taking photos on the other side of the world.At that point, Mr. Stopera assumed the story of his iPhone was over, but he posted online an article about his lost phone and the mysterious images that followed its disappearance. After his post was translated into Chinese, it drew the attention of thousands of people in China.Chinese Internet users, including one with an account on the microblogging platform Sina Weibo called “Helping Search for Brother Orange” and staff members at Sina Weibo, soon began a campaign to track down the person who had Mr. Stopera’s phone.The users identified the place the images had been taken as Guangdong. Then, last Friday, a microblog user from Guangdong who identified himself as a nephew of Brother Orange uploaded three pictures of a man eating dinner and a picture of a black iPhone, with the message: “Is this the Brother Orange you are looking for?”Brother Orange himself then created a Sina Weibo account over the weekend describing himself as “Brother Orange who doesn’t sell oranges” and sent a greeting to Mr. Stopera.Brother Orange explained that the iPhone was a gift from a distant relative. He then extended his greeting one step further, by inviting Mr. Stopera to visit China.“Matt, you’re welcome to come visit my home and try its famous local dishes,” he posted in Chinese.Mr. Stopera, who has described the phone hunt as a “great journey” and said he was delighted by Brother Orange’s images of China, responded:“Bro Orange! I would love to come visit you soon! What do you think?”I ship Matt Stopera and Bro Orange. #MATTANGE #BroOrange
//t.co/0UlY9cfc9a— Cécile ఇ (@kittisaurus)22 Feb 15 Brother Orange confirmed the invitation on Weibo, and the story has been read by more than 30 million people in China.  Mr. Stopera has also received tour-guide services and language instruction from a large number of people online.Brother Orange said on Monday that he could not respond to a request for comment, saying “Really sorry, I’m busy with business right now.” Mr. Stopera stated on his Weibo page that he intended to firm up his travel dates to visit Brother Orange soon.