By IVAN NECHEPURENKOOCT. 12, 2015
MOSCOW —  Russia’s main security agency on Monday detained what it said was a terrorist cell operating out of a central Moscow apartment, where, it said, an “explosive device” was found.The Federal Security Service said in an announcement that about 10 people had frequented the apartment, and that a few of those detained had trained with the Islamic State in camps in Syria. Neither the names of detainees nor the number arrested was released.For nearly two weeks, Russia has been bombing opposition groups in Syria to buttress the government of President Bashar al-Assad, depicting its opponents there as terrorists loyal to the Islamic State. While the Federal Security Service says about 2,400 Russians have joined the group in Syria, Islamic State adherents were not known to have any significant presence here.Some on social media were skeptical toward the announcement of the foiled plot.Analysts have said the Syria campaign runs the risk of producing the opposite effect — blowback from Sunni Islamists outraged by the attack on fellow Sunnis who are fighting the Assad government.Those arrested on Monday were in Russia long before the country started its military operations in Syria at the end of September, the security agency said. The agency said they had planned to use a homemade bomb containing more than 10 pounds of explosives to attack Moscow’s transportation system.Russia has suffered a string of terrorist attacks claiming hundreds of lives in the decades since the Soviet Union collapsed. Many of them were connected to a separatist rebellion in the Caucasus region, which President Vladimir V. Putin brutally suppressed after coming to power in 2001.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Russia Says It Detained Terrorist Cell in Moscow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.