AdvertisementSupported byBy Merna ThomasCAIRO — A steel tycoon who came to epitomize the cronyism and corruption in Egypt during the era of President Hosni Mubarak was disqualified on Sunday from running for Parliament, according to state news media reports.The tycoon, Ahmed Ezz, 56, had filed papers earlier this month announcing his intention to run again for Parliament, where he had been a leader. But an election committee disqualified him on the grounds that he had failed to submit financial statements by one of his wives, Shahinaz el-Naggar, a prominent businesswoman, according to a judicial official who spoke to Al-Ahram, the flagship state newspaper.The decision also saved the current government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi from the embarrassing spectacle of seating a Parliament that included Mr. Ezz, whose wealth, influence and service to Mr. Mubarak’s ruling party made him a central focus of protester anger during Egypt’s 2011 uprising.Mr. Ezz, a close friend of Mr. Mubarak’s son Gamal Mubarak, was accused of using his political influence to impose a near monopoly on the steel industry. As a power broker in the ruling National Democratic Party, he was widely seen as the architect of rigged parliamentary elections in 2010 that were a precursor to the Arab Spring revolt the next year.In the post-uprising clamor to punish Mr. Mubarak and his associates, the downfall of Mr. Ezz was swift. He was barred from travel, prosecuted and convicted on charges, including corruption, and sentenced to more than 30 years in prison. His release on bail last summer after an appeals court ordered a retrial set off little outcry, reflecting the changing political mood under Mr. Sisi’s government, which has made prosecutions of political opponents, including youth leaders of the 2011 revolt, a priority.Yet welcoming Mr. Ezz back into the ruling circles appeared a step too far for the government, which has held up the parliamentary elections that are to be held next month, as evidence of its commitment to democracy despite an ongoing crackdown on most types of political dissent.During a television interview on Saturday, Amr Adeeb, a pro-government talk-show host, told Mr. Ezz he was “embarrassing the Egyptian state” by choosing to stand for Parliament again.In response, Mr. Ezz offered effusive praise for Mr. Sisi’s government and insisted he had the right to compete in the elections. And while Mr. Ezz has consistently maintained that he is innocent of any wrongdoing, he acknowledged in the interview his unique role in the fall of Mr. Mubarak by giving protesters a cause “to come out in a revolution.”“If for nothing else,” he said, “I apologize just for the anger of the Egyptians.” Advertisement