AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersADEN — Yemen’s president sought to resume his duties as head of state on Sunday, holding his first public meeting with state officials since he fled house arrest by the Houthi militia that dominates the northern half of the nation.President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi convened governors of several southern provinces and military commanders at the presidential retreat in the economic hub of Aden, in a meeting that was broadcast on the city’s local television channel.Mr. Hadi submitted his resignation last month after Houthi fighters seized the presidential palace and held him under house arrest in the capital, Sana, at the apparent conclusion of a power struggle that had followed months of tension over a constitutional dispute.But Parliament never met to approve the resignation for it to go into effect as stipulated by Yemeni laws. On Saturday, Mr. Hadi appeared to rescind his resignation after he escaped from Sana, saying in a statement that he was still president. Aden is outside the control of the Houthis, tribesmen from the north who belong to the Zaydi branch of Shiite Islam.Mr. Hadi’s escape and resumption of his duties could complicate talks between major political parties in Sana on a new transitional administration.His flight to Aden followed an agreement between Yemen’s rival factions on Friday, brokered by the United Nations, to set up a transitional council that keeps Parliament in place and gives a voice to some other groups.The United Nations envoy to Yemen, Jamal Benomar, who is overseeing the talks, said Mr. Hadi had reassured him in a telephone call on Sunday that he still supported dialogue to end the crisis but demanded those negotiations be moved to a neutral location outside the capital.Mr. Hadi also reaffirmed his commitment to a 2011 power transfer deal that allowed veteran President Ali Abdullah Saleh to step down after months of Arab Spring protests, according to people who were at the meeting. And he denounced the Houthis, who seized Sana in September and completed their takeover of the government last month. “What is going on is a struggle for authority of the first order and not due to concern for the interests of the people,” one source quoted Mr. Hadi as saying at the meeting.He called for the release of Prime Minister Khaled Bahah and other government officials, who have also been kept under house arrest.The Houthis have said their advance on Sana was intended to save the country from corruption and from being divided by a draft constitution calling for devolving power to local authorities.A member of the Houthi group’s Ansarullah politburo, Ali al-Qahoum, was quoted by the local news website al-Akhbar on Saturday as saying that it no longer mattered if Mr. Hadi remained in Sana or left. Western countries worry that unrest in Yemen could create opportunities for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula to plot more attacks against international targets.Advertisement