AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressMALÉ, Maldives — The authorities in the Maldives arrested a former president and current opposition leader, Mohamed Nasheed, on Sunday, and ordered him to stand trial on charges related to his 2012 decision to arrest a senior judge.Mr. Nasheed’s party called for his release and supporters protested in the capital, Malé, after the arrest, in a sign that the Indian Ocean archipelago nation could be plunging into political uncertainty.A document signed by a senior criminal court judge said Mr. Nasheed was being charged under antiterrorism laws. Television stations in the country aired scenes of the arrest.Mr. Nasheed resigned as president in February 2012 after weeks of public protests against his order to arrest Abdulla Mohamed, chief judge of the Criminal Court. In 2013, Mr. Nasheed lost the presidential election to the current president, Yameen Abdul Gayoom, a half brother of Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who had ruled the country for 30 years.The arrest comes weeks after a key ally of Yameen Abdul Gayoom defected from the ruling coalition to align with Mr. Nasheed’s Maldivian Democratic Party to set off a series of protests to force Mr. Gayoom to resign. They accuse Mr. Gayoom’s administration of repeatedly violating the Constitution.A government minister, Mohamed Shareef, said Mr. Nasheed was arrested because the court felt he might not honor a summons to stand trial. Mr. Nasheed is accused of using the military to arrest the senior judge when it had no authority to do so, Mr. Shareef said. He also is accused of detaining Mr. Mohamed for weeks without trial or legal counsel and ignoring a Supreme Court order to release him, he said.Mr. Mohamed was arrested soon after he released an opposition politician whom Mr. Nasheed’s government had detained. He was accused of bias and corruption.A spokesman for the Maldivian Democratic Party, Hamid Abdul Gaffoor, said in a statement that “Nasheed had never absconded from court, nor has taken the opportunity to flee or go into hiding,” and called on the authorities to release him immediately.Advertisement