

      By K.K. REBECCA LAI

UPDATED May 9, 2015


The World Health Organization declared Liberia free of Ebola on Saturday, ending a 14-month plague there that killed more than 4,700. Guinea and Sierra Leone each reported fewer than 10 new cases in the week ending May 3, the lowest since September.The number of new cases in the three countries fell rapidly in December and January, but started rising again in March. A total of 150 new cases were reported in the week ending March 15, the highest number in 2015.Officials with the United Nations and the World Health Organization have cautioned that ending the outbreak entirely will be extremely difficult. “In Liberia it took a long time,” said Dr. David Nabarro, the United Nations’ special envoy on the Ebola crisis. “It took about two months to move from single-figure cases to zero — so we are not anticipating that this will be a very rapid thing."
              
              
            

The leaders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the West African countries hit worst by the outbreak, pledged to reduce the number of new cases to zero by mid-April, when the rainy season begins. Officials said poor road conditions would make it difficult to move health workers and equipment to where they are needed.To get to zero cases, public health workers must trace and isolate every contact of every Ebola patient to prevent new chains of transmission. The recent rise in cases shows this is difficult. The sources of infection for more than two-thirds of the cases in Guinea each week are unknown. In Liberia, there were no new cases for three consecutive weeks, but a patient tested positive for Ebola on Friday.The final 10 percent of infections might be the hardest. “It’s like looking for needles in the haystack,” Dr. Nabarro said, warning the international community to remain vigilant.
              
              
            
Average new cases each weekDec. 30, 2013–May 4, 2014The Outbreak BeginsOfficials believe the first case in the outbreak was in December 2013 in Meliandou, a small village in Guinea near the borders of three countries. The disease soon spread to Conakry, Guinea’s capital, and to the neighboring countries.May 5–Aug. 3, 2014New Cases Rise RapidlyBy June, cases were found in districts far from the epicenter of transmission in Guéckédou. Efforts to control the spread of the disease were stymied by large and fluid population movements across the three countries.Aug. 4, 2014–Jan. 4, 2015W.H.O. Sounds the AlarmBy August, the number of new cases began doubling about every three weeks. Every district in Sierra Leone and Liberia reported cases. The spread of the disease to the capitals, Monrovia and Freetown, caused a surge. Some weeks had more than 1,000 new cases.Jan. 5–May 3, 2015Trying to Get to ZeroGuinea and Sierra Leone continue to report a small number of new cases along a belt stretching from Conakry, Guinea, to Freetown in Sierra Leone. As the outbreak waned in some areas, people began to travel to other districts and countries, making it more difficult to reach zero cases.Source: World Health OrganizationAdvertisement