By STEVEN ERLANGEROCT. 12, 2015
Stuart Rose heads Britain Is Stronger in Europe, an initiative that was kicked off Monday, urging the British to vote for remaining in the European Union in an eventual referendum.LONDON — A well-funded campaign to keep Britain in the European Union kicked off on Monday, even though a promised referendum on the issue may be a year or more away.The campaign — and an opposing effort, which began last week, urging Britain to leave the European Union — is underway even though Prime Minister David Cameron has not yet finished his effort to negotiate a new deal for Britain in what he hopes to present as a reformed European Union.The campaigns are a measure of how many people have firm positions for or against Europe no matter what Mr. Cameron produces — and how important the vote will be for Britain’s place in the world.The vote, which must take place by law before the end of 2017 but is likely to come sooner, will decide not only Britain’s relationship to the rest of Europe, but also whether pro-Europe Scotland, which voted last year to remain in the United Kingdom, will embark on a new independence referendum. It will also define the legacy of Mr. Cameron and, if he loses, could bring a sudden end to his rule as prime minister.AdvertisementThe Britain Stronger in Europe campaign is led by Stuart Rose, a former head of the British retail icon Marks & Spencer. It is supported by the former prime ministers Gordon Brown and Tony Blair, both of the Labour Party, and John Major, a Conservative like Mr. Cameron. The board includes Peter Wall, a former military chief; Karren Brady, the vice chairwoman of West Ham United soccer club and a Conservative member of the House of Lords; and June Sarpong, a television host. Other supporters include Carolyn McCall, the chief executive of easyJet, a low-cost carrier; Richard Reed, who started Innocent Drinks, a smoothie business successful across Europe; and Chuka Umunna, a rising Labour legislator.AdvertisementThe “stay in” campaign is also backed by major businesses like BT, a telecommunications company. Mike Rake, BT’s chairman, said on Monday that businesses had a “duty, an obligation and a right” to explain the impact of a so-called Brexit — a British exit from Europe — on investment.John Cridland, the director general of the Confederation of British Industry, which represents about 190,000 companies, said in December that “political isolationism would make us poorer.”“The fundamental choice here,” he added, “is whether Britain wants to be a global citizen or retreat behind national borders.”The “get out” campaign, Vote Leave, includes business leaders and legislators from various parties, including the only elected member of Parliament from the fiercely anti-European U.K. Independence Party, Douglas Carswell, who defected from the Tories. It is run by Matthew Elliott, founder of a lobbying group called The TaxPayers’ Alliance, and Dominic Cummings, a former adviser to the cabinet minister Michael Gove.Vote Leave has the backing of three euroskeptic groups: Conservatives for Britain, Labour Leave and Business for Britain. It is being funded by party donors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Another group, Leave.EU, was founded by a U.K. Independence Party donor, Arron Banks, and has been described by the party’s leader, Nigel Farage, as an “umbrella group” of anti-European Union campaigners.Nigel Lawson, a chancellor of the Exchequer under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, is heading Conservatives for Britain, arguing that the case for a British exit should be made before Mr. Cameron concludes his negotiations, and that it should not be left to “less moderate, xenophobic voices” like Mr. Farage’s. The group’s vice chairman is Norman Lamont, the chancellor of the Exchequer under Mr. Major. Mr. Lamont says he has an open mind but believes Britain “could survive perfectly well outside the E.U.” As many as 100 of the Conservatives’ 330 members of Parliament are thought to favor a British exit, or lean toward it.The whole matter is complicated by Mr. Cameron’s negotiations with his European partners, who want Britain to remain in the European Union but are wary of creating exceptions on key matters of principle, like freedom of movement and labor, or of creating a special case for European regulation just for London’s go-go financial markets.AdvertisementMr. Cameron, who hosted Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany on Friday, has also exasperated his partners by not precisely specifying what changes he wants and by refusing to take a quota of Syrian refugees.He is afraid that the moment he writes down anything specific, the list will be leaked and will be judged insufficiently ambitious by those who want Britain to leave. And then if he gets only some of what he wants, he is sure to be attacked.Mr. Cameron has outlined the main themes of what he wants from Europe — curbs on benefits for new migrants, a bigger say for national parliaments in judging European legislation, less regulation of financial services and more concentration on completing a single European market in financial services and trade. He also wants safeguards for countries like Britain and Denmark that have chosen not to use the euro.But he seems torn between going for a quick deal and a vote next year or waiting until 2017.Opinion polls are mixed. But the “stay in” side has lost some support because the European Union has been viewed as having badly handled the current migrant issue and the long crisis over Greece and the euro.Immigration is deeply sensitive here, and while Britain remains outside the 26-nation passport-free travel zone known as Schengen, and so controls its own borders, any citizen of a European Union member state has the right to come here to live and work. Mr. Cameron has vowed to sharply reduce net immigration to Britain and has failed to do so; the easiest way, his critics argue, is to leave the European Union.And then there is the position of the Labour Party. Pro-Europe for decades — its former leader Ed Miliband ran last May on a firmly pro-European Union platform — Labour is now seen as having a fuzzy position with the election of a hard-left member of Parliament, Jeremy Corbyn, as leader. Mr. Corbyn has said he voted no in the referendum on membership in what was then the European Economic Community, in 1975, but now he says he wants to protect European rights for workers and cannot see circumstances in which he would publicly argue to leave.Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Potent Campaigns Square Off Over Britain’s E.U. Membership.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.