By CELESTINE BOHLENFEB. 23, 2015
BERLIN — The banking giant HSBC was outed by an international consortium of journalists for having systematically helped wealthy clients hide billions of dollars in assets, thus avoiding international tax police and criminal investigations.The journalists did their job. Now what?The news reports seem to have compelled Swiss prosecutors last Wednesday to conduct a search of its Geneva branch in a new money-laundering investigation.But according to campaigners for financial transparency, much more remains to be done to uncover an estimated $17.6 trillion in murky money held in tax havens, unidentified bank accounts or shell companies around the world — some of it acquired illegally through corruption, crime or tax evasion. According to the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, which coordinated the HSBC investigation, this stash has cost governments some $200 billion a year in lost tax revenues.“Financial opacity is one of the key drivers of rising global inequality,” the French economist Thomas Piketty told the consortium of journalists.AdvertisementJosé Carlos Ugaz, the chairman of the anticorruption group Transparency International, said he hoped the media investigations would galvanize a broader political push to crack the impunity still enjoyed by corrupt officials and their criminal partners.Advertisement“We have run into a new phenomenon, which we’re calling ‘grand corruption,’” he said in an interview near the group’s headquarters here. Corruption was bad enough before, but now, he said, it has reached staggering proportions, with devastating consequences.“Grand corruption kills, makes poverty worse, and impacts development,” said Mr. Ugaz, a Peruvian lawyer who, as ad hoc attorney general, prosecuted several high-profile corruption cases in his country.Transparency International is starting a campaign called “No Impunity,” which will target high-level officials — in both the public and private spheres — who remain protected by corrupt regimes.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to Mr. Ugaz, the initiative will feature “social sanctioning,” turning a spotlight on the palaces, private jets and other ostentatious displays of wealth owned by corrupt individuals. He said a list of the world’s top 10 most egregious cases was being drawn up to expose and shame them where it hurts most — back home.“Societies don’t have to tolerate the corrupt in their midst,” he said.Naming and shaming is essentially what the journalists have done. But after years of similar exposés, along with numerous initiatives undertaken by international organizations, corruption worldwide seems to have gone from bad to “grand.”Global Witness, a London-based anticorruption group, says it also wants to single out the guilty. It is advocating punitive action against bankers who turn a blind eye to their clients’ misdeeds.“There has been a lack of accountability for senior executives who, at the worst, have had to pay fines which are simply passed on to shareholders,” said Stuart McWilliam, senior campaigner at Global Witness.Most experts agree that now is the time to press for a comprehensive approach that would stop the rich from being able to hide their money in the first place. Last December, the European Union adopted a directive that would require countries to create public directories of beneficial owners of companies.Britain is moving in that direction with a parliamentary bill. Denmark is already on board, and Norway is considering similar legislation.AdvertisementBut the United States, which has been at the forefront of prosecuting wayward banks, is lagging. “The problem is that in the U.S. there has not been enough political support,” Mr. McWilliam said.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2015, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.