By MICHELLE INNISFEB. 23, 2015
Prime Minister Tony Abbott of Australia announced national security revisions, including tighter immigration laws, and the revoking of citizenship or curbing rights of those involved in terrorism.SYDNEY, Australia —  Prime Minister Tony Abbott of Australia said Monday that the government would seek to revoke the citizenship or curb the rights of Australians involved in terrorism and tighten immigration, visa and hate speech laws in a crackdown on terrorism.“The terrorist threat is rising at home and abroad, and it is becoming harder to combat,” Mr. Abbott said. “By any measure, the threat to Australia is worsening.”Mr. Abbott’s national security address, delivered at the Australian Federal Police headquarters in Canberra, the capital, followed the release of a review of the nation’s counterterrorism operations and a report on Sunday into a 17-hour siege in a Sydney cafe, in which three people died, including the gunman, who had aligned himself with the Islamic State.The national counterterrorism strategy introduced Monday would include the appointment of a senior official to oversee counterterrorism measures, better coordination among Australia’s surveillance agencies and initiatives to counter violent extremism. The prime minister pledged stronger prohibitions on hate speech, intimidation and inciting hatred, but he stopped short of outlawing any organization. The measures he vowed to take were recommendations from the counterterrorism report. Some measures, such as a national strategy to counter violent extremism, would be debated by Australia’s state and territorial governments, while others may involve redrafting some laws.AdvertisementHe also announced measures to curb the rights of Australians, suspending some of their citizenship entitlements if they engage in terrorism. This could include restricting a person’s ability to leave or return to Australia.Advertisement“Australian citizenship is an extraordinary privilege that should involve a solemn and lifelong commitment to Australia,” Mr. Abbott said. “People who come to this country are free to live as they choose — provided they don’t steal that same freedom from others.”Mr. Abbott has faced increasing pressure over his ability to lead the governing conservative coalition. This month he faced a challenge to his leadership after a series of much criticized decisions, and an inability to get measures from last year’s May budget through the Senate.Mr. Abbott said that at least 110 Australians had traveled overseas to join fighting in Iraq and Syria and that at least 20 had been killed. He also said there is a “cohort of hardened jihadists who are intent on radicalizing and influencing others.”The government will review measures to stop Australian terrorism suspects from leaving the country, returning home from overseas, getting support from overseas consular officials or receiving government money, Mr. Abbott said. In the case of dual nationals, Mr. Abbott said he would aim to revoke or suspend their Australian citizenship through changes to the Australian Citizenship Act.In his speech, Mr. Abbott said that as of September, 55 Australians fighting with terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria had been receiving Australian welfare payments.More than 30 fighters have returned to Australia, and around 140 people in Australia were actively supporting extremist groups, he said. Australia’s domestic spy agency, the Australian Security Intelligence Organization, has more than 400 high-priority counterterrorism investigations underway, Mr. Abbott said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There is always a trade-off between the rights of an individual and the safety of a community,” Mr. Abbott said. “We will never sacrifice our freedoms in order to defend them, but we will not let our enemies exploit our decency, either.”The national review began in August before a gunman — who linked himself to the extremist Islamic State — held 18 people hostage in Sydney in December, and before the arrest of two young men in Sydney on Feb. 10 who had made a video recording promising to carry out an attack “for the soldiers of the caliphate.”AdvertisementThe siege ended when police officers stormed the cafe, killing the gunman, Man Haron Monis, and another hostage. Mr. Monis, who had shot dead the cafe’s manager, was well known to the police and counterterrorism experts.The other attack, which the police described as imminent, was averted, but the police said they had acted on a tip that led to the arrests, and that neither man had been under police watch.The Australian Parliament last year passed laws that allow greater sharing of information between Australia’s domestic and international intelligence agencies, and that make it easier for those agencies to collect data. The laws also make it an offense to advocate terrorism and make it illegal for Australians to travel overseas to designated areas.A third set of more contentious legislation governing the capture and retention of computer data has yet to go before Parliament. On Monday, Mr. Abbott urged Parliament to pass this legislation into law.He also urged Australia’s Muslim leaders to speak up against the radicalization of young men and women. “I have often heard Western leaders describe Islam as the religion of peace,” Mr. Abbott said. “I wish more Muslim leaders would say that more often, and mean it.“Everybody, including Muslim community leaders, needs to speak up clearly because, no matter what the grievance, violence against innocents must surely be blasphemy against all religion.”Last year, Australia joined a coalition of countries, led by the United States, in airstrikes against the Islamic State in Iraq. Mr. Abbott also committed Australian special forces troops to acting as advisers to Iraqi soldiers.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: Prime Minister Seeks to Tighten Controls on Australians Suspected of Terrorism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.