Last year the National People’s Congress set Sept. 3 as a new Chinese holiday to commemorate the defeat of Japan in World War II. At the time people here took notice, but there was little debate.Then came news last month that a major military parade would be held on Tiananmen Square to mark 70th anniversary of the event this year. Chinese commentators immediately asked why a parade was being staged four years earlier than the once-in-a-decade routine on National Day, Oct. 1. (The last was in 2009.) The explanation: to underscore the anti-Japanese theme of China’s foreign policy under President Xi Jinping as well as his control of the People’s Liberation Army.Now the guessing centers on who will be on the reviewing stand overlooking Tiananmen Square, and what alliances might be forged as the jets and tanks roll by. There seems to be as much curiosity about the interplay between Mr. Xi and his guests as about the display of weapons. The Beijing police chief, Fu Zhenghua, broke the news in January that foreign guests would be present at the military parade. The Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, had already said that Mr. Xi would be at the May 9 parade in Moscow celebrating the war’s end in Europe.(Mr. Lavrov also dropped that the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, would attend the parade. That raised the question of whether Mr. Xi would meet Mr. Kim in Moscow, an encounter Mr. Xi seems to have been avoiding as a way to drive home his disapproval of Mr. Kim’s nuclear arsenal.)With Mr. Xi confirmed for Moscow in May, it appeared clear that President Vladimir V. Putin would be a prized guest in Beijing in September.The Russian ambassador in Beijing, Andrey I. Denisov, confirmed as much last month. And even though China’s Foreign Ministry, in its usual fashion of not commenting on events far in advance, has declined to give official confirmation, it is widely assumed that Mr. Putin will be in Tiananmen Square.Even if another valued guest, and Washington’s ally, the South Korean leader, Park Geun-hye, accepts China’s invitation — she gets along well with Mr. Xi, and her presence is greatly desired, Chinese foreign policy experts say — all eyes will be on the chemistry between Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi. A senior Obama administration official said the United States would be “staying as far away as possible” from the parade.Last May, Mr. Putin was in Shanghai and signed a $400 billion deal with Mr. Xi to sell natural gas to China. In November, he was in Beijing for an Asia-Pacific meeting, where the two leaders were captured in a cozy photo comparing their smartphones.But Mr. Putin’s presence at Mr. Xi’s side as they watched the best of China’s military hardware would be far more dramatic, an affirmation of the growing bond between China and Russia that worries Washington.‘‘China is courting Russia to counter the increasingly strong Japan-U.S. alliance,’’ said Zhang Baohui, director of the Center for Asian Pacific Studies at Lingnan University in Hong Kong. ‘‘China really worries about Japan’s great power status. The China-Russia relationship is mainly about Japan. According to China’s perception, because of history and territorial issues, Prime Minister Abe is a self-confessed nationalist.’’Does Mr. Xi like Mr. Putin? Many in Washington think so.Beijing has shown little enthusiasm for Russia’s actions in Ukraine, but as the pressure of Western sanctions bears down on Moscow, Mr. Putin is eager to get economic relief from China, and as long as Russia comes as the junior, impoverished partner, Beijing will be helpful, Chinese experts say.But Mr. Zhang said it was unclear what Mr. Xi thinks of Mr. Putin. The Chinese leader may not be as smitten as some American experts believe. The growing proximity between Russia and China is ‘‘because of common strategic interests, rather than a mutual personal relationship,’’ he said.Mr. Xi will make a state visit to Washington soon after the Sept. 3 military show on Tiananmen. It seems unlikely, Mr. Zhang said, that he would push the relationship with Mr. Putin to the extent that it would jeopardize China’s relationship with the United States.