Story of Matt Stopera and #Chinese man nicknamed #BroOrange may have a very happy ending: //t.co/JAC845uWAb //t.co/k0h2xrA4Bx— China News (@Echinanews) 25 Feb 15The digital hunt for an iPhone lost in a New York bar a year ago, which put an editor at BuzzFeed in contact with a Chinese man now known to millions online as “Brother Orange,” is heading toward a personal encounter.The BuzzFeed editor, Matt Stopera, 27, hopes to travel to China on March 18 to meet Brother Orange, who now has the stolen iPhone. Brother Orange had invited Mr. Stopera to visit Meizhou, in the southern province of Guangdong, and to try its local dishes.“I’m definitely going. Brother Orange still has to confirm the date, but he seems very down to meet,” Mr. Stopera said on Wednesday by telephone. “I think I’m going to visit him probably for a week, he invited me for a meal or dinner at his house.”
Brother Orange, who earned his nickname after images of him standing in front of an orange tree showed up on the photo stream of Mr. Stopera’s new phone, said this week that his surname is Li.In the past few days, Mr. Stopera and Mr. Li have exchanged messages through their status updates on the microblog platform Sina Weibo, discussing their possible meeting as well as aspects of their personal lives. Neither man speaks the other’s language, but their posts have been translated by online followers.“Matt, come to our side to celebrate the Lantern Festival,” Mr. Li wrote in a recent post, referring to the Chinese holiday that takes place this year on March 5 and that features displays of lanterns and delicacies like sweet dumplings.A little later, Mr. Li, whose nephew owns a restaurant, posted pictures of himself enjoying yellow noodles and a bowl of soup: “Matt, these are the marinated noodles from Meizhou that Wang Leehom likes,” he said, referring to the Chinese-American singer. “Do you want to try them?”On Tuesday, he wrote: “Once you get your visa, then come on over. I don’t know any English. I’ve put the cellphone aside. The Lantern Festival is the first important holiday after the Spring Festival,” he said, referring to the Lunar New Year.Mr. Stopera has become a rather adept user of Weibo since joining the platform on Monday. He is now followed by thousands of Chinese users and has shown a strong liking for the emoticons favored by many Weibo users. He posted several messages this week, some of them directed at Brother Orange:“Are people in China watching the Oscars?”“What is the Lantern Festival like? What happens there?”“It’s so cold in New York City. Is it warmer in China?”“Bro! Can I visit you on March 18? I’m ready to buy a plane ticket and finally meet you!”In the interview on Wednesday, Mr. Stopera could hardly contain his excitement about the planned trip. He said that tracing his lost iPhone to a stranger in China, through the photos that Mr. Li had posted online – and the global attention that the process had attracted – had given him a taste of what it means to be “Twitter famous.” Thousands of Chinese people respond to each of his posts online, he said.“To me, the story is not about the stolen phone,” Mr. Stopera said. “I don’t blame Brother Orange, and the phone was stolen so long ago that I’ve made amends with it. It’s more about me and this crazy twist of fate. Now I’m connected to this man in China, all because he somehow ended up with my phone that I lost.”Mr. Stopera, who has lived in New York City for more than a decade, said the trip would offer a welcome change from his life in Manhattan. He said he had long wanted to travel to China.When asked about his itinerary, Mr. Stopera said he expected to spend most of his time in Guangdong Province.“I’m not sure where I’m staying yet,” he said. “I don’t think I’ll be staying with him, no, but that would be awesome. I’ll probably have a translator. Brother Orange doesn’t speak any English, and I don’t speak any Chinese.”The tale of Mr. Stopera and Mr. Li has attracted wide attention, partly because of the low odds that a stolen phone’s exact location and user could be tracked down, especially on the other side of the world.Part of the mystery involved how the iPhone traveled from an East Village bar into the hands of a distant relative of Mr. Li’s, who presented it as a gift to Mr. Li, according to his online explanation of the story.Mr. Stopera said he was curious how his iPhone had reached Mr. Li, but emphasized that it ultimately did not matter. “Brother Orange said online he still has the phone,” Mr. Stopera said. “It’s mind-blowing that my phone ended up in China, but I don’t care about that phone. It’ll be a unique experience. I’m so excited to visit.”