AdvertisementSupported byBy Somini SenguptaUNITED NATIONS — His cease-fire monitors have been held hostage, one of their cars has been blown up, and a surveillance drone has been shot down.Now, a year into the conflict between Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists, the secretary general of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Lamberto Zannier, says he wants more drones and radar systems to keep an eye on what his teams are not always permitted to see on the ground.Mr. Zannier also wants the Kremlin to press the pro-Russian rebels to ensure that his teams are granted access to places they need to monitor. Never in his 30 years as a diplomat, he said, has he seen fighters who harbor such a “total lack of respect” for international monitors.“We have still, as of today, difficulties in having access, especially in the separatist areas,” Mr. Zannier said in an interview Tuesday, adding that he did not want his mission’s reports to be manipulated.“My feeling is Russia could do more,” he said.A tenuous cease-fire exists in eastern Ukraine, with reports of fighting in other parts of the country. It is a situation that Mr. Zannier says suggests the use of “a destabilizing strategy” across a wider area.“The danger is there; the risk is more instability in the neighboring regions,” he said. “I hope the work we are trying to do works. If we see an expansion of the conflict, that will be bad news for everybody.”The O.S.C.E. chairman, Ivica Dacic of Serbia, said at a United Nations Security Council meeting Tuesday that the foreign ministers of Ukraine and Russia had promised their support for an extension of the mission. “Ukraine is at the critical juncture; what is needed is full adherence to the cease-fire,” Mr. Dacic said, referring to the truce reached this month in Minsk, Belarus, which requires both sides to withdraw heavy weapons from the front lines.What began last year as a modest civilian mission to monitor human rights violations in Ukraine after Russia’s annexation of Crimea has rapidly evolved into a high-risk, high-stakes effort to stave off a full-scale war in the heart of Europe. The O.S.C.E. is now entrusted to monitor cease-fire violations, as well as to oversee the pullback of weapons from the front lines and, eventually, to disarm the fighters.The organization’s mandate expires at the end of March. Negotiations are underway to extend it for another year, and also to strengthen it. Mr. Zannier is pushing to include unarmed military observers as part of his teams. They are largely functioning as peacekeepers, anyway.“We could have military people that can strengthen the ability of the mission, the effectiveness of the mission in these tasks that are really traditional peacekeeping tasks,” Mr. Zannier said. “I think that would be a plus. I don’t think this should be seen as a taboo.”The Ukrainian government in Kiev has called for a United Nations peacekeeping mission, but the prospects of that are slim. Any United Nations effort would require the authorization of the Security Council, and Russia, one of its veto-wielding members, is decidedly uninterested.The Russian ambassador, Vitaly I. Churkin, told the Security Council on Tuesday that his country fully supported the O.S.C.E. mission. He said outside the council chambers that Russia was prepared to back its calls for additional equipment, including surveillance drones and radar systems.The O.S.C.E. is also mandated to monitor two crossing points along Ukraine’s eastern border with Russia.For the organization, Ukraine is perhaps among its toughest tests. There are currently 430 monitors, including several from Russia.The monitoring mission is part of an international accord reached last year that was intended to cool down tensions after the annexation of Crimea in March. In two episodes, two of its teams were captured in rebel-held areas of Donetsk and Luhansk last year. One of their four unmanned aerial vehicles was shot down this year, Mr. Zannier said. He has repeatedly complained that fighters have blocked his monitors from doing their jobs, particularly in separatist-controlled areas.He pointed out that Ukraine’s call for United Nations peacekeepers would further complicate the situation. Peacekeeping missions involve military contingents from particular countries, and it would be difficult to get the rivals in Ukraine to agree on whose soldiers could be deployed.“Ukraine is a spike in relationship that has developed in a problematic way,” Mr. Zannier said.“How can we try to mend what we’ve gotten wrong and rebuild between Ukraine and Russia,” he said, “and also more strategically between Russia and the West?”Mr. Zannier added, “There is an element of unpredictability which continues to worry us.”Advertisement