By WILLIAM NEUMANFEB. 24, 2015
CARACAS, Venezuela —  A police officer shot and killed a teenage boy during an antigovernment protest in the restive Venezuelan city of San Cristóbal on Tuesday, officials said, as tensions rose over a struggling economy and the recent arrest of a prominent opposition politician.The interior minister, Carmen Meléndez, said that the officer had been arrested and that he had admitted to firing on the boy, Kluiberth Roa, with a shotgun loaded with plastic pellets. She said the boy had been hit in the back of the neck.President Nicolás Maduro said later on television that, according to a preliminary investigation, the killing had occurred as masked demonstrators confronted a group of police officers.“The police said that they were surrounded, beaten and attacked with rocks, and one of the police officers fired his shotgun and killed this boy,” Mr. Maduro said. “I condemn this murder.”AdvertisementThe national prosecutor’s office said Kluiberth was 14 years old. Venezuela was racked last year by widespread protests that began in San Cristóbal and then spread to the rest of the country. Dozens of people were killed in those demonstrations, including protesters, government supporters and National Guard soldiers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The death came as Mr. Maduro, a leftist, has been stepping up pressure on his opponents, whom he accuses of sabotaging the economy and seeking to overthrow his government.Last week, the intelligence police arrested a prominent opposition politician, Antonio Ledezma, on charges that he was plotting a coup against Mr. Maduro. A lawyer for Mr. Ledezma, whose title is municipal mayor of Caracas, a position with little practical authority, denied the charges, and opposition leaders deplored his arrest as part of a campaign of repression.AdvertisementThe Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in Washington issued a statement on Tuesday calling for the release of Mr. Ledezma and two other opposition politicians detained last year, Leopoldo López and Daniel Ceballos, the former mayor of San Cristóbal.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Police Kill Boy During Protest in Venezuela.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.