By NORIMITSU ONISHIOCT. 12, 2015
JOHANNESBURG —  Just this summer, Zimbabwe was pressing to extradite an American dentist involved in the hunt that killed a lion known as Cecil, with the environment minister denouncing him as a “foreign poacher” who had absconded home.On Monday, it changed course, saying not only that the dentist would not be charged but that he was welcome to return. “He is free to come, not for hunting, but as a tourist,” Environment Minister Oppah Muchinguri said of the dentist, Dr. Walter J. Palmer of Minnesota.The killing of the 13-year-old lion in July outside Hwange National Park in northwestern Zimbabwe set off a fierce outcry among animal rights advocates. Dr. Palmer, 55, an experienced big-game hunter, became the target of furious attacks on social media sites and closed his dental practice for more than a month.But Zimbabwe said Monday that his documentation for the hunt had been proper, as he had said.Officials had initially reported that Dr. Palmer and a professional hunting guide had illegally lured Cecil out of his protected habitat onto a neighboring farm. At a news conference in July, Ms. Muchinguri described Dr. Palmer as a “foreign poacher” who had broken Zimbabwe’s laws.AdvertisementBut Zimbabwe’s authorities declined to make a formal extradition request before a deadline last month. The trial of the professional hunter, Theo Bronkhorst, who has also denied any wrongdoing, has been postponed.Dr. Palmer has said he was unaware that British researchers were monitoring the lion. And amid the barrage of criticism, other voices pushed back. “We Don’t Cry for Lions” became a trending topic on Twitter after a Zimbabwean, Goodwell Nzou, included the phrase in a New York Times Op-Ed article, adding that “no lion has ever been beloved” in his village. “They are objects of terror,” he wrote.AdvertisementMany airlines responded to the fury by banning the transport of animal trophies, which are prized by big-game hunters. Many African nations, and some conservationists, support trophy hunting as a way to finance the overall protection of wildlife.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: In Reversal, Zimbabwe Says It Will Not Charge American Who Killed Cecil the Lion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.