AdvertisementSupported byLondon JournalBy Stephen CastleLONDON — Even loyal fans of the Gay Hussar, a restaurant favored for decades by London’s political left, will acknowledge its shortcomings.Quite a few admit that those include the food.Lawmakers from the opposition Labour Party are excited when taken to the Gay Hussar, said Kevin Maguire, associate editor of the left-leaning Daily Mirror and a regular diner, “but usually if they have never been there before.”Many have, however, and Mr. Maguire said that when he invited one female politician for lunch here recently, she replied, “In that case, I’ll have a sandwich first.”But now, the Gay Hussar is up for sale, and suddenly its supporters are legion. Around 160 politicians and journalists have banded together as the Goulash Cooperative to try to buy the place.When it opened in 1953, the Hungarian restaurant was an exotic addition to London’s Soho district, and many still enjoy its hearty cuisine. But it is not a good choice for vegetarians or those on a low-carb diet.Dumplings, pancakes and goulash feature prominently on the menu, vegetables rather less (except red cabbage). Then there is the house specialty, chilled wild cherry soup, a starter that tastes like a sweet and fruity milkshake.For decades, this is the food over which Labour Party and trade union figures debated, intrigued and gossiped. Most of the biggest figures of the Labour movement have eaten here, and it was a favorite of several former Labour leaders, including Michael Foot and Neil Kinnock.Visiting luminaries have included Henry Kissinger. Literary figures such as T. S. Eliot have dined in the Gay Hussar. And, when a failed effort was made to tempt a young Mick Jagger into Labour politics, it was here that he was wooed.But the Gay Hussar fell from favor in the 1990s, when Tony Blair took the Labour Party rightward and his food-fashionista followers gravitated to shinier, smarter, somewhat healthier restaurants.The Gay Hussar has also suffered from the demise of a tradition of British political journalism: the long, alcohol-fueled lunch. “People don’t have the time,” Mr. Maguire said, “and journalists have to be sober for longer at work.”But the political lunch is not quite dead yet, and those fighting to save it include Tom Watson, honorary president of the Goulash Cooperative and a prominent Labour lawmaker, known for campaigning against phone-tapping by Rupert Murdoch’s newspapers and for championing the cases of child sex abuse victims.Less well known is his nickname, “Tommy Two Dinners,” coined after a bibulous lunch at the Gay Hussar that somehow merged into dinner. Sipping ruby-colored Hungarian wine, Mr. Watson recalled how, between the two meals, he had an hour’s sleep on an upper floor of the restaurant before being revived with “fresh mint and a glass of champagne.”Little has changed here in recent decades, except for the addition of dozens of caricatures of politicians by Martin Rowson, a cartoonist at The Guardian and a director of the Goulash Cooperative.Mr. Watson, who features in at least three pictures, named a handful of Labour lawmakers who eat here, though not the leader, Ed Miliband. “He has been here, but he’s part of that generation that don’t particularly lunch,” Mr. Watson said.Over a meal of fish dumplings, followed by chicken pancakes, he conceded that the cuisine could be on the heavy side.“If we ever get the place, one of the things we are going to put on the menu is a lighter option,” Mr. Watson said.Mr. Rowson said the Cooperative’s plans included more use of the building’s upper floors for literary and political events, capitalizing on its unique history.The Gay Hussar’s founder, Victor Sassie, died in 1999 having already sold it. The current owners, Corus Hotels, put it on the market because it loses money and is not part of their core business.“We have kept this iconic little restaurant going for years,” said Andrew Clayton, managing director of Corus Hotels. “And it has been loss-making for a couple of years, so I think we deserve a bit of credit for that.”The asking price is 500,000 pounds, or about $772,000, for a lease that expires in 2022. Corus has rejected the Cooperative’s bid — currently the only one — of £225,000.Mr. Clayton said Corus wanted “a little more” for the restaurant but had “no plans to shut it.”According to Mr. Watson, the Goulash Cooperative’s offer was “already above the market rate.” John Wrobel, manager of the Gay Hussar since 1988, put it more colorfully: the £500,000 asking price would make economic sense only “if the council also gave us a license as a brothel,” he said.Mr. Wrobel has served many prominent politicians. Famously, he once rushed to help a member of the House of Lords who had spilled food on his pants. Dabbing at the garment with a cloth, Mr. Wrobel unfortunately loosened some elastic, exposing his customer’s naked rear.Some blame the Gay Hussar’s decline on the great hate figure of the Labour left, Mr. Blair. In the early 1980s, Mr. Blair discussed his own plans to run for Parliament with a senior Labour lawmaker over lunch here. But he was rarely seen thereafter.“Blairites wanted salads — Hungarian cuisine is not for them,” Mr. Maguire said. “And Blairites didn’t like drinking. One of the things about the Gay Hussar is you can drink and you don’t get chased out.”So the Gay Hussar, once so popular on both wings of Labour that diners worried about who was listening at the next table, became a refuge of an embattled left — “Old Labour.”Devotees remain loyal, even from afar, including Mark Seddon, former editor of Tribune, a left-wing publication. He said arriving at the restaurant was “like walking into your own front room with your best friends, and sometimes people they have invited — who are likely to become friends.”Now working at the United Nations in New York, Mr. Seddon said he had fabulous dining options in Manhattan but still hankered after goulash and stuffed cabbage. “If I had the choice, I would go to the Gay Hussar,” Mr. Seddon said, adding that he was calling on “diners of the world to unite” to save it.“You have everything to lose,” he added, “including your cherry soup.”Advertisement