AdvertisementSupported byBy Kimiko de Freytas-TamuraLONDON — Almost anything linked to Winston Churchill can be collectible, right down to the butts of his cigars. But it is hard to imagine an artifact rarer or more intimate than the one scheduled to be auctioned on March 12: a vial of his blood.The sample, long since turned from red to amber, was collected in 1962 by Patricia Fitzgibbon, a student nurse at Middlesex Hospital in London, where Churchill was being treated for a hip injury. The vial was supposed to be discarded after his stay, but Ms. Fitzgibbon got permission to keep it as a souvenir, according to a statement by Duke’s Auctioneers, which is organizing the sale.Ms. Fitzgibbon kept the glass vial, which is seven centimeters, or 2 ¾ inches, long and labeled “Sir Winston S. Churchill W.W.B.9” in black ink, until shortly before her death, when she entrusted it to a friend. The friend decided to sell it this year, the 50th anniversary of Churchill’s death.The auction house said it has already attracted interest from private collectors. The question is how to put a price on it.The market value of the vial “is a very difficult thing to estimate,” Timothy Medhurst, an auctioneer and appraiser at Duke’s, said. He noted that Churchill’s cigar butts have been known to change hands for 500 pounds, about $773, but the blood sample “is the closest you can get to Churchill.”“There is nothing to guide it, because nothing like it has ever come up to auction,” Mr. Medhurst said, calling the vial “the most poignant and unique memorabilia we’ve ever had.”Even so, some number had to be put on it, and Mr. Medhurst said he expected the blood to sell for at least £1,000 in the auction next month. (What his toil, tears and sweat would fetch is anyone’s guess.)Churchill fractured his hip by falling out of bed while on vacation in Monte Carlo in 1962. He was flown back to London on a Royal Air Force plane for treatment, and spent several weeks at the hospital, recuperating and bedeviling the staff.“I remember that he would never settle at night until after he had read the first edition of all the daily newspapers which he had specially delivered,” Ms. Fitzgibbon said in an interview in 2010, according the auction house. “He habitually smoked cigars in bed.” She also recalled that he “regularly mixed the first and second courses of his meal into one bowl before eating it.”Churchill’s recovery was slow, hampered by his contracting bronchitis and pneumonia, which developed into thrombosis. He died three years later, in 1965, at the age of 90.Advertisement