AdvertisementSupported byBy Adam NossiterDAKAR, Senegal — An American missionary was kidnapped on Monday from a school in central Nigeria in an area prone to kidnappings for ransom, officials said Tuesday.The missionary was identified as the Rev. Phyllis Sortor on the website of the Free Methodist Church. A Washington State television station, KING, said Ms. Sortor was from western Washington. In a statement on its website, the church said she had been kidnapped from the compound of Hope Academy outside Emiworo in Kogi State.Nigerian officials said the kidnapping was probably not the work of the Islamist militant group Boko Haram. The police commissioner of Kogi State, Adeyemi Ogunjemilusi, said a ransom of around $300,000 had been demanded by Tuesday afternoon, barely 24 hours after the kidnapping, which is not typical for Boko Haram.In addition, the area where the kidnapping occurred — south of Abuja, Nigeria’s capital — is not generally considered to be within Boko Haram’s sphere of influence. Commissioner Ogunjemilusi said the Islamists were not active in Kogi. Still, kidnappings do occur there with some regularity. This month, a top local official in Kogi State was abducted from his home by gunmen who used the same method, scaling a wall, that was used in the kidnapping of Ms. Sortor.On Monday, Commissioner Ogunjemilusi said, five “hoodlums” jumped the school’s wall around 10:30 a.m., shooting in the air to frighten away would-be rescuers. Two of them wore masks, he said.Ms. Sortor had just returned from a trip to town and was standing outside with two girls, both students, he said. The kidnappers grabbed her, scaled the wall and fled into the surrounding bush. The area is mountainous and full of potential hide-outs.“The entire forest is being combed as I talk to you,” Commissioner Ogunjemilusi said, adding that police officers and soldiers had been deployed. “We are all working together to secure her release.”All of southern Nigeria is prone to kidnappings, with public officials, their relatives and foreign workers, often in the oil industry, regularly abducted for ransom.Farther north, Islamist violence continued to surge ahead of national elections next month, with bomb blasts at bus stations in Kano and Potiskum killing at least several dozen people, officials said. The blasts bore the hallmarks of previous attacks by Boko Haram.Advertisement