By MARTIN FACKLERFEB. 24, 2015
TOKYO — The Japanese politician who issued a landmark official apology to women forced to work in wartime brothels urged Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Tuesday to stand by Japan’s previous apologies for the country’s wartime agression, and not pull Japan too far to the nationalist right.Yohei Kono, 78, a former deputy prime minister who retired from politics in 2009, said that when Mr. Abe commemorates the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, he should repeat past expressions of remorse over Japan’s wartime aggression and abuses. Mr. Abe’s statement, expected in the summer, will be closely watched by Japan’s neighbors for any sign that he is trying to whitewash his nation’s history.To avoid being accused of revisionism, Mr. Kono said in a rare public speech, Mr. Abe should use the same language of regret that past prime ministers used on the 50th and 60th anniversaries: Tomiichi Murayama in 1995 and Mr. Abe’s political mentor, Junichiro Koizumi, in 2005.With nationalist voices growing louder in recent years, there have been calls from within Mr. Abe’s governing Liberal Democratic Party to discard the old language. Many on the political right here say it reflects an overly negative assessment of Japan’s wartime actions, imposed by the victorious Allies after the war. Mr. Abe himself disputed some of the past apologies before he became prime minister in 2012.AdvertisementMr. Kono, a moderate who sought better ties with Asian nations, is perhaps best known for what has come to be called the Kono Statement, issued when he was chief cabinet secretary in 1993. The statement officially acknowledged that Korean and other women were forced to work in Japanese military brothels during the war. It has become a favorite target of the revisionist right, who claim that the women in the brothels were ordinary prostitutes who were not coerced.Speaking in Nagoya on Tuesday, Mr. Kono warned Mr. Abe against embracing strongly ideological views that could potentially isolate Japan in a region where memories of its 20th-century militarism remain raw.Advertisement“I don’t want the Liberal Democratic Party to go any further to the right,” said Mr. Kono, who was a member of that party before retiring. “Right now, I’m seeing more ultra-right politics than conservative politics.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.