AdvertisementSupported byBy Stephen CastleLONDON — After being caught in an undercover report, Malcolm Rifkind, a former British foreign secretary, said on Tuesday that he would resign as chairman of an influential parliamentary panel overseeing intelligence and would not run for re-election to Parliament in May.In a statement, Mr. Rifkind, a lawmaker in Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservative Party, insisted that none of the discussions about paid consultancy work he had with a reporter had related to the chairmanship of the parliamentary committee, a post that gives access to highly sensitive information.“However, I have today informed my colleagues that, while I will remain a member of the committee, I will step down from the chairmanship,” he said. He added that he was doing so because he did not want its work “in any way distracted or affected by controversy as to my personal position.”In a separate statement, Mr. Rifkind, who was foreign secretary from 1995 to 1997 and held other senior positions, also said he would not run in the general election in May and would retire from the House of Commons at that time.Mr. Rifkind, 68, was one of two former foreign secretaries caught in the investigation by Channel 4 and The Daily Telegraph. The other was Jack Straw of the opposition Labour Party. They were filmed talking to a reporter who posed as the representative of a Hong Kong-based company that was purportedly seeking to hire them.The two politicians denied breaking any parliamentary rules. On Monday, Mr. Rifkind called the allegations against him “very serious” but unfounded, telling the BBC, “I’m going to fight them with all my strength.” He had also suggested that he would retain his chairmanship of the parliamentary committee unless other members wanted him to go.But Mr. Rifkind’s vigorous defense of his position appeared to have backfired in a climate of public distrust of politicians, which has been fueled by a series of earlier scandals over parliamentary expenses.On Monday, Mr. Rifkind justified earning money in addition to his parliamentary salary of around 67,000 pounds a year, or about $103,000, something that is not, in principle, against the rules. Though a parliamentary salary sounded substantial to those earning less, Mr. Rifkind said, “the vast majority of people from a business or professional background earn far, far more than that.”The episode again shined an uncomfortable light on the probity of lawmakers, whose reputation with the British electorate had already been tarnished by the expenses scandals, which led to prison terms for some.With a general election on May 7, the Conservative Party hopes that Mr. Rifkind’s decision to retire will help it move past the matter. Before the latest scandal, Mr. Straw had already announced plans to step down from the House of Commons in May.While being secretly filmed, Mr. Straw was said to have boasted of operating “under the radar” to use his influence with the European Union and the government of Ukraine on behalf of a commodities firm that paid him around $90,000 a year. Mr. Rifkind was said to have told the undercover reporter that he could provide access to “any ambassador that I wish to see.”The media sting operation involved two undercover reporters — Claire Newell, The Telegraph’s investigations editor, and Sky Zeh, working for Channel 4’s “Dispatches” program — who posed as representatives of PMR, a fictional communications agency that wanted to recruit politicians to its advisory board. A website was set up for PMR, a company supposedly based in Hong Kong and backed by a fictitious Chinese businessman.On Monday, the Conservative Party said it would investigate Mr. Rifkind’s case to determine whether any parliamentary rules had been broken. In one of his statements on Tuesday, Mr. Rifkind said it was unlikely that this inquiry would be concluded “until well into March,” prompting him to decide to retire as a lawmaker.“I had intended to seek one further term as member of Parliament for Kensington before retiring from the House of Commons,” he said in the statement. “I have concluded that to end the uncertainty, it would be preferable, instead, to step down at the end of this Parliament.”Mr. Rifkind said the move was “entirely my personal decision,” but he again argued that he was blameless. “As regards the allegations of Channel 4 and The Daily Telegraph, I find them contemptible and will not comment further at this time,” he said.Advertisement