By NIDA NAJARFEB. 24, 2015
NEW DELHI —  The head of a prominent Hindu organization came under criticism Tuesday for remarks he made about Mother Teresa, in which he said that the Nobel Peace Prize laureate’s service to the poor in India had been motivated by a desire to convert them to Christianity.Mohan Bhagwat, head of the Hindu nationalist group Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, made the televised remarks Monday at an inaugural ceremony for an orphanage and a home for impoverished women in the state of Rajasthan. “There are no services like Mother Teresa’s here,” Mr. Bhagwat said, adding of the nun’s work that “there was a motive behind it — that those who are rendered the service should become Christian.”“It is their question if somebody wants to convert and make someone Christian or not,” Mr. Bhagwat said. “But if that is done under the garb of service, then that service is devalued.”Mother Teresa, an Albanian Roman Catholic nun, died in 1997 after spending most of her life ministering to the poor and sick in Calcutta, now called Kolkata. She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979 for her “work in bringing help to suffering humanity.”AdvertisementMr. Bhagwat’s remarks came less than a week after Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave a speech condemning religious violence, amid a growing sense of insecurity among India’s Catholics and other religious minorities. Mr. Modi and his governing party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, have longstanding ties to Mr. Bhagwat’s organization, an offshoot of which was recently reported to have converted Muslims to Hinduism.Opposition politicians criticized Mr. Bhagwat on Tuesday for his remarks. The new chief minister of Delhi, Arvind Kejriwal of the Aam Aadmi Party, wrote on Twitter that he had briefly worked with Mother Teresa at an ashram in Kolkata. “She was a noble soul,” he wrote, adding, “Please spare her” (abbreviating the word “please”).AdvertisementThe Indian news media reported that opposition lawmakers had brought up Mr. Bhagwat’s statements in Parliament.Sunita Kumar, a spokeswoman for Mother Teresa’s order, the Missionaries of Charity, told the Indian news channel NDTV that Mr. Bhagwat was “ill-informed.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Mr. Bhagwat, her only motive was to serve the poor and give them love and care,” Ms. Kumar said of Mother Teresa. She said the nun had received criticism for her work in India at a time when Christian missionary work was rapidly decreasing.“For several years there was criticism, and her only reaction used to be, ‘Let’s pray for them,’ ” Ms. Kumar said.Mr. Bhagwat’s organization wrote on Twitter that his remarks had been in response to another person’s comment that Mother Teresa had done “seva,” or service to others, with conversion as her motive. Mr. Bhagwat replied: “Let Mother Teresa know her motive for seva. We do seva without expecting any returns,” according to his organization.Missionary work has long been a matter of controversy in India, even the work of Mother Teresa, who also faced criticism for making Kolkata famous for its poverty. Her Nobel Prize was awarded after a period in which political leaders had taken measures to curb missionary work.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Hindu Leader Is Criticized for Views on Mother Teresa.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.