When a couple in eastern China called the police about the tiger splayed dead and bloodied in a parking lot below an 11-story building, they encountered some skepticism. Perhaps Lunar New Year excesses had taken their toll, the officer suggested.“The answering officer didn’t believe us and even asked, ‘Have you been drinking so your eyes are playing tricks?’” said Ms. Li, who made the call, according to one Chinese newspaper report.“We explained again and again that we hadn’t been drinking, and the command center finally sent over a police car.”Dead tiger found in Shandong parking lot over CNY: //t.co/rR6PShyV0S //t.co/U3sIO7alrn— James Griffiths (@jgriffiths) 25 Feb 15As reports from Pingdu, a small city in Shandong Province, have recounted this week, the police and officials have uncovered a tale of a small, illegal menagerie; a remorseful owner; and fireworks that apparently terrified the young Siberian tiger into jumping from the roof of the Guwu Tower, an office building.“I was raising two tigers from soon after they were born, and I really raised them like they were children,” the man who kept the tigers in a rooftop cage, Mr. Yang, told The Peninsula City News, a newspaper in Shandong. (The reports gave only surnames for him and other people in the story.) “The moment I saw that the tiger had fallen to its death, tears fell from my eyes.”The mystery began in the early hours of Wednesday last week, when Ms. Li and her husband were, like most Chinese, celebrating the new Lunar New Year’s Eve, when the sky fills with screaming fireworks. They drove home from a dinner of dumplings and stumbled on the dead tiger in a parking lot outside the Guwu building. It was no kitten. It weighed about 110 pounds and was more than three feet long, with a 12-inch tail.“There was a pool of blood around the tiger’s head, but you couldn’t see any injuries,” Ms. Li told The Huashang News, a paper published in northwest China. “Touching it, the body was still not completely cold.”The police surmised that the tiger had jumped from the office building, and on the rooftop they found a cage holding another young tiger, as well as a Tibetan mastiff. They traced the cage to Mr. Yang, the building manager, who explained that he had reached a deal last July with a friend who worked for the nearby Chashan tourist resort, which had its own zoo, to raise two of its Siberian tiger cubs.“I didn’t have anywhere else to raise them, so I welded together a big iron cage on the roof,” Mr. Yang said, according to The Peninsula City News. There he fed the tigers on beef and chicken, spending about 400 renminbi, or $64, a day to satisfy their growing appetites.But Mr. Yang had not taken into account the cacophony that would mark the start of the Lunar New Year, which revelers celebrate with fireworks. He and the police concluded that the sounds scared one tiger enough that it squeezed out of the cage and jumped from the roof.Mr. Yang rejected accusations that he had neglected the animals. He took the surviving tiger back to the tourist resort’s zoo.“Tigers might not be people, but I really did treat them like they were my own kids,” he told The Peninsula City News. “I haven’t had the heart to celebrate the New Year since the tiger fell from the building.”