When the novel “Wolf Totem” was published in China in 2004, it became an overnight sensation. Readers of all ages and occupations embraced the story of a Han Chinese student sent to Inner Mongolia during the Cultural Revolution.But the book was not without controversy. It made waves with its acerbic indictment of the environmental and cultural impact of China’s relentless drive toward modernization. In a review, the writer Pankaj Mishra wondered whether the novel owed much of its success to a deep-seated national insecurity. “‘Wolf Totem,’” he wrote, “captures a widespread Chinese anxiety about their country’s growing physical and moral squalor as millions abandon the countryside in search of a middle-class lifestyle that cannot be environmentally sustained.”The author, who uses the pen name Jiang Rong and was later revealed to be Lü Jiamin, now 68 and a retired professor at the China Institute of Industrial Relations in Beijing, has described his novel as a “critique of thousands of years of Chinese culture.” He characterized this as enamored with “sheep — obedient and submissive sheep.” Mr. Jiang, who drew on his own experience of living on the Inner Mongolian grasslands, contrasted this to the wolf, the fearless spirit animal of the region’s nomadic herdsmen.More than a decade later, “Wolf Totem” is reportedly the best-selling contemporary Chinese novel, having sold more than five million copies in China and attracted millions more readers via pirated editions. And last week, a film based on the book and directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud was released in Chinese theaters. In an interview, Mr. Jiang discussed the novel, the film and what happens next:
The film ended up being quite different from your novel. Were you O.K. with the changes? The book is so long [544 pages in the English edition]. How could you fit all that into a two-hour film? There’s no way you could fit it all in and still write a good screenplay, so some stuff had to be cut. In the end, I thought the film did a good job of expressing the book’s spirit and its manner. I think Annaud did a very good job of this. He even exceeded my expectations in some respects.So you were involved in the writing of the screenplay?I was involved in seven rounds of edits for the screenplay.What were the changes in the final edit?In the book there is no romantic storyline between the male and female characters. They added it, which I thought was O.K. I didn’t really get it at first, but gradually I understood. After I saw it the second time I understood.I thought the changes were made very skillfully. The movie is mainly about the wolf spirit totem, so how do you express the totem? In the book, one important way in which the totem is expressed is the traditional Mongolian practice of giving dead bodies to the wolves to eat. They do this because they believe wolves return to heaven. So when wolves die, they bring the human souls with them to heaven. This is a very profound idea, something that isn’t really understood by most people. Tibetans use vultures, but Mongolians use wolves. I didn’t know this when I first went to the grasslands. So burial rites are a very important way in which to express the totem. It shows the Mongol peoples’ veneration of wolves.I wrote about this in the book, but Annaud thought it wasn’t enough. So he wrote it so that the son [Batu] died while protecting the herd of horses and the father has to give up his son’s body. The scene was an opportunity to present this tradition without having to lecture on it. This was different from the book. In fact, it exceeded the book in this respect. So I thought Annaud had a good reason to kill off Batu. It didn’t distort the original intention of the book. The conclusion of the film is very different from the book’s.I was able to accept it. At the end of the book, the main character kills the small wolf cub. Why? He does it because he doesn’t want the wolf to become a servant to man. The wolf was no longer able to survive, so, as the cub was dying, Chen Zhen kills the cub. It was right to have the cub die like a soldier, and not die like a dog. I think this showed a certain respect for the wolf. It was very difficult to write.But Westerners would not be able to bear this. They would think this was too cruel, and the animal rights people might protest. Annaud is very respectful of animals. He doesn’t have any scenes that show wolves being killed. If there were any scenes that showed animals being tortured, then viewers might cause trouble. That was the first consideration. So by having the main character release the wolf, this provides a little warmth and hope to viewers. But if this is what happened in the book, why not include that in the film? Couldn’t they have used computer-generated images instead of real animals?I asked about this when I was reviewing a draft of the screenplay. But the parts of the film that include the cub are pretty superficial. People were very moved by the wolf cub in the book because I wrote about it in great detail. So when the wolf cub dies in the book, many readers cried. Even I cried while I was writing it. The wolf cub’s personality is very strong in the book up until its death, so it is a very complete chain of events.But since the cub wasn’t very prominent in the early parts of the film, to have this shocking thing happen to it wouldn’t be very logical. I thought that if it’s going to be written this way, then it’s O.K. to let the cub survive. Also, while writing the book, I had a dream of raising a wolf and releasing it when it was older. Later if I went to the top of a hill and called for it, it would bring its little cubs over. So you could say that this was a way of fulfilling that dream. That’s another reason why I could accept the change.The book explores the impact of modernization and the encroachment of Han Chinese civilization on the people of Inner Mongolia and the grasslands. This theme is touched on in the film, but not to the extent that it was in the book. I was also disappointed because, the way I imagined it, the end would show the grasslands as a giant desert. In fact, that’s why I don’t want to go back to the grasslands. The grasslands today are terrifying. When I went back in 1997, the terrain was still there, but it was already in a very bad state. Telephone poles, wireless towers and mining — there was so much. You didn’t get the sense anymore of an untouched grassland. One aspect where this film really succeeded was in finding a piece of untouched grassland. It’s so beautiful. Later I told Annaud, I said, “Tengger [the Mongolian sky god] hid this piece of land especially for you.”Many people have interpreted your novel as a critique of China’s political system. Were you concerned that in the course of making the film, this critique would be filtered out?This was a problem from the beginning. There were a few considerations. The first was that the film could only cover a limited amount of ground, and the story is very long, so cuts were inevitable. Annaud said this from the beginning. With regards to what to cut, then of course some sensitive subjects had to be considered. You don’t want to make the film and then not have it shown because of censorship. So in the process of cutting, I decided that it would be O.K. not to talk about some of the very sensitive topics, such as inter-ethnic conflict, and to focus instead on the environmental issue. This was an important issue in the novel, and one of the main reasons why I wrote it.What’s the best medium for exploring these sensitive topics if not movies? Are these discussions better suited for books?Yes. I was actually very daring when I wrote this novel. In China, it’s rare to see a book as critical as mine. It’s essentially a critique of several thousand of years of Chinese history. But it’s been more than 10 years since the book was published, and it still hasn’t been censored. Not only that, but many high-level officials, intellectuals and ordinary people have embraced the book. Why? Because I based it on truth.I think you can see the progress Chinese society has made by looking at the past 10 years since the book was published. You see that if you criticize, as long as your criticism is fair, then society can accept it. So even though there have been many people who have wanted to ban this book, most people have embraced it.Are you working on another book?I have enough material to write another one, but I have a special quality when it comes to writing books: I’m very slow. If I’m not clear about it then I won’t write it. Normally I will wait and wait and wait until the point at which I can’t hold it in any longer, and then finally I’ll write. But I haven’t reached this point yet.