By ISABEL KERSHNERFEB. 25, 2015
JERUSALEM —  In another potential blow to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who faces his country’s voters in less than three weeks, Israel’s government watchdog issued a harsh report on Wednesday chronicling the failure of successive Israeli governments in dealing with a growing housing crisis — mostly on Mr. Netanyahu’s watch.The report was written by the state comptroller, Joseph Haim Shapira, who this month released another report that examined expenditures at the prime minister’s residence, including food costs that more than doubled after Mr. Netanyahu took office in 2009, reaching nearly $120,000 in 2012 — a third of it in takeout meals.Whereas the Netanyahu family’s sushi and hairdressing bills were something of a personal embarrassment for the prime minister, the lack of reasonably priced housing has affected millions of Israelis across the political spectrum.For many Israeli voters, day-to-day issues like the high cost of living and housing can resonate just as strongly as strategic ones like the acute tensions in Israel’s relations with the Obama administration over Mr. Netanyahu’s plans to address a joint meeting of Congress next week and the nuclear talks with Iran.AdvertisementMr. Netanyahu is perceived as being weaker than many of his rivals on socioeconomic issues, an element that has turned the election on March 17 into a surprisingly open race, with his conservative Likud party struggling in the polls against the center-left Zionist Union led by Isaac Herzog and Tzipi Livni.AdvertisementMr. Netanyahu described the report as important. He said that it noted what he described as some of his government’s achievements in the housing realm, but he acknowledged that much more remained to be done.The Likud party said in a statement that “only a strong government led by Prime Minister Netanyahu will resolve this crisis.”Netanyahu loyalists had sought to delay the report’s release, saying that the timing, right before the elections in which Mr. Netanyahu is competing for a third consecutive term, was political and problematic.But Mr. Shapira, a retired judge, said in a statement that the housing crisis had been on the public agenda for years and that it affected much of the population.“The work of the state comptroller is carried out with professionalism and according to relevant considerations only, and it is not appropriate for political timetables to influence it,” he added.The almost 300-page report, long anticipated by Mr. Netanyahu’s opponents, said that housing prices shot up by about 55 percent from 2008 to 2013, and they have continued to rise. Deficient planning and the limited number of housing starts relative to the growth in the number of households has led to a shortfall of tens of thousands of units and high costs for those that are on the market, the report concluded.Rents have also gone up by about 30 percent, according to the report, while salaries have not kept pace, increasing only modestly.AdvertisementThe report also described a clumsy and somewhat chaotic bureaucracy where the multiple ministries and official agencies dealing with different aspects of the planning and construction process lacked coordination, reliable data, or any common strategy or vision.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.According to the report, it currently takes 12 years from the first stage of planning until an apartment building is completed.Mr. Shapira said that the government could have a great deal of influence on the housing market, along with local authorities and other bodies.Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, who resigned in the fall of 2008 under the shadow of a corruption inquiry, did not perceive the significance of the unfolding housing gap as it widened that year, according to the report. The government formed by Mr. Netanyahu after the February 2009 elections did not realize the need for action until July 2010, the report said.The country’s housing problems finally burst onto the public agenda in 2011 when young activists pitched tents in central Tel Aviv to highlight the lack of accommodations, setting off widespread social justice protests that brought half a million Israelis onto the streets at their peak.In 2012, following recommendations of a committee set up as a result of the protests and led by a prominent economist, Prof. Manuel Trajtenberg, the government made dozens of decisions meant to speed up the marketing and development of land for residential construction. Yet the report said the timetable and goals proved unrealistic. Still, Mr. Netanyahu and the Likud were returned to office in the January 2013 elections.The Zionist Union, Mr. Netanyahu’s main electoral competition, has chosen Mr. Trajtenberg as its candidate for finance minister in the next government.Mr. Trajtenberg told Israel Radio on Wednesday that rising housing prices were “not a divine decree, and the solutions have long been at hand.” He added, “What we have here is a prolonged failure of government — one government after another has not done what was necessary.”Some Likud ministers, as well as some Zionist Union politicians, appear to have been trying to shift the blame onto Yair Lapid, the former finance minister who is the leader of Yesh Atid, a centrist party that ran for the first time in 2013 on a social agenda, promising to help Israel’s struggling middle classes. Yesh Atid won a surprising 19 seats in the 120-seat Knesset, or Parliament. This time, however, the polls predict it will win half that amount.AdvertisementBut Mr. Lapid, who had served as finance minister for a year and eight months and established a special housing cabinet in the middle of 2013, responded on Wednesday that the crisis was “a direct result of Netanyahu and the Likud ignoring the issue.” He said, “Years of procrastination, inaction and corruption caused house prices to increase outrageously.”Still, it was not clear how much the report would affect Mr. Netanyahu’s electoral fortunes. Shmuel Sandler, a political science professor at Bar-Ilan University, said that within days, the report was likely to drop from the headlines, and the public’s attention would be focused on Mr. Netanyahu’s trip to Washington.Mr. Sandler added that many Likud supporters were like soccer fans. “They don’t leave their team when it is under attack,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: As Vote Nears, Watchdog Agency Criticizes Netanyahu on Housing Costs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.