By CEYLAN YEGINSUFEB. 25, 2015
ISTANBUL —  Turkish police officers on Wednesday arrested dozens of fellow officers accused of wiretapping President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and top government officials.The chief prosecutor’s office in Ankara, the capital, issued 54 arrest warrants, the Anadolu News Agency reported, and at least 40 people were arrested in a wave of early morning raids that were carried out simultaneously in 19 cities.The arrests are the latest salvo in a feud between Mr. Erdogan and his former ally, Fethullah Gulen, an influential Muslim cleric who lives in exile in Pennsylvania and has been accused of participating in a plot to overthrow the government.Mr. Gulen, 73, has millions of followers around the world, and his supporters in Turkey hold positions of power in the police force and the judiciary. The arrests on Wednesday follow a string of orchestrated raids on institutions linked to Mr. Gulen’s supporters, and they represent the latest attempt in Mr. Erdogan’s campaign to root out Mr. Gulen’s influence before general elections scheduled for June.In 2013, Mr. Erdogan accused Mr. Gulen’s supporters of pursuing a corruption scandal against him that implicated members of his inner circle. Recordings from illegal wiretaps of Mr. Erdogan when he was the prime minister were posted on social media sites in what Mr. Erdogan called an attempt staged by Mr. Gulen to bring down his government.AdvertisementThe Turkish government has since purged thousands of Gulen supporters from the ranks of the police force and the judiciary.AdvertisementSince December, Turkey has issued two arrest warrants for Mr. Gulen, who has lived in the United States since 1999. The most recent request for a warrant was made on Tuesday by the Istanbul Public Prosecutor’s Office, which accused Mr. Gulen of being a member of a terrorist organization and of forming a “parallel state” to overthrow the government.The first warrant, issued in December, accused Mr. Gulen of committing a crime, without providing further details. Mr. Gulen has denied playing a role in plots against the government. The warrants are thought to be an effort to form the basis of a formal request to the United States for Mr. Gulen’s extradition.An arrest warrant was also issued for the journalist Emre Uslu, a former police officer who is thought to have close ties with Mr. Gulen and who has been accused of espionage and of setting up an “armed terrorist organization.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Police Officers in Turkey Held in Wiretaps of Officials.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.