AdvertisementSupported byBy Julfikar Ali Manik and Nida NajarDHAKA, Bangladesh — An anticorruption court here in the capital issued an arrest warrant Wednesday for the opposition leader, former Prime Minister Khaleda Zia, in a move that could exacerbate heightened tensions between her supporters and governing party loyalists.Warrants were issued for Mrs. Zia and two others after all three failed to appear for hearings involving embezzlement allegations from Mrs. Zia’s time as prime minister. Lawyers for Mrs. Zia have maintained that the charges are politically motivated.“Issuing the arrest warrant against Khaleda Zia was unfair,” said Syed Zaynul Abedin Mesbah, one of her lawyers. “It has been issued only to harass her and to put her on an unfair trial.”Sheikh Hasina, the country’s prime minister and Mrs. Zia’s political rival, has been locked in a power struggle with Mrs. Zia for two decades. Mrs. Zia’s Bangladesh Nationalist Party escalated protests against Mrs. Hasina’s government last month, maintaining that the election that installed Mrs. Hasina, which took place last year, was undemocratic.More than 100 people have died in the ensuing political agitation since January, according to local news reports, prompting foreign leaders to urge the two leaders to end the violence. Mrs. Zia ordered an indefinite transportation blockade on Jan. 5, as well as countrywide strikes for several days every week.Mrs. Zia has missed several court hearings in the corruption cases, and a lawyer for the prosecution said she had failed to appear at more than 50 hearings in the past several years.“We did not file any petition for an arrest warrant against Khaleda,” Mosharraf Hossain Kajol, a lawyer for the prosecution, said by phone. “It was the court that issued it because there was no other legal way to continue proceedings of the graft cases.”Mr. Mesbah said she had missed recent hearings for security reasons and because of the recent death of her younger son, who party officials said died of cardiac arrest last month in Malaysia.Mrs. Zia, her son Tarique Rahman and seven others are accused of misappropriating and abusing power to collect more than $600,000 from two separate charities named after Mrs. Zia’s husband, former President Ziaur Rahman, who was assassinated in 1981. The charges were filed in 2008 and 2011 by the Anticorruption Commission of Bangladesh and have been pending since.Mrs. Zia and the other two accused will be required to appear in court on March 4, Mr. Kajol said. It was not clear on Wednesday afternoon whether the warrants would lead to the immediate arrest of either Mrs. Zia or the two others: a former Bangladesh Nationalist Party lawmaker, Kazi Saleemul Haque, and a businessman, Sharfuddin Ahmed.Julfikar Ali Manik reported from Dhaka, and Nida Najar from New Delhi.Advertisement