AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris BuckleyHONG KONG — An 81-year-old survivor of Mao’s purges was convicted in southwestern China on Wednesday for his efforts to remind Chinese of their country’s history.Tie Liu, an underground publisher, was tried in Chengdu, in Sichuan Province, along with his maid, Huang Jing, and convicted of operating an illegal business, Mr. Tie’s former lawyer said. Both defendants received suspended sentences for publishing the memoirs of people persecuted nearly 60 years ago for criticizing the Communist Party.Even with the relatively light sentences, the prosecutions have underlined the party’s determination under President Xi Jinping to eradicate what the authorities deem to be corrosive criticisms of the Communist Party, including of its turbulent past.Mr. Tie’s real name is Huang Zerong, but he is widely known by his pen name, under which he published “Small Scars From the Past,” a journal with a small circulation that ran recollections of people who, like him, were persecuted as “Rightists” in the 1950s.The Rightists were students, scholars and other citizens who took up Mao Zedong’s call in 1956 to expose the shortcomings of the Communist Party. When Mao decided their criticisms had gone too far, he reversed course and purged the same people who had answered his call by sentencing them to decades in labor camps and political ignominy. In 1957, when he was a journalist and aspiring author, Mr. Tie was called a Rightist and spent nearly a quarter-century in labor camps.In the early 1980s, many Rightists won political rehabilitation. But Mr. Tie and others felt the party had not faced up to its misdeeds, and he started his magazine to preserve the accounts of victims of Mao’s campaigns.The Communist Party tightly controls accounts of its past, but Mr. Tie’s journal, circulated in Beijing, was tolerated by the security police who watched his activities. That changed in September, when Mr. Tie was detained after publishing scathing criticisms of party propaganda, like claims that the ideology chief, Liu Yunshan, had sabotaged Mr. Xi’s supposed liberal leanings.When the police formally charged Mr. Tie in October, they also accused him of “creating a disturbance” by publishing those commentaries on overseas websites. But the prosecutors did not pursue those charges, said Liu Xiaoyuan, the lawyer, who said he last saw Mr. Tie in November.Mr. Tie and Ms. Huang reportedly pleaded guilty in return for lighter sentences, Mr. Liu said. Mr. Tie received two and a half years, with four years’ probation. Ms. Huang, who worked in his Beijing home, received one year, with a year’s probation for helping his publishing.“Even the official authorities could see that it wouldn’t look right to have an old, sick man go to prison,” Huang Qi, a Chengdu rights advocate, said by phone. “Imagine if his condition worsened and the worst happened.”Mr. Liu said the prosecutors tried to avoid publicity by moving Mr. Tie’s trial from Beijing to Chengdu and insisting that the defendants use a local lawyer. He said that from his discussions with Mr. Tie and the police when he was his lawyer, he knew the illegal business charges concerned Mr. Tie’s publishing activities. “The publication wasn’t for profit,” he added. “It was for sharing information and memories, not for business purposes.”Advertisement