
Open Source By                     
 ROBERT MACKEY
 
FEB. 26, 2015
The Islamic State released video showing militants using sledgehammers and drills to smash archaeological artifacts from Iraq’s Mosul Museum, saying they were symbols of idolatry.Confronted with the latest video news release from Islamic State militants in Iraq, which shows jihadists taking sledgehammers and electric drills to ancient statuary in the city of Mosul, historians and archaeologists spent much of Thursday studying the footage for clues as to what, exactly, had been lost.The smashing of the antiquities, described as “idols” by a spokesman for the Islamic State in a video report titled “The Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice #1 — Nineveh Province,” seemed to echo the destruction of the Great Buddhas of Bamiyan by the Afghan Taliban in 2001. And it outraged Iraqi opponents of the Sunni Muslim extremists.
            Congratulations to the people of Mosul, Anbar, Salahuldin for welcoming #ISIS, you have ruined yourselves pic.twitter.com/U9NZv2inSU Lynda Albertson, the chief executive of the Association for Research into Crimes Against Art, pointed out that some of the footage matches images of the museum’s galleries included in a 2009 Unesco report. She said that the museum “specializes in antiquities from the Assyrian empire, which flourished within the provincial borders of present-day Province of Nineveh,” but “also houses a significant collection of sculptures and other stone relics from Hatra — the capital of the first Arab Kingdom.”Christopher Jones, a doctoral student in ancient Near Eastern history at Columbia University who blogs about the threat to cultural heritage posed by the Islamic State, suggested that most of the originals destroyed inside the museum appeared to be from ancient Hatra.
            Most of the destroyed statues seem to be from Hatra. Most of the Assyrian relief sculptures in the museum are replicas.        Eleanor Robson, a professor of ancient Near Eastern history with the British Institute for the Study of Iraq, said the destruction was filmed at two sites: inside the Mosul Museum — which was looted in 2003, after the American-led invasion of Iraq — and at the Nergal Gate, an entryway to the capital of the Assyrian Empire, Nineveh, guarded by a pair of colossal human-headed, winged bulls.AdvertisementThe militants’ video lingered on a description of the gate, which explained that the entrance was dedicated to Nergal, the Sumerian god of plague and the underworld in ancient Mesopotamia. The association of the winged bulls with this pre-Islamic god was offered by the spokesman for the fundamentalist militants as a justification for their destruction.
            My heart can't take it. The pain is immense. History gone forever. The world is silent. pic.twitter.com/c2Pggkn0SV Ms. Robson said in a BBC radio interview that the video evidence showed that “artifacts from two different ancient cities as well as modern replicas” were destroyed at the museum. “What we’ve got at the beginning of the video are standing statues of people who lived in the desert city Hatra in Iraq in the second century B.C. to the third century A.D.,” she said.As those statues are smashed in the video, Ms. Robson noted, “you can see in them iron rods which archaeologists have used to piece them together from ancient fragments.”AdvertisementThe winged bulls, she added, date to the early seventh century B.C., “so they have stood there for nearly 3,000 years welcoming people into the city, and ISIS have now taken sledgehammers to them.”
@holland_tom @matthewteller Three is us have watched & rewatched: more originals than I first thought :( #wishfulthinking A similar winged bull is in the British Museum in London.Samuel Andrew Hardy, a specialist in the trade in illicit antiquities who teaches at the American University of Rome, explained on his blog that one of the one of the exhibits shown in pieces on the Museum floor, a statue of the seventh-century-B.C. Assyrian king Sargon, was a reproduction of the original. “The Assyrian reliefs (carved panels),” he added, “were plaster cast replicas of pieces that are in the British Museum.”Mr. Hardy also suggested that, even though the new video showed the destruction of pre-Islamic artifacts, Islamic State militants had previously taken part in “the illicit trade in antiquities,” despite their professed horror of “idols.”“Obviously, they are destroying some things that they could sell,” Mr. Hardy wrote, “but they are also selling some things that, according to their perversion of Islamic law, they ‘should’ destroy.”The video of the winged bull, he added, highlighted “that it was too massive for them to sneak it out of the country to an unscrupulous private collector in the West.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »