By SOMINI SENGUPTAFEB. 26, 2015
UNITED NATIONS —  The United Nations high commissioner for refugees said Thursday that European countries must accept more Syrian refugees to dissuade them from boarding overcrowded boats for a perilous journey across the Mediterranean Sea to escape the war in Syria as “the level of despair rises.”Speaking to the United Nations Security Council, the high commissioner, António Guterres, said Syrians accounted for a third of the 220,000 migrants who reached European shores last year. This year alone, he said, for every 20 who made it across the sea, one drowned.“Abandoning refugees to hopelessness only exposes them to even greater suffering, exploitation and dangerous abuse,” Mr. Guterres said, warning that to leave it to countries of the region to absorb the burden alone “could result in serious regional destabilization, and more security concerns elsewhere in the world.”Already, he added, 3.8 million refugees were registered in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, many of them living in dire conditions.AdvertisementMr. Guterres’s comments came as the Council met for a review of how the warring parties in Syria had complied with a resolution passed a year ago, when the Council authorized aid agencies to deliver food and medicine to people inside the war zone, even without the consent of the government of President Bashar al-Assad.The Council heard on Thursday how blatantly that measure, which had taken months to negotiate, had been flouted. Government forces continue to prevent medical supplies, including “midwifery kits,” from being delivered to opposition-held areas, according to the United Nations secretary general’s monthly report.AdvertisementNo food could be delivered in January to areas held by the Islamic State, including Raqqa and Deir al-Zour, where an estimated 600,000 people live.And two United Nations staff members who had been negotiating access to opposition-held areas were expelled by the Assad government this month, according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. No reasons were given.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Council’s resolution had specifically called on both sides to cease obstructing the delivery of aid, though it contained no enforcement measures.The resolution also condemned the use of so-called barrel bombs, which has continued unabated, according to the United Nations report.The United Nations special envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura, is seeking to halt the aerial bombardments in Aleppo as part of what he calls a freeze in fighting.This month, Mr. de Mistura announced vaguely that Mr. Assad had agreed to a temporary truce, but provided no details. On Thursday, the American ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, pointed out that Mr. Assad had already demonstrated his “abysmal track record” of abiding by the Council’s resolution of last year.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Official Seeks Havens for Syrians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.