By MICHAEL FORSYTHEOCT. 12, 2015
HONG KONG —  China sentenced two former senior Communist Party officials to lengthy prison terms on Monday after courts found they took bribes. The men were closely tied to the disgraced former security chief Zhou Yongkang, who is serving a life term.Jiang Jiemin, the former party official who once ran China’s largest oil and gas company, was sentenced to 16 years after confessing to taking bribes, a court in central China announced. Another court sentenced Li Chuncheng, a former top party official in Sichuan Province in southwestern China, to 13 years for the same offense. Both men were fined 1 million renminbi, or about $158,000.The verdicts came two weeks before the start of an annual conclave of the Communist Party’s Central Committee. The party often announces criminal judgments before important meetings. This year’s meeting, called a plenum, will be held Oct. 26-29 in Beijing, the official news agency, Xinhua, reported on Monday.The downfall of both men served as a signal that the Communist Party was investigating Mr. Zhou, a former member of the party’s elite Politburo Standing Committee and the most senior individual to be tried for corruption in the 66-year history of the People’s Republic. Both men acted under Mr. Zhou’s orders to illegally give assistance to other people, causing the state to lose $235.6 million, according to the court judgment on Mr. Zhou issued in June.Mr. Li was dismissed from his post within weeks of President Xi Jinping’s assumption of power in late 2012, and Mr. Jiang was placed under investigation in September 2013. Mr. Jiang spent most of his career at the China National Petroleum Corporation, which Mr. Zhou led from 1996 to 1998. Mr. Li served under Mr. Zhou in Sichuan Province, where Mr. Zhou was the top official from 1999 to 2002.Mr. Jiang took bribes amounting to more than $2.2 million, and Mr. Li took bribes amounting to almost $6.3 million, according to the verdicts. Mr. Li’s sentence was reduced for providing “meritorious service,” showing contrition, turning himself in and actively handing over the bribe money, the court said.Mia Li contributed research from Beijing.A version of this article appears in print on October 13, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: China Sentences 2 Former Communist Officials .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.