By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVISFEB. 26, 2015
WASHINGTON —  President Obama will send Susan E. Rice, his national security adviser, and Samantha Power, his envoy to the United Nations, to speak to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee at its conference here next week, officials at the White House said Thursday.The move comes as relations between the United States and Israel have soured after the decision by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to address a joint meeting of Congress on Tuesday to argue against a nuclear deal with Iran that is one of Mr. Obama’s highest priorities.While in Washington, Mr. Netanyahu will also speak to Aipac, a strong supporter of his position on Iran. The administration — dismayed about the Israeli prime minister’s visit, which was arranged without informing the White House and will come just two weeks before Israel’s national elections — has said Mr. Obama will not meet with Mr. Netanyahu to avoid the appearance of influencing the campaign.Susan E. Rice, President Obama’s national security adviser, said that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s planned speech to Congress posed a problem for the Israeli-American relationship.White House officials have said senior advisers, including Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Secretary of State John Kerry, will be out of town for the speech.AdvertisementUntil Thursday, White House officials had also not responded to Aipac’s invitation to participate in its conference, which is usually attended by high-ranking American officials and sometimes by the president.AdvertisementSending Ms. Rice and Ms. Power is “consistent with the kind of administration participation you’ve seen” in past years, said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary.Asked whether sending them was an attempt to play down the dispute between the United States and Israel over the speech, Mr. Earnest said, “If it’s perceived by some as an effort to demonstrate bipartisan support for the relationship between the United States and Israel, then that would be great — that would be a great conclusion.”“Unfortunately,” Mr. Earnest added, “that’s not the way that everyone has participated in this dispute in the last few weeks.”The Republican and Democratic leaders of the Senate announced Thursday that they would host the Israeli prime minister in the Capitol on the day of his speech. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, said they would meet with Mr. Netanyahu in Mr. McConnell’s office on Tuesday afternoon.Still, the dispute over Mr. Netanyahu’s trip continued. House Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, who invited the prime minister to speak, said he “couldn’t disagree more” with Ms. Rice’s comment on Tuesday that the visit was “destructive” to the American-Israeli relationship.“What is destructive, in my view, is making a bad deal that paves the way for a nuclear Iran,” Mr. Boehner said. “That is why it is so important for the American people to hear what the prime minister has to say about the grave threats we’re facing.”Isaac Herzog, the head of Israel’s Labor Party and the prime challenger to Mr. Netanyahu in the March 17 elections, on Thursday renewed his call on the prime minister to cancel the speech to Congress. “You will cause strategic damage to Israel’s standing and to the relationship with the United States,” Mr. Herzog said.AdvertisementMr. Herzog and Tzipi Livni, who have joined forces for the campaign under the banner Zionist Union, have increasingly made Mr. Netanyahu’s trip to Washington and the discord between his government and the Obama administration a focus of their pitch to voters.Ms. Livni, a centrist former foreign minister, has described the frayed alliance as a threat to Israel’s security.Mr. Herzog announced this week that he would not attend the Aipac conference, saying he could make his case about the Iranian nuclear threat from the campaign trail in Israel. Amos Yadlin, the former head of military intelligence who is the Zionist Union’s candidate for defense minister, and Erel Margalit, a high-tech mogul and Labor member of Parliament, will speak at Aipac instead.At a news conference with Ms. Livni on Thursday, Mr. Herzog criticized Mr. Netanyahu’s rejection of an invitation to meet with Senate Democrats. “Netanyahu is playing politics at the expense of diplomacy,” Mr. Herzog said, according to The Jerusalem Post. “If I was in your place, I wouldn’t go there. I would hold intensive talks with the U.S. president.”Jodi Rudoren contributed reporting from Jerusalem.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Sends Top Officials to Address Jewish Group.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.