By STEPHEN CASTLEFEB. 26, 2015
LONDON — Despite 10 complaints against him, and a reputation as a “sex pest,” Jimmy Savile, the British television personality, had freewheeling access in a hospital where he sexually abused 60 people over more than two decades, according to a report released Thursday.The document adds shocking detail to the growing evidence of serial sexual abuse by Mr. Savile, who used his celebrity status and charity work to gain access to potential victims in more than a dozen hospitals and on the premises of the British Broadcasting Corporation, where he worked for 30 years.His behavior came to light after he died in 2011, at the age of 84, prompting deep soul-searching and setting off a number of criminal investigations into other cases of sexual abuse from decades ago. Mr. Savile is now thought to have had more than 500 victims, the majority of whom were girls under 18.The report, which focused on Mr. Savile’s relationship with the Stoke Mandeville hospital in Buckinghamshire, was one of several released Thursday. A celebrity fund-raiser, and one of the country’s best-known and most popular television presenters, the cigar-chomping Mr. Savile was granted almost unfettered access to the hospital.Advertisement“Suspicions were not acted on and patients and staff were ignored,” the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, told Parliament. “People were either too dazzled or too intimidated by the nation’s favorite celebrity to confront the evil predator we now know he was.”AdvertisementThe report is from an independent inquiry into Mr. Saville’s behavior conducted at the behest of Buckinghamshire Healthcare N.H.S. Trust, which oversees Stoke Mandeville Hospital.The report said Mr. Savile abused 60 people at Stoke Mandeville from around 1968 to 1992, ranging in age from 8 to 40. Ten were younger than 12.“The victims were patients, staff, visitors, volunteers and charity fund-raisers,” the report said. “The sexual abuse ranged from inappropriate touching to rape.”This systematic abuse continued, the report noted, even though it appeared to be an “open secret” that Mr. Savile was a “sex pest,” and despite one formal and nine informal complaints about him from 1972 to 1985.“The investigation found that none of the informal complaints were either taken seriously or escalated to senior management,” the document said. “The one formal complaint was dropped by the complainant’s father due to her serious ill health.”That formal protest, made in 1977, “should have led to Savile’s suspension from the hospital and a formal police report being made,” the report concluded.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The document described how, first as a volunteer porter, then as fund-raiser, Mr. Savile, who was once invited to lunch with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, built up his status at Stoke Mandeville.“Savile’s access as a voluntary porter in the 1970s and his position of authority in the 1980s established him as a powerful and influential figure at Stoke Mandeville Hospital,” the inquiry’s lead investigator, Androulla Johnstone, said in a statement, “one who could abuse and one whose victims felt powerless to challenge or report.”AdvertisementOne harrowing account was from a woman who said she was raped at the age of 12 by a man she later identified as Mr. Savile. When she complained to a nurse, she was told not to say anything, otherwise the nurse would get into trouble, the report said.Another victim, then 11, from a family of practicing Roman Catholics was “systematically abused by Savile in the hospital chapel presbytery during services,” the report said.And the report quoted the comments of another of Mr. Savile’s victims, also 11.“I did not understand what had happened,” she said. “I knew it felt wrong and I felt dirty and I went to clean myself and, I just wanted to wash myself again and again.”Mr. Savile had access to the hospital’s mortuary, and two people told investigators that they had heard that he had inappropriate contact with corpses there — though that allegation was not proved.“No witness when interviewed by the investigation could recount any direct experience of Savile acting inappropriately with dead bodies in a sexual manner,” the report said. “However, there was significant evidence to suggest that Savile probably could, and did, access the mortuary on his own” after hours.Though it acknowledged many failings by the British health department and the hospital, the document also suggested that Mr. Savile’s offenses were, to some extent, made possible by the social mores of the time.“It is evident from what many witnesses told us that staff accepted higher levels of sexual harassment in the workplace during the 1970s than would be accepted today,” the report said.A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Britain: Report Details Abuser’s Actions.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.