By ISABEL KERSHNERFEB. 27, 2015
JERUSALEM — Israel’s state-owned electric company will stop disrupting power supplies to Palestinian districts in the West Bank after reaching an agreement with the Israeli government meant to help offset a ballooning debt, Israeli officials said on Friday.The deal involves the transfer of 300 million shekels, over $75 million, to the Israel Electric Corporation — money to be deducted from Palestinian tax revenues that Israel has been withholding for two months in response to the Palestinian leadership’s move to join the International Criminal Court.Israel collects more than $100 million in monthly tax revenue on behalf of the Palestinian Authority — money that makes up a significant part of the budget needed to pay the authority’s tens of thousands of employees and provide government services. The withholding of the funds has caused a financial crisis in the authority, which has been unable to pay full salaries. Palestinian officials have denounced the move as “piracy.”But the effort to restore full electricity supplies seemed to indicate an Israeli desire to reduce tensions with the Palestinians, or at least not have them escalate further. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who is running for re-election on March 17, is already under pressure because of acute tensions with the Obama administration over his plans to address a joint meeting of Congress next week about the nuclear talks with Iran.AdvertisementRelations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority took a turn for the worse after President Mahmoud Abbas’s Fatah party signed a reconciliation agreement last April with Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls Gaza, contributing to the breakdown of troubled American-brokered Middle East peace talks.AdvertisementIsraeli officials refused to say whether the arrangement with the Israel Electric Corporation was reached in coordination or agreement with the Palestinian Authority; the authority’s government spokesman did not respond to requests for comment. There was no word on whether Israel was considering an end to the withholding of tax revenue.“Our goal was to ensure that electricity would be supplied without interruption to the Palestinian Authority,” an Israeli official said on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the issue publicly.The Israeli government has in the past stopped the electric company from cutting Palestinian power supplies, wary of the humanitarian impact and diplomatic fallout. Soon after the electricity company reduced the supply to the Nablus and Jenin districts for about 45 minutes on Monday, the Israeli prime minister’s office clarified that the step had been taken at the company’s own initiative. Power was again reduced for an hour on Wednesday.“We were obviously not happy about the interruption,” the Israeli official said.The Israeli power company, which supplies most of the electricity to the West Bank, said the Palestinian Authority’s debt had been building over a number of years, and had reached 1.9 billion shekels, or around $480 million. Israel said the tax money being transferred to the utility company was not meant to dent the huge backlog of debt but only to prevent the debt from growing larger.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The use of the tax money to offset utility bills is not new. For some time, a portion of the monthly tax money has automatically gone to pay the electric company, but it is not enough. And no funds have been transferred to the corporation over the last three months, said Dalia Bodinger, a spokeswoman for the company.Ms. Bodinger added that the electricity company had sent a letter on Thursday to the Palestinian prime minister and the head of the Palestinian energy authority warning that the electricity cuts would be broadened on Sunday. A few hours after the letter was sent, the Israeli prime minister’s office announced the new arrangement.Dhafer Melhem, the acting head of the Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority, told the independent Palestinian news agency Ma’an that the authority had no knowledge of the Israeli decision to prevent further power reductions to the West Bank. He blamed some of the local Palestinian councils for the rising debt to the Israeli electricity company, saying they collected money from citizens for electricity but did not pay all their debts to the Israelis.In another step apparently intended to reduce tensions, the Israeli prime minister’s office said approval had been granted to connect the new Palestinian city of Rawabi to a nearby water main, a decision that had been held up for months and had threatened the viability of the flagship Palestinian enterprise.AdvertisementBashar Masri, a Palestinian businessman and the driving force behind Rawabi, which is a short commute from Ramallah in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, said he had received confirmation on Friday from a senior Israeli official that the water issue had been resolved.Speaking by telephone from London, Mr. Masri said he expected to be able to deliver completed apartments to their new owners within about three months.“I am happy now,” Mr. Masri said. “I was losing a lot of credibility telling people, ‘Next week, next week, next week.’”A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Electricity to Return to West Bank.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.