By MICHAEL FORSYTHEFEB. 27, 2015
HONG KONG — A Hong Kong woman convicted of beating and threatening her Indonesian maid was sentenced to six years in prison on Friday, in a case that focused attention on the treatment of domestic servants here.Law Wan-tung, 44, was found guilty earlier this month of assaulting Erwiana Sulistyaningsih, 24, who cleaned her house and lived in a closet in her apartment for eight months. During the trial, Ms. Erwiana recounted the various ways she said Ms. Law abused her, including shoving a vacuum cleaner tube into her mouth, fracturing two of her teeth with a blow to the face, putting her on a diet of bread and rice and forcing her to urinate into a plastic bag or bucket to avoid dirtying the toilet.In announcing the sentence, which also included a fine that amounted to less than $2,000, Judge Amanda Woodcock told Ms. Law that her behavior was contemptible, Radio Television Hong Kong reported. The maximum sentence that can be imposed in Hong Kong’s district courts, where Ms. Law was tried, is seven years.In a statement, Ms. Erwiana said that she was unhappy that Ms. Law was not punished more severely.“Giving her the guilty verdict is one thing, but giving her this light sentence is another,” she said. “This sentencing may send a wrong signal to employers who mistreat or violate the rights of their domestic workers.”AdvertisementMs. Erwiana said she was never paid for her work, apart from the equivalent of less than $10 that she was given the day Ms. Law sent her back to Indonesia. On that day, in January of 2014, Ms. Law put her in a diaper because Ms. Erwiana was too weak to go to the toilet, dressed her in six layers of clothes to hide her emaciated body and slathered her face in makeup to hide the bruises, according to testimony at the trial. The taxi driver who drove them to the airport testified that Ms. Erwiana smelled of urine and feces.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The abuse came to light after photos of Ms. Erwiana taken in an Indonesian hospital caused an uproar in both Indonesia and Hong Kong.More than 300,000 women, mostly from Indonesia and the Philippines, work as domestic servants in Hong Kong. By law, they are relegated to second-class status, forced to live with their employers, often in tiny flats such as Ms. Law’s 592-square-foot apartment. Their minimum pay comes to $530 a month, an amount that, when their long hours are factored in, is far less than Hong Kong’s minimum wage. Ms. Erwiana testified that she regularly worked 20-hour days, with no days off.AdvertisementOften very young, poor and with family members dependent on their wages, the women are vulnerable to abuse by their employers, recruitment agencies in Indonesia and placement agencies in Hong Kong, Amnesty International documented in a 2013 report.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Hong Kong: 6 Years for Abusing Maid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.