By STEVEN ERLANGERFEB. 28, 2015
BERLIN —  Germany has become Europe’s indispensable nation, at the center of crises over Ukraine and Greece. But a country uncomfortable with leadership, often labeled a reluctant hegemon, has had a rocky month.The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, was praised for trying to revive the Minsk cease-fire deal over Ukraine with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, but the effort, thrown together to try to forestall Washington from providing defensive arms to the Ukrainian government, has thus far failed.Ukrainian separatists supported by Russian forces drove a column of tanks through an apparent loophole in the agreement, claiming that it did not cover the key town of Debaltseve. They took the town, cutting off Ukrainian soldiers.Ms. Merkel’s diplomatic efforts were popular with the German public, which is averse to military means, but the results so far have undermined President Petro O. Poroshenko of Ukraine and allowed the separatists to consolidate control of a large part of the country.AdvertisementOn Greece, Ms. Merkel’s acerbic finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, not content with rejecting the new government’s plea for a new deal on its debt, rubbed in the humiliation, speaking about “a date with reality,” as if to children. He suggested that “the Greeks will certainly have a difficult time explaining the deal to their voters.”AdvertisementThe Germans were hardly alone in trying to protect their taxpayers, but it seemed clear that Berlin was calling the shots for the eurozone. The moral arrogance of the tone may come back to haunt Berlin, especially if Greece leaves the euro and defaults.There is no promise of success in Ukraine, either. Ms. Merkel sees the Russian threat; she has pushed her Social Democratic partners and German industrialists to support tougher European Union sanctions against Moscow. But like them, she rejects the military option, apparently believing that sending weapons to Ukraine would only increase the bloodshed without defeating Moscow’s proxies.Another “frozen conflict” may have been inevitable, but speaking at the Munich Security Conference this month, Ms. Merkel compared eastern Ukraine to East Germany, where she grew up. She counseled perseverance in another long struggle with Moscow.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Senior Senate Republicans in the United States unfairly accused her of appeasement, but there is a deeper issue about Germany’s positioning now, made manifest over Ukraine. In discussions here and in Munich, there is a sense that Germany is distancing itself from the United States in its attitudes toward Russia.German dreams of a special relationship with Russia — expressed by the Social Democratic Party’s love for “Ostpolitik,” even as the Berlin Wall was falling — still have a hold.At the Munich conference, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who rewrote chunks of his speech at the last minute, said that Germany’s proximity to Moscow provided an understanding that North Americans lacked. Ms. Merkel, angry with Mr. Putin, has pushed back hard against this tendency, but she knows that the German public has its limits.Opinion polls regularly show a deep disappointment among Germans with the United States and with President Obama, whose election was greeted here as the second coming of American goodness, after George W. Bush.The disgruntlement begins earlier, with the Vietnam War, and extends through the Iraq misadventure; violations of civil rights under the Patriot Act; the torture and treatment of prisoners in Afghanistan and Guantánamo Bay; and the revelations of Edward J. Snowden, including the shock for Germans, remembering the Stasi, that Washington had bugged Ms. Merkel’s cellphone.There is a clear set of disagreements with Washington over privacy, torture, the death penalty, genetically modified food and trade regulation. But they also have about them a whiff of an older German sense of moral superiority, the same whiff that emerges from Mr. Schäuble’s discussions with the Greeks about debt in Southern Europe and German rectitude.AdvertisementGermany is the country the United States helped to mold after the year zero of the Nazi defeat — a deeply democratic, fundamentally federal, almost passionately pacifist country that finds itself the leader of Europe. Germany is indispensable but ambivalent, and is only hesitantly finding its voice.A version of this article appears in print on March 1, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Germans at the Crux of Crises, but Reluctantly.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.