
MARCH 2, 2015

The deadline to finalize the outline of an agreement is the end of March. Here’s what’s at stake for each of the key players and what an agreement might look like.
Related Article
Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei told his country in 2013 that economic sanctions will never force Iran into unwelcome concessions over nuclear development. Office of the Iranian Supreme Leader, via Associated Press
The United States and its negotiating partners want rigorous inspections, limits on the number of centrifuges with which Iran can enrich uranium, and the removal of most of Tehran’s stockpiles of existing fuel. President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry insist on limits that would prevent Iran, should it break an agreement, from producing enough fuel for a nuclear weapon within a year.

Tehran says it should be able to produce nuclear energy for power and medical purposes, and wants an end to sanctions that keep it from shipping oil or gaining access to global financial markets.  The supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has said that Iran would want to build peaceful nuclear enrichment capability when a negotiated agreement expired.

Critics, including Israel, seek the complete dismantling of Iran’s nuclear infrastructure, citing Tehran’s history of hiding efforts to produce nuclear fuel and pursue other weapons-related activities. They also object to any deal that would allow limits on Iran’s nuclear program to expire. In an open letter to Iran's leaders, 47 Republican senators warned Iran about making an agreement with President Obama.

The deadline for finalizing an outline of an agreement is the end of March, and a final deal would have to be reached by June. Under an agreement, Iran’s ability to produce nuclear fuel would probably be strictly limited for at least 10 years, and restrictions would be eased gradually. Iran would ship some nuclear equipment to Russia.  After the deal ends, Iran would still be subject to inspections and unable to produce bomb-grade fuel. It remains unclear whether Iran would have to answer all questions from inspectors about its suspected work on bomb designs.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, then the president of Iran, visiting the Natanz nuclear site in 2008. Iranian President's Office, via Associated Press
Persistent international sanctions, as well as unilateral ones levied by the United States, could continue to curtail Iran’s nuclear program for a time. The U.S. has also used sophisticated cyberattacks to slow Iran’s enriching of uranium, though the effects were temporary. Some argue for “anywhere, anytime” inspections as part of a deal, but inspections are imperfect, as the U.S. has learned from Iraq to North Korea.
By David E. Sanger, Sergio Peçanha and Karen ZraickMany in Iran hope that a blunt speech to Congress by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel would turn American public opinion against him.The full text of Benjamin Netanyahu’s remarks on Iran to a joint meeting of Congress.AdvertisementMany in Iran hope that a blunt speech to Congress by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel would turn American public opinion against him.The full text of Benjamin Netanyahu’s remarks on Iran to a joint meeting of Congress.