

      By LIAM STACK and 
    
KAREN ZRAICK

OCT. 14, 2015

RUSSIAKAZAKHSTANUKRAINEEastern UkraineTransnistriaMOLDOVAROMANIACrimeaSouth OssetiaBULGARIABlack SeaAbkhaziaGEORGIAAZERBAIJANNagorno-KarabakhARMENIAGREECECaspianSeaTURKEYSYRIAIRANMediterraneanSeaIRAQLIBYARUSSIAKAZAKHSTANUKRAINEEastern UkraineTransnistriaMOLDOVAROMANIACrimeaSouth OssetiaBlack SeaBULGARIAAbkhaziaGEORGIAAZERBAIJANNagorno-KarabakhARMENIAGREECECaspianSeaTURKEYSYRIAIRANMediterraneanSeaIRAQLIBYARUSSIAKAZAKHSTANUKRAINEEastern UkraineTransnistriaMOLDOVAROMANIACrimeaAbkhaziaGREECESouth OssetiaBULGARIABlack SeaGEORGIAAZERBAIJANARMENIAGREECENagorno-KarabakhCaspianSeaTURKEYLIBYASYRIAMediterraneanSeaIRANIRAQLIBYARUSSIAEastern UkraineUKRAINEKAZAKHSTANTransnistriaMOLDOVAROMANIACrimeaAbkhaziaSouth OssetiaBlack SeaBULGARIAGEORGIAAZERBAIJANARMENIANagorno-KarabakhTURKEYIRANSYRIAMediterraneanSeaIRAQSince the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia’s international military operations have focused almost exclusively on its neighbors, former Soviet republics. One pattern is clear: interventions that inflame conflict and create permanently tense and unstable “frozen zones,” allowing Russia to exert influence and confound its opponents and, often, its rivals in the West. The Kremlin has said that it is protecting its own interests and those of ethnic Russians in those areas. During the Cold War, Moscow frequently intervened in countries both near and far from its borders, including Afghanistan, Angola, Cuba and Vietnam.The Russian operation currently underway in Syria is in some respects a return to the ambitious military moves of the Soviet past. In reality, though, Moscow never quite lost its appetite for exerting influence after the Iron Curtain fell. Here are notable examples of Russian intervention in the post-Soviet period.Nearly 8,000 people have died since Russian-backed separatists began fighting Ukrainian government forces in April 2014. The United States and the European Union have imposed heavy sanctions on Russia for its actions there.The Ukrainian government says the Kremlin has sent thousands of troops and advanced weapons across the border into Ukraine. Russia denies that it has any active-duty forces on the ground. However, it has criticized the current Ukrainian government, saying it is the result of a coup, and expressed alarm over attacks on ethnic Russians there that the United Nations has called exaggerated.This month, Russia, Germany Ukraine and France held talks aimed at strengthening the Minsk accord, a peace agreement hammered out in Belarus in February. The deal is supposed to be put into full effect by the end of the year.In sharp contrast to its strategy in “frozen zones,” Russia annexed Crimea last year and has pledged to send billions of dollars in aid. The largely bloodless takeover came after a disputed referendum in which an overwhelming majority of residents chose to come under Moscow’s control. The United States and the European Union condemned the vote as illegal. It was Russia’s deepest confrontation with the West since the Cold War, and prompted Western sanctions.“Crimea has always been an integral part of Russia in the hearts and minds of people,” President Vladimir V. Putin said after the takeover.But life remains in disarray on the Black Sea peninsula. Residents say freedom of speech and assembly have largely evaporated, while government corruption and incompetence have remained constant. Sanctions have damaged the economy and isolated Crimea from the outside world.These impoverished breakaway regions of Georgia declared independence after the fall of the Soviet Union but remained politically and economically dependent on Russia. Georgian leaders accuse Russia of intervening to keep their country from seeking closer ties to the West, but Moscow has described its policy as defending both regions from oppressive Georgian rule.South Ossetia has fought three wars with Georgia – in 1991, 2004 and 2008. In the most recent conflict, Russia came to its defense, declaring war on Georgia and helping South Ossetian forces consolidate control of their territory in five days of fighting. After the war, Russia recognized both South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent countries. Last year Russia and Abkhazia signed a treaty that gave Moscow a dominant role over its military and economic affairs and called for the establishment of a joint Russian-Abkhazian military force.Transnistria is a thin strip of land between the Dniester River and Ukraine populated largely by Russian-speaking Slavs. Most of the world recognizes the area as part of Moldova, where Romanian speakers predominate.But Transnistria declared its independence in 1990, and war with Moldova erupted two years later. The conflict ended after four months, when negotiations spearheaded by Russia created an international peacekeeping force in which Moscow played a leading role.Transnistria has existed as a de facto independent state ever since. Roughly 1,000 Russian soldiers have remained there, and Russia has exploited the conflict to play a significant role in Moldova, one of the poorest countries in Europe.Azerbaijan and Armenia, both former Soviet republics, have been in an on-again, off-again state of war for more than two decades over Nagorno-Karabakh, which declared its independence as the Soviet Union collapsed. Most residents there are ethnic Armenians, but the area is recognized internationally as part of Azerbaijan. The self-declared Nagorno-Karabakh Republic has acted as a de facto independent country since the early 1990s, but it is not recognized by any United Nations member state. Russia has styled itself as the leader in long-running peace negotiations to end the conflict, but critics have accused it of fanning the flames. There is concern in Azerbaijan that Russia could intervene to assist Armenia if it ever moved decisively against the breakaway republic. Advertisement