By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICKMARCH 1, 2015
Audio recordings of senior Egyptian officials that were leaked Sunday suggest that when Mohamed Morsi was president, the United Arab Emirates gave the Egyptian Defense Ministry money for a protest campaign against him.The recordings, which could not be authenticated, appear to indicate that both the Egyptian military and its backers in the Emirates played a much more active role in fomenting the protests against Mr. Morsi in June 2013 than either party has acknowledged.President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who was then the defense minister, said when he led the ouster of Mr. Morsi that he was acting in response to the protests.The audio recordings are the latest in a long series that appear to capture the private meetings and phone calls of senior defense officials. All have been released through Islamist news outlets that oppose President Sisi.AdvertisementEgyptian officials have said that the recordings are fabrications, but many Egyptian commentators treat them as credible, giving them weight in public opinion.Advertisement“Everything, absolutely everything is under surveillance,” Mohamed Hassanein Heikal, a historian and journalist who is close to senior defense officials, said in a television interview when asked about previous leaked recordings. Mr. Heikal said that amid all the turmoil in Egypt, it would not be surprising that such recordings would have been made.“Who records during the time of chaos?” he said. “Everyone records during the time of chaos.”The latest recordings were released by Mekameleen, an Islamist satellite channel based in Istanbul. They appeared to have been made in an office at the Defense Ministry and to date from near the end of Mr. Morsi’s presidency.They appear to record Gen. Abbas Kamel, Mr. Sisi’s office manager and top aide, speaking by telephone with Gen. Sedky Sobhy, who was then the military chief of staff and is now defense minister.They appear to be discussing a bank account controlled by senior defense officials that had been used by Tamarod, a movement that called for protests on June 30, 2013, to demand an early end to Mr. Morsi’s presidency.“Sir, we will need 200 tomorrow from Tamarod’s account — you know, the part from the U.A.E., which they transferred,” General Kamel appears to tell General Sobhy in the recording.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.General Sobhy’s side of the conversation is not heard. But he apparently brought up the Egyptian intelligence services, or mukhabarat.“What do you mean by mukhabarat, sir? The mukhabarat guys?” General Kamel appears to say. “Do you remember the account that came for Tamarod?”AdvertisementHe then apparently says to General Sobhy, “We will need only 200 from it — yes, 200,000.” If that sum was in Egyptian pounds, it would have been equivalent to about $30,000 at the time.Mr. Morsi, an Islamist backed by the Muslim Brotherhood, was Egypt’s first freely elected president. But he held office for only a year before he was removed on July 3, 2013, and it was evident throughout his short tenure that he was highly unpopular among government officials held over from the administration of his predecessor, Hosni Mubarak.Many activists and commentators said in 2013 that they thought the Egyptian intelligence services had played some role in aiding Tamarod, but no concrete evidence emerged. When Tamarod planned a day of protests against Mr. Morsi, Mr. Sisi hinted ambiguously that he might intercede if the turnout was high — appearing to encourage those hoping for a military takeover.Once Mr. Morsi was ousted, both the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia swiftly made it clear that they approved of the step. Both became major donors to the new government.In addition to financing the protest effort, the leaked recordings suggest, the Emirates and the Egyptian military played active roles in organizing the protests.A spokesman for the Egyptian military, Gen. Mohammad Samir Abdel Aziz, declined to comment Sunday concerning the recordings, and referred all questions to the office of the president. A spokesman for the president’s office did not respond to a request for comment.Since the ouster of Mr. Morsi, Egypt has suffered a series of attacks on security forces, which have killed hundreds of soldiers and police officers. The latest took place Sunday, when a small bomb went off near a police station in the city of Aswan, Egyptian state news media outlets reported. Two civilians were killed and nine injured, the outlets said. The bombing in Aswan was the first of the attacks to strike near a major tourist site.Merna Thomas contributed reporting from Cairo.A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Recordings Suggest Emirates and Egyptian Military Pushed Ousting of Morsi.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.