AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan GilbertBUENOS AIRES — President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner of Argentina made an impassioned defense on Sunday of her role in the investigation into the fatal bombing of a Jewish community center here in 1994, days after a judge dismissed criminal allegations against her.In her annual State of the Union address to Congress, Mrs. Kirchner accused others of using the case for political gain. “If there are delays or a cover-up of A.M.I.A., look somewhere else, not here,” she said, using the Spanish acronym for the Argentina Israelite Mutual Association, the bombed community center. A judge dismissed on Thursday a criminal complaint brought by a federal prosecutor, Alberto Nisman, shortly before his mysterious death in January of a gunshot wound to the head. Investigators are trying to determine whether he was killed or had shot himself.In an emphatic rebuke of Mr. Nisman’s complaint, which was revived by a second prosecutor, Gerardo Pollicita, Judge Daniel Rafecas wrote that there was no evidence pointing to Mrs. Kirchner and faulted the evidence provided by Mr. Nisman. Mr. Pollicita can appeal the decision. A prosecutor in Argentina accuses the president of attempting to cover up a secret deal to shield terrorists. Days later, the prosecutor is found dead and the president alleges a conspiracy. An overview of key developments in the case.Mrs. Kirchner had been accused of conspiring to shield Iranian officials from responsibility in the bombing, which left 85 people dead, in exchange for trade benefits. Bolstered by the judge’s decision after weeks of turmoil here following Mr. Nisman’s death, Mrs. Kirchner dedicated a large part of her address to Congress, which lasted almost four hours, to defending her record over the investigation into the bombing. Tens of thousands of supporters gathered outside Congress in a show of support for the beleaguered president.Mrs. Kirchner suggested that Mr. Nisman was manipulated by forces trying to destabilize her. She pointed to documents, cited by Mr. Rafecas, in which Mr. Nisman had highlighted her government’s role in helping the investigation just weeks before he filed the criminal complaint. “Which Nisman do I believe?” Mrs. Kirchner said, before questioning the circumstances under which he returned to Buenos Aires from Europe in January to accuse her. “I don’t think Nisman wanted to attack the president.” There were nationwide marches last month to honor Mr. Nisman and express anger with Argentina’s political establishment. Many Argentines believe the government had a hand in Mr. Nisman’s death. But Mrs. Kirchner and her inner circle have cast suspicion on a former spymaster who worked with him on the bombing investigation.“She painted herself as the hero of the A.M.I.A. case and presented her administration in a triumphant way, but what emerges is a very dubious legacy,” said Federico Finchelstein, an Argentine historian at the New School for Social Research in New York, referring to divided public opinion over Mr. Nisman’s death and economic problems.Advertisement