

      By PETER BAKER and 
    
ALAN RAPPEPORT

MARCH 3, 2015

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel on Tuesday warned against what he considers an ill-advised nuclear deal being negotiated with Iran. Below are some of the highlights from his speech.
Related Article

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel on Tuesday warned against what he considers an ill-advised nuclear deal being negotiated with Iran. Below are some of the highlights from his speech. 
Mr. Netanyahu warned against what he called a "bad deal" that would still allow Iran to maintain some of its nuclear program and has instead insisted any agreement should require it be dismantled altogether, something the White House deems unrealistic. His full-throated opposition before Congress to the deal Mr. Obama is negotiating could scuttle any agreement. While the president can waive sanctions, Iran is insisting on permanent relief, which would require congressional approval.Mr. Netanyahu said that Iran dominates four of its neighbors -- Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen -- and that before agreeing to any deal, world powers should demand that Iran renounce its aggression against its neighbors, cease support for terrorism around the world and disavow its threats to annihilate Israel. He argued that an Iran with nuclear weapons would lead to more financing of terrorism and a Middle East “littered with nuclear bombs.” Calling the proposed deal with Iran a gamble, Mr. Netanyahu said the world should not bet that a stronger Iran would be any friendlier.Mr. Netanyahu sought to ease partisan tensions early in the speech, which had driven a partisan wedge between Republicans and Democrats on an issue that historically has been bipartisan. More than 50 Democrats skipped the speech, and Nancy Pelosi, the party's House leader, called the speech "an insult" to the intelligence of Americans, while Republicans called it an indictment of President Obama's foreign policy. Mr. Netanyahu tried to defuse the furor by framing his speech in the context of their broader alliance, praising Mr. Obama for his strong assistance to Israel in moments of crisis and recalling that both Democrats and Republicans support the Jewish state. Mr. Netanyahu linked Iran and the Islamic State as rival regimes that have the same ultimate goals -- winning the crown of militant Islam. The Israeli prime minister made the argument that Iran was the greater threat, because while the Islamic State uses butcher knives and social media, Iran could gain nuclear weapons to attack its enemies.Mr. Netanyahu used North Korea as an example of how tools like international inspections have failed in other cases, as well as in Iran in the past. He pointed to Iran's “shutting off the cameras” in 2005, 2006 and 2010, and said that inspectors did nothing to stop North Korea’s violations. “Within a few years, it got the bomb,” he said.Many in Iran hope that a blunt speech to Congress by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel would turn American public opinion against him.AdvertisementMany in Iran hope that a blunt speech to Congress by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel would turn American public opinion against him.