By WILLIAM NEUMANMARCH 2, 2015
CARACAS, Venezuela —  With diplomatic relations fraying rapidly between the United States and Venezuela, the government of President Nicolás Maduro has given the American Embassy here 15 days to come up with a plan to drastically shrink its staff, Venezuela’s foreign minister announced Monday.Mr. Maduro has repeatedly accused the United States of supporting a plot to overthrow him, and on Saturday he announced a series of diplomatic measures that he said were intended to halt American meddling.He said the United States would have to reduce the number of officials at its embassy to a number similar to the staff at the Venezuelan Embassy in Washington. He said there were 100 American officials here and just 17 Venezuelan officials in Washington, although those numbers have not been verified by the State Department.“Regarding the reduction to 17 officials with which the Embassy of the United States in Venezuela must operate, they were given 15 days to present a plan as to the classification and rank of the officials that will remain,” the foreign minister, Delcy Rodríguez, said at a news conference.AdvertisementShe said the change was in keeping with “the reciprocity that should govern relations between sovereign states.” The United States denies Mr. Maduro’s claim that it is involved in any plan to overthrow him, saying he is seeking to deflect attention from the country’s worsening economic crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Maduro also said Saturday that Americans traveling to Venezuela would now need visas to enter the country and that they would have to pay a fee equal to what Venezuelans pay for a visa to the United States.Mr. Maduro’s anti-Washington language was tamped down for several weeks after the surprise diplomatic opening between the United States and Cuba, a close ally of the Caracas government.AdvertisementBut last month, as pressure grew on Mr. Maduro to address the country’s many economic ills, he once again stepped up accusations against the United States.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Venezuela Tells U.S. to Reduce Embassy Staff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.