By ISABEL KERSHNERMARCH 2, 2015
JERUSALEM —  During Israel’s 50-day war against Hamas in Gaza last summer, residents of Israel’s border communities lived in fear of rocket or mortar attacks, or the possibility that Hamas militants could attack Israelis through tunnels.So Israelis were outraged to learn on Monday that three Israeli citizens had been charged on suspicion of knowingly supplying raw materials to Gaza that the Israeli authorities said were destined for Hamas, to use in building up its military infrastructure.Six Palestinian businessmen have also been indicted in connection with a suspected smuggling ring, according to Shin Bet, Israel’s internal security agency.Zion Amir, a lawyer for one of the Israeli suspects, told Israeli television that his client was selling materials that were permitted to the people in Gaza, who were authorized to buy them. There was no comment from the defendants, who are all in detention.AdvertisementThere was also no immediate comment from Hamas.One of the accused Israelis, Michael Peretz, 46, is from the small community of Mivtachim near the Gaza border. Haim Yellin, the regional council head of the border area, said that residents of the area were furious about the accusations. In an interview with Israel Radio, he described Mr. Peretz’s actions as “a betrayal of his community and his family.”AdvertisementAccording to Shin Bet and the charge sheet, Mr. Peretz is accused of storing the merchandise in his warehouse in Mivtachim and organizing its transfer to Gaza on trucks through the official Kerem Shalom border crossing.Shin Bet said in a statement that Hamas, the Islamist militant group that controls Gaza, had smuggled in thousands of tons of materials, including iron, electrical and electronic equipment that it used for its military installations, training camps and manufacture of war matériel and for preparing tunnels, among other things. Some of the deliveries were hidden among consignments that had been authorized for transfer by Israel.Mr. Peretz’s main contact in Gaza was said to be a merchant named Osama Zuaroub, according to the Israeli authorities. By January 2014, Mr. Zuaroub had been identified by the Israeli authorities as being a supplier to Hamas, and by May, Mr. Peretz was warned to stop trading with him, the authorities said. But even though Mr. Peretz knew that Mr. Zuaroub was “the long arm of the Hamas organization,” he continued to do business with him through front companies, Shin Bet said.The agency said Hamas had bought $30 million worth of metal goods through Mr. Zuaroub. It said the amount paid for storage in Israel and transfer to Gaza was about $375,000 a month.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The charges filed against Mr. Peretz include contact with a foreign agent, providing aid to the enemy in its war against Israel, and fraud.The other two Israelis who were charged were said to be owners of metal companies from central Israel.Some 60,000 homes in Gaza were damaged or destroyed during the 50-day war, according to the Palestinian government, and reconstruction has been slow. Palestinians and aid organizations have complained about Israel’s restrictions on the entry of building materials into Gaza.Shin Bet said the smuggling case showed that “Hamas has invested vast sums in building up its military infrastructure even as its leaders and spokesmen seize every opportunity to bewail the Palestinian public’s dire economic plight.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: 3 Israelis Are Charged on Suspicion of Supplying Materials to Hamas Militants.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.