By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE and MICHAEL R. GORDONMARCH 2, 2015
GENEVA — The United Nations said on Monday that a sharp escalation in recent fighting in eastern Ukraine had left more than 800 people dead and over 3,400 wounded, with hundreds missing and many buried without their deaths being recorded.Ivan Simonovic, the United Nations assistant secretary general, told reporters here that more than 6,000 people had been killed since the fighting started in April — at least 842 of whom died from mid-January to the middle of last month.The casualty figures were included in a United Nations report issued on Monday that also said an influx of troops and heavy weapons from Russia had intensified the conflict in Ukraine.“Credible reports indicate a continuing influx of heavy and sophisticated weaponry to armed groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as well as foreign fighters, including from the Russian Federation,” the United Nations report said.Advertisement“This has fueled the escalation of the conflict and new offensives by armed groups, undermining the potential for peace as armed groups extend their areas of control,” the report said. “This has resulted in further and significant increases in civilian and military casualties.”AdvertisementThe report was issued as Secretary of State John Kerry met with his Russian counterpart, Sergey V. Lavrov, in Switzerland to discuss the crisis in Ukraine.Mr. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, said in a speech to the Human Rights Council here in Geneva that the cease-fire in Ukraine was being “consolidated” and that any decision by Western nations to send arms to Ukraine would “disrupt the peace.”The Obama administration has been considering whether to send arms to Ukraine to deter Russian-backed separatists and Russian troops from further advances, though the White House appears to have put off a decision in recent weeks.Mr. Kerry said that to avoid further sanctions, Russia must arrange for the separatists to relax their grip on the strategically important town of Debaltseve, which they seized soon after a cease-fire reached last month in Minsk, Belarus, went into effect.“There has been a kind of cherry picking” by the Russians about what elements of the cease-fire to honor, Mr. Kerry told reporters at a news conference on Monday. “There is not yet a full cease-fire.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kerry said that he had raised his concerns about the seizing of Debaltseve and the presence of Russian-backed separatists near the port city of Mariupol during his morning meeting here with Mr. Lavrov.A rocket attack on Mariupol at the end of January killed 31 people, according to Mr. Simonovic, citing an example from the United Nations report of the growing use of heavy weapons by all sides and indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas.The report also drew attention to the plight of civilians in areas of conflict, saying that attempted evacuations in government-controlled areas had apparently been targeted by shelling. But travel restrictions imposed by the government in Kiev had also made it harder for civilians to escape conflict areas, the United Nations said.AdvertisementMore than 400 civilians continue to be held prisoner by pro-Russian armed groups, the United Nations monitors reported, noting that an “all for all” prisoner exchange included in the cease-fire agreement signed last month had not been fully enacted. The report also cited “a pattern of enforced disappearances, secret detention and ill treatment by Ukrainian law enforcement agencies.”Mr. Kerry said that his Russian counterpart had insisted that the Kremlin intended to honor the cease-fire agreement and would respond to the points the United States had raised.It is far from clear, however, if this is an indication of progress in defusing the conflict in Ukraine. Mr. Kerry told Congress last week that Russian officials had lied about Russia’s involvement in Ukraine “to my face.”Mr. Kerry declined to say if Mr. Lavrov had responded to those remarks in their private meeting. Neither Mr. Kerry nor Mr. Lavrov smiled as they shook hands and they appeared impassive as they posed for photos.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ukraine: U.N. Details Fighting’s Toll as U.S. and Russian Officials Meet.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.