AdvertisementSupported byBy Neil MacFarquhar and Andrew E. KramerMOSCOW — The funeral on Tuesday for Boris Y. Nemtsov, the assassinated Kremlin critic, drew a gloomy band of politicians and supporters from the faltering liberal opposition, with mourners grieving that they were burying not just a friend, but also their dream for a different Russia.“Now that he is in the grave, the last hope for Russia is in the grave,” said Vladimir N. Voynovich, a famous Russian novelist who, like Mr. Nemtsov, has been outspoken in criticizing Russia’s role in the war in Ukraine. “He was one of the last optimists in this country.”Thousands of Muscovites bearing flowers and red votive candles lined up early in the morning to pay their final respects to Mr. Nemtsov, 55, whose body lay in an open coffin at the Sakharov Center. By early afternoon, hundreds still clogged the sidewalk outside as the coffin was transferred to a hearse for the long ride to the pine-covered Troyekurovskoye Cemetery, filled with the black granite headstones favored by the city’s elite.Mr. Nemtsov was once one of President Boris N. Yeltsin’s bright young things, among the mavericks brought into the Kremlin to force the transition from centrally planned communism to capitalism in the early 1990s.Russians remember that era for chaos more than anything else, and the political fortunes of Mr. Nemtsov, a former deputy prime minister once discussed as possible presidential timber, faded. Naina I. Yeltsin, the widow of the president, attended the memorial service, as did many former top Yeltsin aides.Aleksei L. Kudrin, a former deputy prime minister and finance minister and a longtime ally of President Vladimir V. Putin’s while supporting liberal economic policies, lamented a state of affairs in Russia in which “in a debate with an opponent, bullets serve as an argument.”Receiving the well-wishers at the coffin was the hunched, tiny figure of Dina Eidman, Mr. Nemtsov’s mother, who had raised him as a single parent in poverty, watched him soar to the heights of the Russian government and then, in recent months, reportedly told her son that she feared that Mr. Putin would kill him for his criticism of the war in Ukraine.In their eulogies, politicians spoke about the need to fearlessly pursue Mr. Nemtsov’s often lonely crusade against corruption, mismanagement and the Ukraine war. At the same time, they acknowledged that the assassination late Friday night had sent fear rippling through their ranks as surely as the winter chill seeping through multiple layers of clothing on this gray Moscow day.“Our country has changed,” Dmitry Gudkov, a young member of Parliament, said at the cemetery, where 2,000 people showed up. “A week ago, we lived in a country where opposition figures feared being jailed or facing house arrest. But now, we are even afraid of wandering around the city.”Mr. Nemtsov was shot a couple of hundred yards from the imposing red walls of the Kremlin, one of the most guarded sites in Moscow. Law enforcement officials have not publicly identified any suspects. Although there are several unsolved, high-profile murders in Russia involving whistle-blowers who exposed government corruption, politicians were considered safe until now.Both the memorial service and the burial were notable for those who did not attend. Neither Mr. Putin nor anyone from the Kremlin elite was there, although Mr. Putin, Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev and Parliament sent identical giant wreaths of red roses and carnations to the graveside.Mr. Putin’s envoy was an obscure official, Garry V. Minkh, his parliamentary liaison officer.The highest-ranking member of the government to pay his respects was Arkady V. Dvorkovich, a deputy prime minister and protégé of Mr. Medvedev’s, along with Mr. Medvedev’s spokeswoman, Natalya A. Timakova. Diplomats from all 28 European Union members showed up, many bearing wreaths, as did the American ambassador to Russia, John F. Tefft.The event opened a new fissure in the already strained ties between Moscow and the European Union after two lawmakers were not allowed into the country to attend the funeral: Bogdan Borusewicz, the speaker of the Polish Senate, and Sandra Kalniete, a member of the European Parliament from Latvia.Russia explained that the two were on a secret list of those barred for “anti-Russian activities.”Aleksei A. Navalny, the opposition activist whose rise eclipsed Mr. Nemtsov, was also absent, serving a 15-day jail term for breaking the rules on organizing demonstrations. Mr. Navalny issued a statement on social media accusing the government of indirectly ordering the killing.The Kremlin has repeatedly denied any such involvement. Many mourners blamed state-run television for creating the atmosphere in which Mr. Nemtsov was killed, singling him out constantly as “an enemy of the state,” a favorite term for those eliminated under Stalin.Mr. Nemtsov’s death did not put a halt to such efforts. Life News, a news site and cable news channel, was plugging its reports describing Mr. Nemtsov as a serial philanderer.The liberal opposition represents a tiny slice of the political landscape in Russia, with Mr. Putin garnering overwhelming support for his robust nationalism, starting with the annexation of Crimea last year.Some people in the crowd expressed both alarm and guilt about Mr. Nemtsov’s killing — alarm that a political figure could be gunned down in central Moscow, and guilt that they had not given him more attention and support when he was alive.“This event was a real shock for me,” said another mourner, Tatiana Limanova, 43, who came to the cemetery. “I feel like I have been knocked off my feet and don’t know how to get back up. I don’t know what will happen tomorrow, and I am afraid.”Alexandra Odynova and Nikolay Khalip contributed reporting.Advertisement