AdvertisementSupported byBy Jonathan WeismanWASHINGTON — Some are standing with President Obama. Some are protesting the actions of the House speaker, John A. Boehner. Still others say they do not want to be props in Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s re-election campaign.By Monday afternoon, 49 House and Senate Democrats had announced they would not attend the Israeli prime minister’s speech to a joint meeting of Congress scheduled for Tuesday, according to a running tally in The Hill. That total represents an unprecedented rebellion that is all the more striking because allegiance to Israel has long had nearly unanimous support in Congress.“It is improper for the speaker of House to side with a foreign leader who is coming in to rebut the chief executive and commander in chief of our country as he is trying to negotiate a peace deal to stop Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon,” Representative Keith Ellison, Democrat of Minnesota and one of two Muslims in Congress, told a Minneapolis television station this past weekend. “I think we should stand with the commander in chief.”Those boycotting the address are a cross section of the Democratic Party, including the third-ranking House Democrat, Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina; moderates like Representatives David E. Price of North Carolina and Jerry McNerney of California; ardent liberals such as Representative Lloyd Doggett of Texas and Senator Bernie Sanders, an independent from Vermont who caucuses with the Democrats; Latino leaders like Representative Rubén Hinojosa of Texas, a former chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus; and African-American leaders like Representative G.K. Butterfield of North Carolina, chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus.“The United States is and will remain Israel’s strongest ally. However, I refuse to be a part of a political stunt aimed at undercutting President Obama,” Mr. Butterfield said.But patterns are emerging. Of the 49 members who have said they will not attend, nearly half — 21— are black, reflecting a sense that Mr. Boehner and Mr. Netanyahu are disrespecting the nation’s first black president. Seven of the Democrats skipping the speech are Jewish, but of those, two — Representatives Steve Cohen of Tennessee and John Yarmuth of Kentucky — hail from districts with far more black voters than Jewish voters.Mr. Cohen said African-American voters see the speech as a thumb in the eye of Mr. Obama, but they are also more likely “to see the Palestinians as an oppressed people and they relate.”What the United States and Iran want out of discussions over Iran’s nuclear development.Some members have cited Mr. Obama’s stated reason for objecting to the address, that it falls too close to Israel’s coming elections.“As President Obama has noted, it is inappropriate for a head of state to address Congress just two weeks ahead of their election,” said Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California. “I agree that Congress should not be used as a prop in Israeli election campaigns.”Senator Martin Heinrich, Democrat of New Mexico, echoed that concern.“I intend to watch his speech about Iran from my office, but I have strong objections to using the floor of the United States Congress as a stage for his election campaign — or anyone’s for that matter,” he said.But regardless of their stated reasons for staying away, among Democrats there was almost universal criticism of Mr. Boehner for offering the invitation in the first place.“If the invitation was aimed to extract a better deal from Iran and protect our friend and ally Israel, then the speaker miscalculated, for it will do the opposite,” said Representative Earl Blumenauer of Oregon. “If the invitation was aimed at scoring political points by undermining the administration, it’s deeply troubling that the speaker is willing to undercut diplomacy in exchange for theatrics on the House floor.”Advertisement