By EDWARD WONGMARCH 3, 2015
BEIJING — The weeks around the start of the Lunar New Year are busy ones for entertainers in China, like acrobats and traveling opera troupes. But the journeys of one such group during the nascent Year of the Sheep ended in disaster when a bus carrying 33 members plunged off a cliff in central China on Monday night, killing 20 people on board and injuring the other 13.The bus plummeted more than 325 feet in Henan Province at 11 p.m., according to a report by Legal Evening News. The municipal government of the nearby city of Linzhou, in the eastern foothills of the Taihang Mountains, sent more than 150 soldiers and more than 200 police officers and firefighters to the scene, the report said.An employee of the city’s propaganda bureau who answered the telephone on Tuesday declined to provide more details and referred a reporter to an official statement online that said the cause of the accident had yet to be determined.There was confusion about the identity of the opera troupe.A report from Henan Business News posted on Sina, a news website, said the bus registration papers showed that the group was the Zhengzhou Municipal No. 1 Yu Opera Troupe, indicating it was from Zhengzhou, the capital of Henan, and performed a type of centuries-old opera associated with the province.AdvertisementBut when interviewed for the report, Gao Xinjun, the head of the main troupe in Zhengzhou, said the people on the bus were using a fake name, since there is no No. 1 Yu Opera Troupe.Mr. Gao said the group appeared to be one of many that pose as high-level professional troupes but perform in villages for small fees.AdvertisementThe Henan Outdoor Rescue Team posted a photograph of the damaged bus on a microblog. The image, taken at night, showed the vehicle at the bottom of what appeared to be a ravine, with the cliff visible at the edge of the frame. On the cliff were trees with branches made bare by the winter.Mia Li contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on March 4, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: China: 20 Die as Bus Goes Over a Cliff.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.