Nearly a year ago, on March 8, Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 left Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, for Beijing. The Boeing 777 was due to arrive with 239 crew members and passengers, among them more than 150 Chinese citizens. About 40 minutes after takeoff, contact between the aircraft and air traffic controllers ceased. Hundreds of relatives of the Chinese passengers traveled to Beijing and waited for weeks in a hotel for news of their loved ones.On March 24, the Malaysian prime minister, Najib Razak, announced that Flight 370 was thought to have gone down in the southern Indian Ocean and that all on board were presumed dead. The airline advised relatives to return home, while maintaining contact though a liaison office near the Beijing airport staffed by airline personnel and Malaysian government representatives.Recently, family members of the Chinese passengers on the flight described the pain of holidays without their loved ones, their frustration at the lack of answers and their anger over their treatment by the Malaysian authorities and the airline:
Steve Wang, whose 57-year-old mother was on the plane, is a salesman for a technology company in Beijing and has served as an unofficial spokesman for the families. The following are excerpts from an interview:
The families in China were all told we could remain in communication with the Malaysian government and the airline through a liaison office set up in a building north of the Beijing airport. We were fooled. The liaison office seemingly has staff from the airline and the Malaysian transport bureau, but they never answer any questions. They say they are only there to collect questions and pass them on, and have no power to give any response. For a year, the families have submitted numerous questions but have never gotten any response.There are police outside the building to make sure no reporters can go into the liaison office.We went to the Malaysian Embassy. We weren’t allowed in or to see anyone. We went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which never did anything more than to tell us that it’s “urging Malaysia to respond.”No one is listening. There is no channel of communication with any authoritative agency.I cannot describe our rage.Everyone asks us about compensation. We don’t want compensation. We want the truth. How can anyone start talking about compensation before finding out what happened?The families tried to form an organization to act together, but the Chinese authorities told us we weren’t allowed to do this.This past Spring Festival [Lunar New Year] was extremely difficult. No one in my family dared to talk about the missing plane even though it weighed on everyone’s mind. No one dared to talk about it because we didn’t know how. The whole family spent the festival in almost total silence.The airline declared everyone dead according to their calculation. I think that’s highly irresponsible. They refuse to release the core data behind their calculation. What are they hiding? The families feel that Malaysia wants to end this as soon as possible. They’re always telling us to move on, but how can we move on without knowing what happened?It’s not that we can’t accept a horrible accident. Accidents happen every day. Car accidents, fires, plane crashes happen all the time. We can accept an accident and move on. What we can’t accept is moving on from an accident and ignoring the possible crimes or foul play and letting the responsible parties get away with it.The Malaysian government is useless and has a guilty conscience. Why else would they want to put it behind them as soon as possible by pushing everyone to take a compensation and move on? We have to wonder. Why can’t they just understand that the thing that will make us move on is the truth, not any amount of compensation?I can’t believe that, in a post-9/11 world, a jumbo jet can fly over an entire country without being detected. The Malaysian government has been lying from Day 1.I want the truth. I couldn’t care less about compensation.In the future we may have to sue the Malaysian government and the airline for answers.Jiang Hui, whose 71-year-old mother was on Flight 370, is a salesman for an information technology company in Beijing. The following are excerpts from an interview: We are completely helpless. The world has no idea how helpless we are.The first issue is a financial one. Malaysia Airlines has given us no financial help since the initial $5,000 “emergency assistance” given to us at the Lido Hotel. The airline pushed us to sign for $50,000 in compensation in accordance with the Montreal Convention. But that requires us to acknowledge the loss of life, which we don’t. We asked the airline to change the word “compensation” to “financial aid” and we agreed to deduct this amount from any future compensation. It’s been almost a year now. There’s been no response.The second issue is that we need a regular, effective channel of communication with the Malaysian government, because now there is none. At the liaison office they set up, I’ve submitted 43 written requests, each time enduring the burden of filling out pages of detailed forms. There has been no response. No emails. Nothing. I’ve been going to that office at least once or twice a week for seven months. I’ve never gotten any kind of response.The liaison office is just for show. I think some P.R. expert told them to set it up as part of the crisis P.R. measures. It does nothing. It’s just a tool the Malaysian government uses to deceive us, to delay things, to show the world they’re listening when they’re not.The liaison office is supposed to be a place where families can feel consoled. But the staff didn’t even call an ambulance when some families fainted there. They stood there with no expression, completely indifferent.When the five-page initial investigation results came out, we asked them to translate it into Chinese. They refused.The third issue is how the Malaysian government is pushing us to accept compensation and forget about the whole thing. It’s pushing the families to sign an agreement that shields the airline from any responsibility in exchange for starting the compensation process. No one would sign that.Eventually, on Jan. 29, 2015, the liaison office announced that it wouldn’t discuss anything except compensation.I just don’t understand. Why they would take away all hope, right before Spring Festival, when they knew it was going to be hard for us. It was like they were trying to hurt us. They can’t be human.Last week the families asked if the office could hold a vigil for the one-year anniversary of the missing plane. No response. In the meantime, we found out that the airline is holding a small vigil, but just for the crew.They have no respect for the passengers. None.I have a 76-year-old father and an older brother. There has been no laughter in our home for a year. We keep telling ourselves, one day at a time.I couldn’t bear spending Spring Festival at home. For the first time in my life, I didn’t spent it at home. I jumped on a plane to Malaysia before the holiday.In Malaysia, I joined other MH370 families going to the airline office, the national transport bureau and the Civil Aviation Bureau. We slept at the airport, slept on the street in front of the bureaus, waited for a day and a night in the lobby of the airline. No one would meet with us.I returned to China early because I had to get back to work. The rest of the families are staying the full 29 days allowed by their visas.As I said, no one in the world has any idea how helpless we are. The way we’re being treated by the Malaysian government and the airline is unimaginably inhumane.