The Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference is an advisory body consisting of delegates from a variety of political groups and social sectors, including the governing Communist Party; the United Front parties aligned with the Communist Party; organizations representing labor, women and young people; and dignitaries with no party affiliation. Every year about this time it convenes alongside the National People’s Congress in Beijing, where delegates gather to discuss and propose new legislation or other policy changes.The members of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference put forward thousands of proposals — 6,000 last year — though only about 1,000 make it to the research phase and even fewer are taken under consideration as legislation by the National People’s Congress. Here are some proposals this year’s delegates have presented and the public’s response:1. The Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang, formed in 1948 by Kuomintang members opposed to Chiang Kai-shek, proposed a ban on divorce by couples with children under the age of 10, full consultation with children over 10 before a divorce can be approved and a “consideration period” before any divorce is granted.
The proposal immediately came under fire in many online and news commentaries. “This is contrary to the general concept of the freedom of marriage, and it’s a violation of the fundamental rights of citizens,” an editorial in China Youth Daily argued.Hong Ye 08224 wrote on a Sina news article: “If a couple constantly fights, it’s really not good for the child psychologically, so the earlier divorce takes place the better. This proposal is nonsense!”But another commenter, Hai Kuo Tian Kong Wan Li Lan, countered: “To protect the harmony of marriage is the responsibility of both sides. It is also the responsibility of society. But divorce must have legal restrictions; the stricter the better.”And an op-ed broadcast by China Radio International noted that while marriage registrations increased 71.4 percent between 2002 and 2013, divorces rose  197.4 percent. “A direct consequence of the high divorce rate is that the rights of women and minors are not being sufficiently protected,” said the writer, Wang Li.When the proposal was formally submitted, the prohibition on divorce involving children under 10 had been dropped, but it still declared that all couples seeking divorce must “fully consult the true desires of children,” party representatives told The Beijing News. “We must find the balance between protecting the rights of minors and protecting freedom of marriage,” one said.2. The September Third Society, a political party named for the date marking  Japan’s defeat in World War II and consisting mostly of intellectuals in science, the arts and education, proposed that China introduce new bank notes with the aim of erasing the value of any hoards of cash in the hands of corrupt officials. Over the past year, several senior officials suspected of corruption have been discovered to have huge vaults filled with millions of renminbi in bank notes, party representatives told The 21st Century Business Herald. Invalidating these ill-gotten gains, they said, would be a fitting punishment for corrupt officials.This met with approval from many commenters, though one raised the possibility that it might already be too late.“If this proposal can actually be implemented,” Daddy 20064 wrote on the Sina news site, “it has the potential to pull the carpet from under corrupt officials.”Wonderful Cactus wrote: “Brilliant. If it can be implemented, it will have a big effect.”Mountain People, Street People cautioned, however: “Just one thing. Many officials may already have converted their money into gold.”3. The film director Feng Xiaogang proposed selecting 50 traditional Chinese characters to be used in elementary school textbooks. After the founding of the People’s Republic, China adopted a simplified form of written Chinese to promote literacy. Mr. Feng said reintroducing some traditional characters would give pupils a better sense of China’s cultural heritage.This received a more mixed reaction. Ideal Future wrote on a QQ news article: “Traditional characters should be revived! They are a form of art in Chinese culture.”And You said: “Even though they are hard to write, the country needs to teach them. I really like traditional characters.”But Yue Zhijin pointed out: “China has 1.3 billion people and there is still a lot of illiteracy. I hope people don’t allow their fondness for them to encourage the restoration of traditional characters.”4. Zhang Lihui, dean of the Conservatory of Music at the Chongqing Normal University, suggested that women be granted three-year maternity leaves so they could care for their children until they are ready for kindergarten. To compensate for this time out of the work force, Ms. Zhang said, women should be encouraged to work past 55, the usual retirement age. She said women often entered a second “golden age” in their careers starting at 50, when their children are grown, their work experience is rich and their health is good.Some commenters welcomed granting women more time with their children. “It will definitely benefit the growth of children!” Listen to the Sea 198520 wrote. Others warned it could backfire if it resulted in job discrimination against women.PetrelDex wrote: “If maternity leave is really extended to three years, then companies won’t want to hire women who haven’t had children yet. The thinking behind this is good, but implementing this will be very hard.”5. Ms. Zhang also proposed that the Lantern Festival, the 15th day of the Chinese lunar calendar, be declared a public holiday, giving all workers and students the day off, as has been done for the Qingming, or Tomb Sweeping, Festival; the Dragon Boat Festival; and the Mid-Autumn Festival, in order to promote traditional culture and enhance people’s well-being.6. Fu Qiping, a village chief in rural Zhejiang Province, proposed that Double Ninth Festival, named for the ninth day of the ninth month in the lunar calendar and dedicated to senior citizens, should also be made a public holiday, so that busy young workers can return home to visit their parents.7. Liu Xin, director of the Food and Health Research Institute of Sun Yat-sen University, said China should declare Dec. 4, which is National Constitution Day, a public holiday as well to give citizens time to study the Constitution.All proposals to give people more holidays were enthusiastically applauded.Liu Si Yi Fei Chang v5 wrote on Sina Weibo that the Chinese need a break, “The working hours are long, much longer than foreign countries, so everyone should take these days off.”A commenter called Don’t want to be a Small Fatty Miss_C offered her own proposal: “I suggest we take a holiday beginning from the Spring Festival all the way to the Lantern Festival!! [15 days] This is the heartfelt wish of the people!!”