AdvertisementSupported byBy Andrew Jacobs and Neil GoughBEIJING — Premier Li Keqiang, in his annual speech to the nation, warned Thursday that China would have to overcome economic inefficiencies, excess capacity and impediments to private enterprise if it were to maintain healthy rates of growth.In his state-of-the-nation report to the National People’s Congress, the Communist Party-run legislature, which meets in full session once a year, Mr. Li lowered the target for economic growth to “approximately 7 percent” and announced new policies and programs that he said would encourage a more robust private sector to create jobs and foster innovation, moving the country away from its dependence on government-led infrastructure investment, heavy industry and low-end exports.Mr. Li acknowledged in his opening remarks that the transition would weigh on total growth and would face challenges.The new target is down from the goal of 7.5 percent that the government set for 2014, which it missed by a whisker. Last year’s actual expansion of 7.4 percent was the country’s slowest since 1990.“China’s economic development has entered a new normal,” Mr. Li said. “Systemic, institutional and structural problems have become ‘tigers in the road,’ holding up development. Without deepening reform and making economic structural adjustments, we will have a difficult time sustaining steady and sound development.”Speaking in front of nearly 3,000 appointed delegates to the congress, Mr. Li sketched out an expansive and lofty vision for fostering economic growth and improving the lives of China’s 1.3 billion citizens. He promised to add 10 million urban jobs, increase monthly pension payments to retirees by 10 percent, build 7.4 million units of government-subsidized housing and construct nearly 5,000 miles of rail.Yet much of his so-called work report to the nation focused on encouraging private enterprise, increasing consumer spending and lightening the heavy hand of a government that has long directed economic growth, at times squeezing out innovation and small businesses.He repeatedly signaled the leadership’s determination to reduce the nation’s dependence on infrastructure construction — spending that economists have warned is often inefficient and unprofitable and that has helped lead to the worrying levels of debt accrued by local governments across the country. Instead, he said, China will make market forces and consumer demand its priorities.“In expanding consumption, we need to ensure that every drop of spending builds to create a mighty river, so that the potential contained in an ocean of private consumers will be channeled into a powerful force driving economic growth,” he said.Like previous work reports, Mr. Li’s speech was suffused with an almost utopian vision of China’s future and a grab bag of proposals to enhance the lives of ordinary people.In his vision, college graduates would get more help finding fulfilling jobs, workers would get more guaranteed paid holidays, and migrant workers would find it easier to enroll their children in urban schools. Yet many of the proposals were short on details, and the report appeared to gloss over some of the more pressing challenges facing the nation.The government has appeared surprised by the depth of the economic slowdown, and that has sapped policy makers’ potential appetite for bolder changes in land policy, banking and credit, and other major drivers of growth, Tao Ran, an economics professor and director of the China Center for Public Economics and Governance at Renmin University, said in a phone interview.“We see very little progress in reform in real sectors of the economy that could boost growth,” Professor Tao said. “All the real economic reforms are very difficult to carry out, but the economic slowdown has made the government nervous, and they began to stimulate again. I think we need faster economic reforms to get the economy on the right track.”Yet the government also faces public anger about the air pollution that bathes many regions and the wealth gap that many citizens believe has channeled too much money to a politically privileged minority.Mr. Li noted that “environmental pollution is serious in some localities” but said nothing specific about any new measures, despite the public ire about smog that was reflected in the intense response to a documentary released online days before the legislature met.In the documentary, “Under the Dome,” a former Chinese television reporter, Chai Jing, explored officials’ and state companies’ failure to enforce environmental protection standards.In an annual policy report released at the same time as Mr. Li’s work report, the National Development and Reform Commission, which oversees economic policy, promised “unremitting efforts” to improve the environment and encourage cleaner energy use.The commission said it would “strictly control” any new energy-intensive industrial projects in regions already afflicted by severe smog.Mr. Li issued targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions by at least 3.1 percent and said the government would introduce legislation for what he called “an environmental protection tax,” although he provided no details.He added that the government would seek to convert more than 1.6 million acres of farmland to forest or grassland and would plant trees on an additional 15 million acres.In contrast with his predecessor, Wen Jiabao, Mr. Li did not mention political reform in his report. He made only passing reference to fighting official corruption, the centerpiece of President Xi Jinping’s agenda since he came to power in 2012.In November 2012, Mr. Xi presided over a Communist Party leadership meeting that endorsed a sweeping list of proposals to restructure the economy, tapping new sources of growth in consumption and the service sector. So far, though, the government has shown no appetite for a dramatic shake-up of state-owned conglomerates that dominate arteries of the economy, including energy and finance.But the report from the National Development and Reform Commission signaled that deeper changes could be coming to the state-dominated sectors of the economy, including the energy behemoths that were a target of Ms. Chai’s documentary.“We will deepen structural reforms of electricity, petroleum and natural gas industries,” said the report, which added that the government would encourage more private investment in public utilities, financial services and other areas still dominated by government-run players.The commission also hinted that barriers to foreign investors in some industries could be lowered, though it gave no specifics.Mr. Xi’s government has pursued a dramatic drive against corruption, featuring images of disheveled officials being dragged off by investigators. But it has taken a more measured — and, some complain, tardy — approach to economic change, one that is reflected in part in the modest shifts in growth targets.China last lowered its annual target for gross domestic product in 2012, reducing it to 7.5 percent from 8 percent, where it had been fixed since 2005. Before 2014, the last time China missed a growth target was 1998, after the Asian currency crisis, when G.D.P. came in at 7.8 percent against a target of 8 percent.In his report, Mr. Li also set a consumer price inflation target of 3 percent, down from last year’s 3.5 percent — a nod to notable forces at work in the economy, where consumer price inflation hit a five-year low in January.“Stepping down G.D.P. targets to 7 percent demonstrates the reality of China’s potential current growth and the reality that the Xi leadership is dealing with the problems that come with reform, rather than the problems that come with deferring reform through further monetary permissiveness,” said Daniel H. Rosen, founding partner of the Rhodium Group, an economic research and advisory firm.By shifting to a softer growth target with an “around” qualifier, the government is also signaling its intent to focus more on the composition of economic growth than on its absolute pace. But doing away with targets altogether would be a step too far for China at the moment, experts say.Setting a softer growth goal represents “a helpful step away from the tradition of specifying a target,” Mr. Rosen said. “For now, however, too many aspects of China’s fiscal system still rely on this annual touchstone to abolish it altogether.”Andrew Jacobs reported from Beijing, and Neil Gough from Hong Kong. Chris Buckley contributed reporting from Hong Kong, and Patrick Zuo contributed research from Beijing.Advertisement