By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLDMARCH 4, 2015
MEXICO CITY — The leader of the Zetas — a Mexican criminal group notorious for its brutal murders — was arrested Wednesday without a shot fired in northern Mexico, as the authorities toppled yet another kingpin in a long and aggressive campaign against the group.Federal police officers and soldiers swooped in on the leader, Omar Treviño Morales, known as Z-42 in the group’s militaristic system of code names, in San Pedro Garza García, an affluent suburb of Monterrey, Mexico, a business and industrial hub.Mr. Morales, 38, had not led the group for long. In July 2013, his brother, Miguel Angel Treviño Morales — considered one of the gang’s most ruthless enforcers — was arrested just a year after taking over from another top leader, Heriberto Lazcano. Mr. Lazcano died in a shootout with the Mexican Navy in October 2012 and grew more infamous after his body was snatched from a funeral home afterward.The upheaval at the top is meant to disrupt, if not dismantle, the Zetas, who earned a reputation for beheading and dismembering enemies and leaving body parts in public places, sometimes with warning messages nearby. Mexican officials have linked them to the massacre of 72 migrants in northeastern Mexico in 2010 and a 2011 arson attack on a Monterrey casino that left 52 dead, among other mass killings.AdvertisementThe Zetas have been among the largest and most well-known gangs, and Mr. Morales’s arrest came as President Enrique Peña Nieto was on a state visit to Britain promoting Mexico as transforming and open to foreign investment.AdvertisementBut a number of security analysts are skeptical that such high-profile arrests will change the criminal landscape much because so many of the large groups have splintered and created new gangs just as dangerous.Last week, another drug lord, Servando Gómez, — known as La Tuta, or the Teacher, and the leader of the Knights Templar gang — was apprehended in Michoacán State.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Steven S. Dudley, a director of  InSight Crime, a research organization that tracks the drug trade, said the Zetas are not what they once were, weakened and broken by fighting among smaller cells and with other groups. The chaotic underworld has yielded unrelenting violence in northeastern Mexico.“Just because these groups are fragmented, does not mean they are any less violent,” he said. “In fact, their fight for these smaller, local criminal spaces is what motors the violence in places such as Tamaulipas State, a Zetas stronghold.”Eduardo Guerrero, another security analyst at a Mexico consulting firm, said Mr. Morales’s downfall was significant in the continuing disruption of the Zetas. It could provoke more violence but perhaps less than anticipated because often the leadership has already set up a succession plan in the event of a senior figure’s capture or death.“In many cases the captured capos have already delegated their post because they sensed their capture was imminent,” Mr. Guerrero said.Alejandro Hope, a Mexican former intelligence official who studies the criminal underworld, said that only a few top kingpins remained but that the government has had to contend with smaller groups capable of wanton, shocking violence, like the kidnapping and murder last fall of 43 students at a teachers college.“Kingpin takedowns are ever less important,” he said.Still, Mr. Morales fetched a high price for anybody turning him in. Mexico had offered the equivalent of $2 million, and the United States, where he faces drug trafficking charges, $5 million.Paulina Villegas contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2015, on Page A7 of the New York edition with the headline: Mexico: Drug Gang’s Leader Is Arrested.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.