AdvertisementSupported byBy Dan BilefskyPARIS — For more than three decades, the case, at the time considered the deadliest anti-Semitic attack in France since World War II, remained unsolved, stumping investigators and haunting the Jewish community in Paris.The attack in 1982 at a storied Jewish deli killed six people, including two Americans, and wounded 22 others. The police said at the time that the attack on the deli, Goldenberg, on Rue des Rosiers, a narrow and lively street in the Marais district now peppered with falafel restaurants and Judaica shops, had been meticulously planned and involved as many as six assailants. During the attack, one of the attackers threw a grenade into the restaurant while the others fired at customers.They escaped on foot, shooting as they fled. Then they vanished.In 2007, a new investigating judge, Marc Trévidic, then 41, took over the case. And on Wednesday, after years of hunting down leads across several continents, the authorities in Paris announced that they had identified three suspects, all associated with a prominent Palestinian terrorist, and sought to bring them into custody.Agnès Thibault-Lecuivre, a spokeswoman for the Paris prosecutor’s office, said that international arrest warrants had been issued for three men in their 50s and 60s, whom she did not identify. Ms. Thibault-Lecuivre said the three were thought to be living in Jordan, Norway and the Palestinian territories, and were suspected of having been part of a terrorist organization run by the Palestinian radical Abu Nidal. In 2002, a Palestinian newspaper reported that Abu Nidal had been found dead in his home in Baghdad.An attack in January at a kosher supermarket in Paris, which left four hostages dead, has served as a reminder that Jews remain targets for hate crimes. Both the recent assault and the 1982 attack prompted deep reflections about anti-Semitism in France, as well as demands for greater security and protection at Jewish sites, including synagogues and shops.The 1982 case spawned no shortage of theories, including that the attack had been the work of neo-Nazis. Others had long suspected that the attack was the work of Palestinian militants during a period of violence in the 1980s. But investigators said that the attempt to do DNA analysis on evidence left at the scene, including a cigarette lighter and cartridges, had not pointed in any clear direction, and the case remained unsolved.That is, until Mr. Trévidic was put on the investigation, determined to put the pieces together.Serge Cwajgenbaum, a Frenchman who is secretary general of the European Jewish Congress in Brussels and has closely followed the case, said that Mr. Trévidic had tirelessly pursued leads, and had helped identify the suspects by dispatching investigators across the world to interview former senior members of Mr. Nidal’s terrorist organization and offering them anonymity in return for information.Investigators said that the death of Mr. Nidal had helped clear the way for the informants, who had previously been afraid of reprisals.Law enforcement officials said Mr. Trévidic and his team were able to tie the attack to Mr. Nidal’s group with ballistic evidence: The munitions used by the killers, including grenades and cartridges, came from the former Soviet bloc and matched the types the terrorist organization had systematically used in other attacks, including assaults in Vienna, Rome and London in the 1980s.Europe 1 radio reported on Wednesday that one of the suspects, age 60, lived in the West Bank city of Ramallah; a second, 63, lived in Jordan; and a third, 56 and a father of four, lived in Norway.“The breakthrough in the case shows that Judge Trévidic is a stubborn man who did not leave a stone unturned in trying to solve this case,” Mr. Cwajgenbaum said. “Some are asking whether the timing of the breakthrough is a coincidence or not, coming so soon after the recent Paris attacks. It is hard to know.”“But one thing is for certain,” he continued, “Mr. Trévidic is to be congratulated. This shows that there is no impunity for terrorists.”Since the January attacks in Paris, thousands of soldiers and police officers have been deployed to protect Jewish sites across France, and soldiers remain on alert on Rue des Rosiers, creating a sense both of security and of anxiety among those who crowd the bustling restaurants on the street.None of the three suspects have been arrested, and it was unclear when they might be or, if it came to that, whether they would be extradited to France.Kurt Lorenz, of Nevada City, Calif., whose sister Ann Van Zanten, a 31-year-old architectural historian, was killed in the Goldenberg attack, said that the identification of the suspects had brought a sense of relief after a very long ordeal. He commended Mr. Trévidic.“It really, really matters that somebody cared,” he said by phone, sobbing. “It has been so long, everyone had sort of buried it.”Advertisement