AdvertisementSupported byMemo From MoscowBy Neil MacFarquharMOSCOW — Among the motley collection of former ministers, retired spies, billionaire oligarchs, intellectuals and others who constitute Russia’s anemic liberal opposition, Boris Y. Nemtsov, the Kremlin critic fatally shot last week, always stood out.Mr. Nemtsov was the prime organizer behind the opposition’s sporadic street demonstrations, which at least showed that a democratic movement still existed. He also managed to cajole a disparate group of men and women, far more proficient at squabbling over leadership positions than at forging unity, to consult one another.Opposition figures and analysts say those two roles, aside from his high-profile attacks on President Vladimir V. Putin over corruption and the war in Ukraine, probably played a part in his killing last Friday by an unknown assailant just off Red Square.The question now is whether the opposition will be able to pivot off the death to assert a role in the country’s political life, or to sink further into obscurity and irrelevance.“They find themselves at a crossroads,” said Aleksandr Pozhalov, a political scientist and research director at the Institute of Socio-Economic and Political Research here. “The murder of Nemtsov must make the democratic opposition of Moscow reconsider its strategy, starting with their relations with each other.”Over the years, the liberals splintered into at least half a dozen political parties working under a plethora of confusing, forgettable names but lacking any distinct identity. Because they never got past the leadership battles to agree on a common platform, experts said, about their only shared position was “Dump Putin!”Voters were unimpressed.The vast majority remains grateful to Mr. Putin for bringing stability and prosperity after the economic hardships and rampant gangsterism ushered in by the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union. Some major opposition figures served in the Kremlin at the time, which did not help.In the past year, Mr. Putin has solidified his position by striking a deep nationalist chord, annexing Crimea and selling Russians on the idea that they inhabit a besieged fortress.Europe and the United States imposed sanctions, hoping the ensuing economic hardship would prompt Russians to push Mr. Putin to change. Instead sanctions have created the opposite effect, exploited by Mr. Putin to convince Russians that the West seeks to bring the country to its knees.“Security has a dual meaning in Russia,” said Gleb Pavlovsky, a former presidential adviser. “It is both national security and social security, and in their eyes, these two notions are combined in one word: Putin.”The opposition, feeling boxed in at home, often endorsed sanctions and other Western efforts to pressure Mr. Putin. They also emphasized what they called the need for Western values like the rule of law, which failed to resonate. That, too, played into Mr. Putin’s hands.The Kremlin used its monopoly over state television to paint the opposition as Western stooges, hammering home the idea daily that government critics constituted a “fifth column,” or in Mr. Putin’s words, “national traitors” working for foreign interests.The most prevalent theory among the opposition is that rogue far-right extremists assassinated Mr. Nemtsov — pointing to repeated statements at demonstrations by right-wing activists that they just awaited an order from Mr. Putin to “cleanse” the country of traitors. The latest such episodes occurred Feb. 21 in central Moscow during a demonstration by the anti-Maidan movement — a Kremlin-endorsed nationalist movement determined to thwart demands for government change in Russia like the revolution that occurred in Ukraine.Prominent members of the anti-Maidan movement held a news conference on Thursday to deny any link to the killing. It was orchestrated from abroad, they said.But government critics maintain that the continual refrain about treachery created an “atmosphere of hatred” that they blame for Mr. Nemtsov’s death.“It is the result of this propaganda of hate, because every day, the Russian media is trying to persuade Russian citizens that there are enemies of our country working for the State Department, working for Washington or some other countries, and they want to ruin Russia,” said Dmitry Gudkov, a young member of Parliament and one of the few willing to criticize the Kremlin openly.Undoubtedly the liberal opposition has faced difficulty building a following, particularly beyond Moscow and St. Petersburg, partly because members are largely blacklisted from state news media. But it has also tended to focus on one or two issues that seem explosive — like corruption — but that the public basically disregards.“They tell people your government is corrupt, and they say, ‘Yes, we know, but our pensions are being paid on time,’ ” said Konstantin von Eggert, a political commentator. The opposition needs to make more of an effort to “build a brand,” he said.Attempts to build it around one person have largely fizzled. A blizzard of legal cases including almost a year under house arrest have kept Aleksei A. Navalny from organizing, and some leftists are troubled by the nationalistic statements he made denigrating immigrant labor.Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the billionaire owner of the Brooklyn Nets, and his sister Irina D. Prokhorova, have withdrawn from the leadership of Civic Platform, a move seen as protecting his business interests as the Kremlin soured on even mild critics.Liberals could probably overcome their stigma and attract about 15 percent of the voters nationally, analysts say, but first, they have to build a platform that emphasizes a kind of “patriotic liberalism.”There have been street demonstrations in Moscow this year, for example, over government cutbacks on health services. So the liberals could build a platform on social and economic changes — including helping entrepreneurs and moving away from state control of at least 50 percent of the economy, experts said.Mr. von Eggert said the opposition would probably do better if it acted more like a government in waiting, with positions on a wide range of issues, rather than just reacting piecemeal to Kremlin policy.The economic downturn — inflation could hit 15 percent and the country could fall into recession — might help the liberals gain some traction, too.“It could become a fight between the television and the refrigerator,” Mr. Gudkov said. “People try to get information from the television, but if the refrigerator is empty, they won’t believe the propaganda.”Perhaps most significantly, opposition liberals might increase their presence in Parliament because 225 seats out of 450 will be up for contention in 2016 in direct elections rather than party lists.But it is not clear that they can cooperate.“Liberals are not popular enough to split votes among five or six parties,” said Vladimir A. Ryzhkov, an opposition politician.For the moment, most opposition activists seemed too stunned by Mr. Nemtsov’s death to focus on future organizational efforts.Politicians mourning at his funeral suggested opinion was divided about whether staying in Russia to continue the fight was worth the risks.Some are already looking for an out, even while acknowledging that the killing might have been designed to prompt such an exodus.“There is no fresh air in the country,” said Galina Timchenko, the editor of Meduza.io, a news website she established in Latvia last October after she was dismissed from one of Russia’s most respected news organizations.Advertisement