AdvertisementSupported byBy Kareem FahimCAIRO — Egypt’s interior minister, who played a central role in the military-backed government’s far-reaching and ruthless crackdown on political dissent, was removed from his post on Thursday in a cabinet shake-up announced by the president’s office.President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi swore in new ministers of tourism, education and agriculture on Thursday, among others, according to a statement from his office, and he removed the interior minister, Mohamed Ibrahim, a veteran official in the sprawling domestic security agency. Mr. Ibrahim was replaced by Maj. Gen. Magdi Abdel-Ghaffar, who had served in the national security apparatus.Changes in the government were expected after parliamentary elections that had been scheduled for this month were postponed indefinitely. That delay came after a judicial ruling earlier this week saying that the laws governing the election were unconstitutional. Thursday’s personnel changes may have been an attempt to shore up confidence in the government before a conference for foreign investors to take place in the Sinai resort city of Sharm el Sheikh next week.Mr. Ibrahim, a senior officer in the Interior Ministry under the former president, Hosni Mubarak, was appointed under Mohamed Morsi, Egypt’s first democratically elected president. He retained his post after Mr. Morsi was removed from power by the military in July 2013, and became a lightning rod for criticism of his officers. The officers, long seen as lacking in training and restraint, acted with even greater impunity after the military takeover, while Mr. Ibrahim brushed off charges of abuse, according to human rights advocates.The black-clad officers of the Interior Ministry’s Central Security Forces played a crucial role in the violent suppression of Islamist protests against the military takeover, killing hundreds of people in Rabaa al-Adawiya square in August 2013. As the crackdown expanded to include leftist and liberal activists, Mr. Sisi had no public complaints about Mr. Ibrahim’s stewardship.More recently, though, Mr. Ibrahim had been unable to thwart a series of deadly bombings in the capital at a time when the government has been desperate to project stability.Analysts said it seemed doubtful that his exit signaled any serious effort to reshape the Interior Ministry, or to repudiate Mr. Ibrahim, who was reported to have retained a job as a security adviser.His removal though may be a sign that Mr. Sisi wants a less confrontational figure to lead the ministry, according to Karim Medhat Ennarah, who researches criminal justice for the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights.He added that after the fall of Mr. Mubarak, General Abdel-Ghaffar served under an interior minister who maintained a rapport with diverse political forces, including the Muslim Brotherhood. “It’s not necessarily progressive change,” Mr. Ennarah said. “It could be an indicator of a more lenient approach.”Merna Thomas contributed reporting.Advertisement