By ALAN COWELLMARCH 5, 2015
BERLIN —  The past lurks here like a tripwire.While Europe’s leaders wrestle with the challenges of a tortured present — the rise of the Islamic State, the euro, the maneuvers of the Kremlin — Germany also seems hauled back to its history, as if condemned never to overcome it.In recent days, there has been news of the heirs of Jewish art dealers suing in the United States for the return of a trove of church treasures in gold and silver — the Welfenschatz, or Guelph Treasure — claiming that their forebears were forced to sell to the Prussian state under Nazi pressure in the 1930s.Then there was a reminder that “Mein Kampf,” Hitler’s manifesto, which has been suppressed since Germany’s defeat in World War II, will finally be republished in Germany in 2016, albeit with critical annotations, when the existing copyright held by the state of Bavaria expires at the end of this year.But perhaps the most chilling throwback across the decades came when Josef Schuster, the president of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, said Jews should consider removing their traditional skullcaps in some “problematic neighborhoods” of Berlin to avoid hostility.AdvertisementThe very notion of Judaism’s identifying emblems being again entwined with the politics of hate seemed to fill German leaders with dread.Advertisement“Never again should Jews have to hide themselves,” said Heiko Maas, the justice minister. Christine Lüders, a senior antidiscrimination official, said the idea of Jews pondering whether to display their faith was “unbearable.”Ever since 1945, Germany has struggled to atone for the Nazi era and the Holocaust and to confront extreme rightists, who were long held responsible for the bulk of anti-Semitic acts even at a time of rising Islamic extremism.“Anti-Semitism is not only a problem related to the Muslim community. Many citizens of German origin also cling to anti-Semitic stereotypes,” said an editorial in Der Spiegel, a weekly newsmagazine. “These prejudices are the breeding ground of hatred for everything Jewish.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But after last year’s conflict in Gaza and recent attacks on Jews in European capitals, the taboo on spreading the blame to Muslim militants has fallen away. “The anti-Semitism of radical Islamist groups represents a threat as much for the Jewish community as for our entire society and our democratic values,” Mr. Schuster said.The debate has intensified with a recent invitation by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for Europe’s Jews to seek sanctuary in Israel. Far beyond Germany’s preoccupation with its past, the prospect of a reduced Jewish population in Germany raises questions about the kind of society Germans wish to build for the future — and the role Jews and other minorities will play in it.Before the rise of Nazism, German Jews numbered some 500,000. In the postwar era, according to the Central Council of Jews in Germany, that number had fallen to 15,000. But with an influx of Jews from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe since 1990, the number has risen to around 100,000 formally registered members of Jewish communities.The actual number may be twice as high and, for some, their presence has become a barometer of a broader inclusiveness that has been threatened across Europe. Germany itself has been shaken by the rise of an anti-immigrant group called Pegida opposed to what it calls the “Islamization of the West.” For some, the destinies of Germany’s Jews and Muslims have become intertwined.“Just for purely selfish reasons, Germany today must do everything to prevent a Jewish exodus,” Özlem Topçu, a columnist, wrote in the weekly Die Zeit. “The Jews in Germany are living proof that the nation has faced up to its past and has become a society in which minorities have a sense of well-being. The Germans need the Jews as much as German Muslims need the Jews.”On present evidence, that calculation may be a work in progress, at best.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: In Germany, an Ugly Past Rears Its Head.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.