By CHOE SANG-HUNMARCH 5, 2015
Video from Yonhap Television, a South Korean news agency, shows the attacker being subdued and Ambassador Mark W. Lippert being escorted from the scene.SEOUL, South Korea —  The South Korean police said Friday that they were seeking to bring attempted murder and other criminal charges against an anti-American activist who slashed the United States ambassador to South Korea, Mark W. Lippert, with a kitchen knife.Senior Superintendent Yun Myeong-seong said a request had been made to a Seoul court for a warrant to formally arrest the suspect, a self-proclaimed nationalist activist named Kim Ki-jong, on charges that also included illegal use of violence against a foreign diplomat.Mr. Kim, 55, may also face the charge of violating South Korea’s anti-Communist National Security Law, Mr. Yun added. That depends, he said, on the results of an investigation into whether he subscribed to North Korean ideology. The controversial National Security Law bans any acts of supporting or aiding the North Korean government.Mr. Kim told reporters through his lawyer that he had acted alone and had not intended to kill Mr. Lippert. But the police said that Mr. Kim stabbed and slashed Mr. Lippert several times, inflicting deep wounds, and that this supported a charge of attempted murder.AdvertisementThe court was expected to interview Mr. Kim before deciding whether to issue a warrant on those charges.AdvertisementMr. Kim claimed he attacked Mr. Lippert to protest the annual joint military exercises the United States began with the South Korean military this week. He said the exercises raised tensions on the divided Korean Peninsula, hindering inter-Korean dialogue and efforts for reunification of the two Koreas.Although such a claim reflected a typical North Korean argument, that itself did not constitute a violation of the National Security Law; some progressive activists and scholars make similar arguments.South Korean officials said they had so far found no signs that Mr. Kim had an accomplice, but they said they were looking into whether his assault on the American ambassador was influenced by North Korean ideology. The police raided Mr. Kim’s home and office in Seoul early Friday, confiscating his computer and documents. They said they were also checking his telephone records.“We are looking broadly and deeply into whether there was a behind-the-scenes force at home and abroad,” Mr. Yun said.He said Mr. Kim visited North Korea seven times from 1999 to 2007. But those visits were approved by the South Korean government and took place during a period when many South Koreans, including government officials, journalists and scholars, were allowed to visit the North under Seoul’s “Sunshine Policy” of encouraging exchanges and reconciliation.Yet Mr. Kim was also among a small minority of progressives in South Korea who tried to build a funeral altar at the center of Seoul to encourage South Koreans to express condolences over the death of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-il in late 2011. The progressives said such a gesture would help promote reconciliation with the North, but their attempt crumbled in the face of protest from conservative South Koreans, who denounced them as “jongbuk,” or North Korean sympathizers.As the police raided Mr. Kim’s home, the government of President Park Geun-hye and her Saenuri Party called his act, which took place as Mr. Lippert was about to give a speech on Thursday morning, “terror against the South Korean-United States alliance” and called for an inquiry into whether “behind-the-scene forces” had been involved in the attack. That raised fears among progressives that conservatives would use the attack to suppress dissidents.AdvertisementNorth Korea praised Mr. Kim for inflicting a “just punishment for U.S. war maniacs” and “knife slashes of justice” against Mr. Lippert, who became Washington’s ambassador to Seoul just last fall.Mr. Lippert was recovering from his injuries, including a four-inch slash on his face that required 80 stitches, according to doctors at Yonsei University’s Severance Hospital in Seoul.The ambassador, who often interacts with the South Korean public through social media, was upbeat on Thursday on Twitter.“Doing well & in great spirits!” he posted from his hospital bed. “Will be back ASAP to advance US-ROK alliance,” referring to the Republic of Korea, South Korea’s official name, by its initiaPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the attack shook the government and raised questions about security. After an emergency meeting of vice ministers, the government vowed “stern punishment” for officials who had failed to protect Mr. Lippert.Mr. Yun told reporters that the police had not checked the people entering the breakfast meeting where Mr. Lippert was to speak because the United States Embassy had not requested it. Mr. Yun added that the police had deployed 28 officers around the restaurant where the event was held, and that some of those officers had joined the meeting’s attendees in subduing the attacker.Though the police say Mr. Kim, who was captured at the scene of the attack, acted alone, his assault gave North Korea an opportunity to play on South Koreans’ “ambivalence toward the United States and pan-Korean ethnic nationalism,” said Lee Sung-yoon, a Korea expert at Tufts University.Although South Koreans generally welcome the 28,500 American troops in their country, many have long held grievances against the United States for agreeing with the Soviet Union to divide Korea at the end of World War II. Some have also accused Washington of backing South Korea’s previous military dictators despite their brutality.Mixed feelings about the United States have bubbled to the surface in the past. In 2005, Korean War veterans guarded a statue of Gen. Douglas MacArthur in Incheon, where he led an amphibious assault that turned the tide of the war, as activists tried to topple it as a symbol of unwanted foreign influence.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea Police Prepare Charges in Attack on U.S. Envoy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.