By ANTHONY DePALMAMARCH 4, 2015
She was the emerald-eyed knockout of Havana society, and everyone knew her as Naty. She belonged to the Havana Country Club and lunched aboard yachts. She was married to a distinguished surgeon, and they lived in one of the best neighborhoods in the city.But at night, Naty — Natalia Revuelta Clews — opened her elegant living room to shadowy young men who slipped in to plot the overthrow of the Cuban government, by violent means if they had to, and to construct in its place a new society that would end the abuses and privileges of the rich who lived in the houses all around them.Ms. Revuelta, who died on Saturday in Havana at 89, had a soft spot for the rebels and a passion for their leader, Fidel Castro. To support him and his movement, she sold her jewels and gave them the money. She helped sew fatigues for the fighters. And when, on July 26, 1953, they attacked the second most important military base in Cuba, hoping to incite a popular insurrection, she delivered their fiery manifesto to top editors in Havana.The assault on the Moncada barracks failed miserably, with many rebels killed or captured. Mr. Castro and his younger brother Raúl were tried and sent to prison.AdvertisementAlthough both Ms. Revuelta and Mr. Castro were already married, she to the surgeon Orlando Fernandez, and Mr. Castro to Mirta Diaz-Balart, Ms. Revuelta dared send Mr. Castro a jailhouse letter that sparked their romance. They exchanged dozens of letters, each filled with passion and intellectual fervor. They went on endlessly about philosophy and revolution, about political discourse and power. And about love.“I am on fire,” Mr. Castro wrote in 1954. “Write to me, for I cannot be without your letters.”One letter to Ms. Revuelta was mistakenly sent to Mr. Castro’s wife, exposing their epistolary affair.AdvertisementBut that did not keep them apart. Batista granted the Castro brothers amnesty in 1955 on the condition that they leave Cuba. Before heading to Mexico, Fidel Castro briefly met up with Ms. Revuelta in Havana and consummated their relationship. Once in Mexico, he asked her to join him, but she said no. She did not tell him she was pregnant.The baby, a girl, was born in March 1956, but Mr. Castro did not know because he was busy making final preparations for his return to Cuba. That December he landed on the southeastern coast of Cuba with a small group of followers to set off his revolution.Ms. Revuelta did not see Mr. Castro again until he triumphantly entered Havana with his forces in 1959, but by then he was preoccupied with consolidating his new power and did not have time for her. Despite her profound disappointment at his indifference, Ms. Revuelta continued to support the revolution, even after her daughter, Alina Fernandez, Ms. Revuelta’s daughter by Mr. Castro, fled Cuba for the United States in 1993 and openly criticized the Castro government.“Naty remained a committed revolutionary,” said Jonathan Hansen, a historian at Harvard who interviewed Ms. Revuelta several times for a biography that he is writing about the young Fidel Castro. Last May Ms. Revuelta, then 88, shared with him about 40 of the letters Mr. Castro had written her from prison.“She told me she didn’t agree with everything that had been done, or the way it turned out, but she said, ‘Cuba had to have this revolution,’” Mr. Hansen said.According to several Cuba news blogs, including Cafe Fuerte, which cited sources close to the family, Ms. Revuelta was taken to a Havana hospital last week and died there on Saturday. She had been in declining health since being seriously injured in a fall last summer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Fernandez was with her when she died, Cafe Fuerte reported, and directed that her ashes be scattered at sea.The romance between Ms. Revuelta and Mr. Castro was whispered about all over Cuba, and in 1998 it was detailed in the book “Havana Dreams,” by Wendy Gimbel. In a review in The New York Times, Alma Guillermoprieto, who had written extensively about Latin America, highlighted the fairy tale nature of the story of the stunning socialite who gave up everything — “the tea parties, the charity fashion shows in which she was always the star, the happy, crooning nannies and the starched and frilly babies — for some sweaty, bearded rabble-rouser who was, to boot, the illegitimate son of white trash!”Ms. Revuelta was born into Havana society on Dec. 6, 1925. Her parents divorced soon after she was born, and she was reared by her mother, Natica. Ms. Revuelta was educated in private schools in Cuba and the United States. She was 22 when she married Dr. Fernandez, who was nearly twice her age. They had a daughter, Nina, and lived in an exclusive Havana neighborhood.AdvertisementWith her husband away much of the time, Ms. Revuelta found that life boring and yearned for adventure. She joined the Orthodox Party, which championed social justice causes. After the November 1952 coup by Fulgencio Batista, she, like many Cubans, became active in the opposition movement.Friends in Havana introduced Ms. Revuelta to Mr. Castro, who was then a lawyer from a wealthy family and who had been an Orthodox Party candidate for Congress until Batista’s coup. Mr. Castro began to organize an armed insurrection, and Ms. Revuelta offered to let the group meet in her home. Eventually, according to an account by Ms. Fernandez in the Spanish newspaper ABC, Ms. Revuelta aided the movement with her “actions, money and contacts.”It was inside Ms. Revuelta’s home that Mr. Castro started to plan the 1953 assault on the Moncada barracks in Santiago.Ms. Revuelta and her husband divorced, and soon after Mr. Castro seized power, Dr. Fernandez fled Cuba with their daughter, Nina. Ms. Revuelta remained in Havana with Alina, who did not learn that Mr. Castro was her father until she was an adolescent.Ms. Revuelta’s dream of joining Mr. Castro as he ruled Cuba had dissolved, leaving her disappointed and embittered.Ms. Revuelta spent two years in France then returned to Cuba, where she held a number of government positions until she retired in 1980. She then volunteered with the Ministry of Culture, and for three decades was a notable presence at many art exhibits and theatrical performances in Havana.Besides her daughters, Nina, who lives in Virginia, and Alina, of Miami, her survivors include a granddaughter, who lives in Boston.Ms. Revuelta never remarried.In an interview with the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia in 2008, she said she understood that Mr. Castro had “put his revolutionary project ahead of his personal life.”Still, she told the newspaper, “It took many years to get him out of my heart.”A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B15 of the New York edition with the headline: Natalia Revuelta Clews, Fidel Castro Ally and Mother of His Daughter, Dies at 89.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.