By SIMON ROMEROMARCH 7, 2015
RIO DE JANEIRO —  Brazil’s highest court on Friday authorized an investigation of dozens of prominent political figures, including the leaders of both houses of Congress, intensifying a sweeping bribery scandal that is bedeviling President Dilma Rousseff’s government at a time when she is grappling with a sluggish economy.The move by the Supreme Federal Tribunal singles out several important figures, including Renan Calheiros, the Senate leader; Eduardo Cunha, the leader of the Chamber of Deputies; Fernando Collor de Mello, a former president; and dozens of others. Many form part of the governing coalition led by Ms. Rousseff, who was re-elected in October.The scandal has shaken the political establishment over the past year, as a former executive at Petrobras, the national oil company, revealed a scheme in which construction companies paid huge bribes to obtain contracts for refineries, deep-sea platforms and oil tankers.Witnesses who have reached plea deals with prosecutors have testified about how funds were channeled to powerful politicians or to the governing Workers Party and other political parties. Rodrigo Janot, the prosecutor general, has asked the high court not to investigate Ms. Rousseff, who was chairwoman of Petrobras’s board while the bribery scheme was thriving.AdvertisementThe process is not expected to be swift if the inquiries produce trials at the high court. Members of Congress have special judicial standing that allows them to be tried only by the Supreme Federal Tribunal, effectively producing long delays in such trials. Some of the politicians who will be investigated have already denied any wrongdoing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I will give all the explanations in the light of day,” Mr. Calheiros, the Senate leader, said Friday.AdvertisementMr. Calheiros, like others entangled in the investigation, is no stranger to scandal. He resigned as Senate leader in 2007 when a magazine reported that a construction company’s lobbyist had paid child support for Mr. Calheiros’s daughter from an extramarital affair. He regained his post as Senate president in 2013.Still, this latest phase in the scandal comes at a delicate time for Brazil’s economy. With Petrobras in upheaval, some investors are cutting their exposure in Brazil, and Brazil’s currency, the real, dipped 7 percent against the dollar over the past week.The turmoil in Congress is also raising concern that legislators may seek to block austerity measures as tensions simmer between Ms. Rousseff and members of her coalition.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: Brazil Bribery Inquiry Targets Top Politicians.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.