By CHOE SANG-HUN and MICHAEL R. GORDONMARCH 6, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  The United States was relying on a lone, unarmed South Korean police bodyguard to protect Mark W. Lippert, the American ambassador to South Korea, when he was attacked Thursday, a senior United States official said Friday, adding to questions in South Korea about whether security had been too lax.Under longstanding arrangements, the United States does not use its own diplomatic security personnel to protect the American ambassador in Seoul, which is considered a relatively safe posting. Instead, it relies on South Korea’s police, the American official said.The embassy’s security office can request additional security measures or more police personnel if it believes such measures are warranted, but security officials did not in this case because the breakfast meeting at which Mr. Lippert was to speak was billed as invitation-only and there had been no security problems there in the past. The man who attacked the ambassador, Kim Ki-jong, was allowed into the meeting although he was not on the list of confirmed invitees, and it is unclear if anyone at the event knew that Mr. Kim had a history of sometimes erratic behavior.Mr. Kim was convicted of hurling concrete at the Japanese ambassador in 2010 to protest Tokyo’s territorial claim to a set of South Korean-held islets and given a suspended prison sentence.AdvertisementAfter the attack on Thursday and as a precaution against copycat attacks, armed South Korean police officers have been assigned to protect Mr. Lippert. How long such arrangements will remain in effect is not yet clear, and the United States plans to consult with South Korea about future security arrangements.Advertisement“What we have to do is have a discussion about the longer-term prognosis going forward,” said the senior State Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the discussion covered internal security arrangements.Mr. Kim, 55, was formally arrested Friday on attempted murder and other criminal charges. He told reporters through his lawyer that he had acted alone and had not intended to kill Mr. Lippert. At the time of the attack he said he was protesting joint American-South Korean military exercises he feared hurt the chances of reconciliation with North Korea. But the police said that he stabbed and slashed Mr. Lippert several times, inflicting deep wounds with a 10-inch knife, and that those actions supported a charge of attempted murder.Relying on local governments to protect American diplomats is a common practice in nations that are not considered high-threat areas. The Metropolitan Police Agency in Seoul has assigned a police officer to escort the American ambassador on all of his movements within South Korea, an arrangement dating to the 1990s, according to the American official. (The South Korean police have not spoken publicly about such an arrangement.)Because of South Korea’s strict gun laws, Mr. Lippert’s police bodyguard, who was in plainclothes at the time of the attack, did not carry a weapon.While the United States Embassy did not request more security for Mr. Lippert for the morning of the attack, the South Koreans assigned 28 officers as a precaution. All but a few were deployed outside the restaurant, and witnesses say the first people to fight off the attacker were those at Mr. Lippert’s table, although the police then joined in.Mr. Kim is the leader of a small civic group that was invited to the breakfast hosted by the Korean Council for Reconciliation and Cooperation, which focuses on better ties with North Korea.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kim did not respond to the invitation to the event, and when he showed up, he was not on the list of confirmed guests. Because of his affiliation with the invited group, however, council officials at the reception desk let him in. A police officer raised a question about letting in someone not on the list, but by then Mr. Kim was already inside, the police said.Critics of the way the security was handled said local police should have known Mr. Kim well and should have kept a closer eye on him when he showed up. Besides the attack on the Japanese ambassador, he was fined last year for slapping a man during a lecture by the Seoul mayor.AdvertisementYu Hyung-chang, who served in South Korea’s presidential secret service for 20 years, said that Mr. Kim should not have been admitted given his background and that “if you are going to let him enter, then the very basic thing to do is to have an officer stay close to him at all times,”  The Associated Press reported.The police also said they did not check people for weapons because there had been no American request to do so, but some critics said such a check should be standard procedure.David Straub, an American former diplomat who served in Seoul and commented on the episode on the Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center’s website, said: “It does not appear that this was an egregious security or intelligence failure on anyone’s part. Ambassadors are public figures, and it’s not possible to provide them with perfect protection.”On Thursday, Mr. Kim seated himself at a table near Mr. Lippert’s. When the breakfast was being served, Mr. Kim slashed his face, leaving a gash that required 80 stitches. Mr. Lippert, who is recovering in a hospital after surgery, also had gashes to his arm and hand.American and South Korean officials said the police bodyguard was not seated at the table with Mr. Lippert but joined in subduing Mr. Kim.Like his recent predecessors, Mr. Lippert has tried to be more accessible to South Koreans — some of whom regard Washington as overbearing — and he has been spotted walking his dog and eating at local restaurants.His wife gave birth in South Korea; the couple gave their son a Korean middle name, Sejun.Choe Sang-Hun reported from Seoul, and Michael R. Gordon from London.A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Used Unarmed Guard for South Korea Envoy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.