AdvertisementSupported byBy Ian AustenOTTAWA — A cellphone video made by a gunman moments before he opened fire in Canada’s Parliament and at a war memorial, killing a soldier, was released by the police on Friday, more than four months after the violent events.While previously withheld from the public, the recording made by the gunman, Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, had helped the Royal Canadian Mounted Police conclude that his attack on Oct. 22 last year was an act of terrorism driven by religious ideology.In the brief and sometimes rambling recording that Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau made inside an old Toyota Corolla he bought for the attack, his language is similar to that of other Muslim extremists. He said that the assault he was about to begin was a response to Canada’s military role in Afghanistan and the decision to join the campaign against the Islamic State militants in Iraq. “So we are retaliating, the mujahedeen of this world,” Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau, who was originally from suburban Montreal, said in audio so indistinctly recorded that the police added subtitles. “So just aiming to hit some soldiers just to show that you’re not even safe in your own land and you gotta be careful.”He added, “May Allah accept from us.”The video was screened by Bob Paulson, the commissioner of the mounted police, for a parliamentary committee that is reviewing a controversial antiterrorism bill. In testimony, Commissioner Paulson said that if Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau had been arrested rather than killed outside the entrance to the Library of Parliament, he would have been charged with terrorism offenses.“It’s not relevant to us or our investigation what kind of a terrorist Zehaf-Bibeau was, or if he was a particularly intelligent, sophisticated, influential or personally disciplined terrorist,” Commissioner Paulson said.The police withheld 18 seconds from Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s video, apparently because of the continuing investigation into possible accomplices. “I’m persuaded that Zehaf-Bibeau didn’t come to this act alone,” Commissioner Paulson said, noting that 130 investigators have interviewed 400 people. “We are actively investigating individuals who contributed to his crimes.”The investigation, he said, shows that Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau initially traveled from British Columbia to Ottawa, hitchhiking and riding a bus, to get a passport. His application for a Canadian passport had been delayed by a review. Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau, also a citizen of Libya because of his father’s citizenship, ran into roadblocks when he tried to renew his Libyan passport at the Libyan Embassy in Ottawa.Portions of the antiterrorism bill proposed by Canada’s Conservative government have been criticized as unconstitutional by several legal experts. Politicians and civil rights group have also questioned its plan to increase the power of spy agencies without improving their civilian oversight.On Friday, Daniel Therrien, the leader of Canada’s privacy commission, joined the critics.In an opinion article published by The Globe and Mail, Mr. Therrien said that without changes the bill “opens the door to collecting, analyzing and potentially keeping forever the personal information of all Canadians in order to find the virtual needle in the haystack.”He added, “While the potential to know virtually everything about everyone may well identify some new threats, the loss of privacy is clearly excessive.”Advertisement