By ROD NORDLANDMARCH 7, 2015
BAMIAN, Afghanistan —  After nearly a year on the run, a pair of star-crossed young lovers are back in the Afghan village where both their love affair and their problems began.The young couple, Zakia and Mohammad Ali, had faced criminal charges and death threats after eloping and fleeing their village in the high mountains of central Afghanistan last year. Now, they have had their legal issues resolved and their marriage legally recognized.But while his family has welcomed them back, hers is another matter.When Mohammad Ali, 22, works in the fields of his family’s farm, he wears his shirt untucked, and a black pistol attached to his belt pokes out beneath it. A guard dog is tied up in front of their mud house, one of several small buildings in a walled courtyard in their village on the outskirts of the town of Bamian.Zakia, 19, never goes out at all, for fear that she might encounter someone from her own large family. Her fathers and brothers publicly vowed to kill her and Mohammad Ali when they eloped. They accused him of kidnapping her and said she had been married already to a man she had never met, chosen for her by her father.Zakia and Mohammad Ali fled threats of arrest and death in Afghanistan as a result of their marriage, which crosses cultural boundaries.“I know there is still a risk to us, but we had no choice,” Mohammad Ali said last week. Now that they were back among the rugged mountain ranges that surround the Bamian valley, he was glad. “Your homeland is a place you will always love, and every mountain pass in my country is precious to me,” he said.AdvertisementSince eloping last March 21, the couple has faced many obstacles. There were months of flight, followed by Mohammad Ali’s capture by the police in Kabul, who he said beat him daily. Zakia took refuge in a shelter run by Women for Afghan Women, a charity. The group’s lawyers managed to win Mohammad Ali’s freedom, and the two were reunited and their marriage recognized as valid.AdvertisementEven as they became a cause célèbre — particularly among young Afghans, many of whom mounted Facebook and Twitter campaigns hailing them as a modern Romeo and Juliet who had the courage to choose their own mates in defiance of Afghan social norms — the couple dropped from public view.They returned briefly to their village, but before long, one of Zakia’s brothers, armed with a gun and a knife, pursued Mohammad Ali through the potato fields. He managed to escape, but Mohammad Ali and a pregnant Zakia then fled to the protection of distant mountain villages in Yakawlang District.Zakia was having a difficult pregnancy, though, and there were few medical services in Yakawlang, so they returned to hiding in Kabul last August.“They live in a constant state of fear,” said Aziza Ahmadi, the acting head of women’s affairs in Bamian Province. She was among those officials who tried to negotiate an amicable settlement with Zakia’s family, but they remained vehemently opposed to the union because they are Tajiks and Sunni Muslims, whereas Mohammad Ali is a Hazara and a Shiite Muslim. “They’re really at risk if they stay here,” Ms. Ahmadi said. “It’s better for them to leave the country.”They tried that, too. Officials at the United States Embassy, as well as at several European embassies in Kabul, told them they could consider their asylum request only if they first fled as refugees to a neighboring country.In October, they crossed into Tajikistan on visas, along with Mohammad Ali’s father, Anwar, intending to apply for status as refugees, in the hopes of then asking for asylum in the West. Like many Afghans, all three of them have only first names.Refugee officials had told them they qualified on at least five grounds, any one of which would normally qualify someone for asylum, including a serious threat to their lives based on discrimination because of gender, race, religion, ethnicity and choice of spouse.AdvertisementShortly after they started the process to register with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Tajikistan, Zakia and Mohammad Ali were stopped on a busy street in the Tajik capital, Dushanbe, during daytime by two men who identified themselves as police officers.UZBEKISTANDushanbeTURKMENISTANTAJIKISTANPanj RiverAmuDaryaAFGHANISTANBamianBAMIANPROVINCEKabulPAKISTANIndusRiver100 MilesDushanbeUZBEK.TURKMEN.TAJIKISTANPanj RiverAmuDaryaAFGHANISTANBamianKabulPAKISTAN100 MilesThe officers robbed them of their life savings, about $5,000, including jewelry that Zakia wore and cellphones, and then summarily deported them from Tajikistan, according to interviews with the couple and Anwar, as well as an independent witness who accompanied them on the trip and was also robbed by the police in Dushanbe, and whose name is being withheld for his safety so he can continue working in the country. They were not permitted to return to their hotel to collect their belongings.Babar Baloch, a spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said that the agency could not discuss the couple’s specific case, but that the agency was aware that “in some instances, asylum seekers may face harassment, arbitrary detention and deportation” in Tajikistan.Tajikistan, which borders Afghanistan to the north, is a former Soviet republic with a record of human rights violations and a reputation as one of the most corrupt countries in the world.Women’s advocates suggested that the couple try to seek asylum in India or Pakistan. Pakistan also has a recent history of mistreating Afghan refugees, even those registered with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and India has few people who speak Dari, the only language the couple speak. With Zakia’s pregnancy nearing term, they decided to return to Bamian instead.“We’re done with running away,” Mohammad Ali said, sitting at home late last month with Zakia and their new baby, a daughter named Ruqia, who was born at the end of December. “This is our proof that we belonged together,” he added, nodding toward Ruqia. “Nobody can take this away from us now.”Economically, their situation at home has been desperate. They were low on food and even fuel during the bitterly cold winter here, burning bushes and dung rather than more costly wood or coal for heat. Anwar’s small farm produces potatoes, but competition from Pakistani farmers made it nearly impossible for many Afghan farmers to sell last fall’s crop. Anwar’s harvest sits in storage without a buyer, and it will spoil if one is not found before winter ends.Mohammad Ali said they were getting by because an anonymous benefactor in the United States who had read about their plight had sent them $1,000 via Western Union to help care for their baby. He used half of the money to buy food and fuel for their family, which numbers 10 adults and nine children sharing his father’s home, and with some of the rest, he bought the pistol he now carries.AdvertisementBamian’s deputy police chief, Mohammad Ali Lagzi, said the authorities were aware of the risk to the couple. “From the time they returned, we are keeping an eye on them,” he said. “It is the police’s job to make sure every single citizen is safe.”The couple were dubious about how much real protection the police could provide in a rural community where Zakia’s family has a home less than half a mile away.If they survive, Zakia said, they want to see their daughter get the education neither of them had. “It doesn’t matter that she is a baby girl,” she said. “I just want her not to grow up illiterate as we are.” If they do live to see Ruqia’s adulthood, Mohammad Ali added, one thing is for sure. “We won’t choose her husband,” he said. “She will.”Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Back in Afghanistan, Modern Romeo and Juliet Face Grave Risks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.