By KAREEM FAHIMMARCH 7, 2015
CAIRO —  Egypt’s government carried out the death penalty for the first time against an Islamist supporter of the ousted President Mohamed Morsi on Saturday, executing a man convicted of murder during the political violence that followed the military takeover of the government in 2013, the Interior Ministry said.The man, Mahmoud Ramadan, was seen among the attackers in a well-publicized video that showed teenagers being thrown from a rooftop water tower. Egyptian officials said Mr. Ramadan had confessed to murdering one of the teenagers, Mohamed Badr al-Din, and was executed by hanging after he had exhausted all of his appeals.His lawyers, however, said Mr. Ramadan’s trial was tainted by several irregularities, including an improperly recorded confession and the imprisonment of one of his lawyers. The accusations echo longstanding complaints by human rights advocates about Egypt’s judicial system.The death penalty has been carried out at least nine times since Egypt’s current president, Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi, took power, mostly related to older criminal cases. Mr. Ramadan’s execution, with its context of political violence, focused attention on the cases of hundreds of Islamists who have been sentenced to death since the takeover — often after trials that relied on partial or nonexistent evidence and disregarded proper legal processes.AdvertisementIn case after case, supporters of Mr. Morsi, a Muslim Brotherhood leader, have been “quickly charged and sentenced,” according to Mohamed Elmessiry, a researcher for Amnesty International. Supporters of the military who participated in violent clashes, as well as members of the security services accused of abuses, are rarely, if ever, arrested. Speaking of the capital cases, Mr. Elmessiry added, “We are of course concerned that these sentences are carried out after grossly unfair trials.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.With a black Islamist flag shoved in his back pocket, Mr. Ramadan appeared in a graphic and widely disseminated video that showed violent clashes in the port city of Alexandria on July 5, 2013, two days after the military arrested Mr. Morsi.AdvertisementMr. Ramadan and a group of men are seen on the rooftop of a building, apparently participating in an attack on a smaller group of young men huddled on a water tower. The video shows the attackers throwing at least two of the young men off the tower, about 20 feet onto the roof below.The prosecution of Islamists has done little to tamp down an insurgency that sprang up in the months after Mr. Morsi’s ouster. Lately, the authorities have struggled to contain a campaign of small but deadly bombings around the country, targeting businesses and restaurants. A soldier and a police officer were killed early Saturday in the Nile Delta city of Mahalla el-Kubra when a bomb exploded outside a bank, injuring at least seven civilians, security officials said.There were no immediate claims of responsibility for the bombing, or for at least five other minor explosions in different parts of the country on Friday. Security officials and diplomats have said the attacks appear to be the work of obscure militant groups seeking to hurt the government by targeting Egypt’s business infrastructure.Merna Thomas contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 8, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Egypt Executes an Islamist Supporter of Ousted President.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.