AdvertisementSupported byBy Anne BarnardBAGHDAD — Iraqi officials said Saturday that they were investigating reports that Islamic State militants had destroyed Hatra, an archaeological site that dates to the first century B.C., two days after officials confirmed that the group had bulldozed another nearby site, the ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud. Officials have been unable to review visual evidence, Qais Hussein Rashid, the deputy minister for tourism and antiquities, said in a telephone interview, because their local contacts have not had Internet access for several days. But, he said, “our local sources confirmed it to us.”Iraqis living nearby and across the country lamented the wholesale destruction of their heritage, with Kurdish and Shiite militias and army troops on the ground, and an international coalition bombing from the air, apparently unable to stop it.“We are in despair with the government,” Ali al-Nashmi, a professor of history at Mustansiriya University in Baghdad, said in a telephone interview. He was nearly in tears after hearing the reports about Hatra, which he said had been rare in Iraq for its classical ruins. “We are losing the country.”On its website, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities blamed what it called a less than concerted international effort to prevent the looting and destruction of Hatra, the most renowned of hundreds of ancient sites in Nineveh Province, which Islamic State militants have controlled along with its capital, Mosul, since June. “The response wasn’t at the required level,” the ministry said, “which encouraged the terrorist gangs to commit another crime by looting and destroying the Hatra site.”On Saturday, residents of Mosul and Nineveh Province offered new details about the destruction of Nimrud by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.Salim al-Jabouri, who lives just across the Tigris River from Nimrud, a sprawling, ancient mud-brick city, recalled being startled to see bulldozers and other construction vehicles entering the site recently.He fetched binoculars to watch more closely, he said, and saw men he believed to be members of the Islamic State get out of cars and armored vehicles, walk closer to the ruins and “start bulldozing them completely.”Capt. Mohammad al-Lahaibi, a police officer in Mosul, said it had taken the militants three hours to destroy the site. Other residents said that before the bulldozing, the militants had begun removing objects and causing damage. The bulk of the destruction occurred on Wednesday, according to journalists at Mosul TV. Gov. Atheel al-Nujaifi of Nineveh said in a recent statement that the group was also looting the sites for artifacts to sell, despite its declarations that they violate Islamic law. “ISIS tries to disguise the looting of Iraq artifacts,” he said. “What has been destroyed so far is not more than what has been looted.”One Mosul resident, Muaid, 40, who provided only his given name for safety reasons, seemed resigned. “Most of Mosul’s people are not satisfied with ISIS attitudes, but we can do nothing,” he said. “The government and the army left us prisoners.”He said the group had “fallen in people’s sights” after destroying other revered sites, including a mosque associated with the Prophet Jonah. Dr. Nashmi, the history professor, expressed frustration with the government and the international coalition, saying they could have seen a military or construction convoy heading to Hatra across the desert and responded, perhaps by bombing. He has been calling for action to stop the destruction. “They didn’t listen to me,” he said. An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Mosul, Iraq, and Omar Al-Jawoshy and Falih Hassan from Baghdad.Advertisement