By STEPHEN CASTLEOCT. 13, 2015
LONDON —  Less than six weeks into Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership of the Labour Party, even his critics acknowledge that he has honored one central promise on which he was elected: to practice politics differently.But as he has done so, a chasm has opened between Labour’s new and left-leaning leadership — supported by enthusiastic party members — and the more centrist instincts of most Labour lawmakers, the majority of whom never wanted Mr. Corbyn as leader, setting Britain’s main opposition party on a new and unpredictable course.At times, Mr. Corbyn, who spent three decades as an often-lonely standard-bearer of the party’s left, seems to act as if his job has not really changed.The morning after his election, he declined an interview with a prestigious Sunday-morning television program, instead attending a local “fun day” organized by a mental health provider in London. Then, at a World War II commemoration service, he did not sing the national anthem, “God Save the Queen.”AdvertisementAnd there has been an acutely personal controversy over the whereabouts of Mr. Corbyn — a lifelong republican — on the day he could have attended his first meeting of the Privy Council, a largely ceremonial body, induction into which normally requires making an oath to the queen. Photos finally surfaced of Mr. Corbyn outside a restaurant in Scotland, where he had gone on a hiking vacation.AdvertisementOnce renowned for their steely discipline and ability to stay on message, Labour lawmakers on Tuesday publicly — and angrily — denounced an unexpected policy shift within the party on deficit reduction that came after heated discussions late Monday.Feuding has broken out within the party over whether Britain should consider military intervention in Syria, which Mr. Corbyn opposes, and over his pledge never to use the country’s nuclear deterrent.“The right-wing press is doing its best to distort what Corbyn does, but really they don’t need to distort it very much,” said Steven Fielding, a professor of political history at the University of Nottingham. “Labour is now a split party that has done a massive U-turn on a key policy.”“And if you are going to snub the queen,” Mr. Fielding added, “you had better make sure that you are really popular, because people are not going to take your side.”Mild-mannered and bearded, the 66-year-old Mr. Corbyn won a big majority from Labour members and supporters, many young, when the leadership job opened up after the Conservatives of Prime Minister David Cameron won the general election in May.Mr. Corbyn’s lack of polish is part of his appeal in a Labour Party where political spin is associated with the leadership of Prime Minister Tony Blair, whose support for war in Iraq and economic liberalism left many traditional supporters feeling betrayed.Supporters point to the enthusiasm Mr. Corbyn has generated among young people, and to the fact that he has reopened debate on important issues like economic policy, welfare and the renewal of the costly Trident nuclear weapons system.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But he may soon have to attend to more practical issues of governing his newly fractious party. Tension recently burst into the open when one of Mr. Corbyn’s biggest supporters, Diane Abbott, who speaks for the party on international development, criticized an article whose writers included another Labour lawmaker, Jo Cox, and which contemplated the creation of safe areas in Syria, possibly by using force.AdvertisementMs. Abbott said on Twitter that it was sad that Labour lawmakers “want to support Cameron in his long-held desire to bomb Syria.”Another Labour deputy, John Woodcock, responded by reminding Ms. Abbott that she was spokeswoman on international development, “not an Internet troll.”On Monday, Labour lawmakers clashed in a private meeting over a government plan to eliminate the budget deficit. Having accepted a proposal on balancing the government’s books several weeks ago, Labour’s economy spokesman, John McDonnell, then instructed the party’s deputies to oppose it, creating confusion in a crucial policy area. It was unclear how much Mr. Corbyn himself had to do with the decision.Some centrist Labour lawmakers fret that Labour could return to the poisonous atmosphere of the 1980s, when left-wing activists sought to depose legislators deemed to be too far to the right.That worry was compounded by the start of Momentum, a group sympathetic to the new leadership, which aims to organize in the party’s grass roots.One Labour lawmaker, Mary Creagh, said she was confused about the motives behind Momentum, adding that it was “not impossible” that a purge of some deputies on the right of the party could ensue.Mr. Corbyn’s internal opponents hope that pressure will mount on him to step aside if the party performs poorly next year in local and regional elections in Wales, Scotland and parts of England, including London.But Mr. Fielding, of the University of Nottingham, said that it was hard to dislodge a Labour leader. He also said that, for the left, Mr. Corbyn’s victory presented a historic opportunity to change the party’s structures and hand power to activists, who tend to be more left-wing, at the expense of lawmakers.“I don’t think his priority is to win the next election,” Mr. Fielding said. “It is to change the nature of the Labour Party.”Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: European Morning newsletter. Sign up here.A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2015, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: New Leadership Widens Divide Within Labour Party.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.