AdvertisementSupported byBy Ellen BarryNEW DELHI — The house once occupied by India’s most notorious rapists is now sealed with a heavy padlock, at the end of a cul-de-sac smelling of musty abandonment.Ask the neighbors about Mukesh Singh and they will try to shoo you away, or, failing that, retreat down one of the colony’s narrow alleys, releasing a stream of muttered complaints: One more outsider raking up this shameful episode, pouring life back into a stain that had begun to fade.It is not that they do not remember Mr. Singh, one of four men from this neighborhood arrested in the savage rape of a 23-year-old physiotherapy student who later died of her injuries. Sentenced to death in 2013, Mr. Singh re-emerged into the public eye last week, when the BBC released quotes from a jailhouse interview he gave for “India’s Daughter,” a British documentary about the crime. Indian authorities have banned the film.No one goes unnoticed in Ravidas, a warren of tiny houses where auto-rickshaw drivers and street vendors are trying to haul their families up to the lowest rung of India’s middle class. Yet a code of silence has settled around the subject of the 2012 rape. Many of Mr. Singh’s former neighbors long for his death.“People like this should be killed immediately,” said Pooja Gupta, 20, her expression stony. “They should leave them in a public place and let the public sort it out. The way they did in Nagaland,” she added, referring to last week’s fatal beating of an accused rapist in northeast India. “They should hang them, but not in jail. They should take them on a parade through the streets, and then hang them.”As for the documentary, which will premiere in New York on Monday, Ms. Gupta, who is in her third year of university, said she had no interest in seeing it. “He has not been hanged, and he is free to air his views,” she said. “He is not worthy of being spoken to.”The banning of “India’s Daughter” is the second time that Indian society has been shaken over this crime. During the days after the young woman died, protests in Delhi grew so large that city officials hastily enacted a ban on demonstrations, but nevertheless the police ended up firing tear gas and water cannons, beating protesters with bamboo sticks and arresting dozens.A new documentary that includes an interview with one of the men who raped and brutalized a woman aboard a private bus in New Delhi in 2012 has reignited passions about the case.Mr. Singh is one of six men who were charged with rape and murder in the case. Ram Singh, Mukesh Singh’s older brother, was found hanged from a bedsheet in his prison cell before the trial. Another man, who was a juvenile at the time of the crime, was sentenced to three years in a detention center. The remaining men pleaded not guilty, and are appealing their death sentences.The latest controversy centers on speech. Advance publicity for the film highlighted Mr. Singh’s interview, in which he blamed the victim for the attack, saying, “A decent girl won’t roam around at 9 o’clock at night.”An Indian court swiftly issued an order blocking the film’s broadcast, stating that his statements were offensive to women and could set off civil unrest. The authorities then approached YouTube, which blocked many channels of users who had uploaded the film onto the Internet. The ban has come under criticism, including from the Editor’s Guild of India, which called it “wholly unwarranted, based as it is on a misunderstanding of the power and the message behind it.”The news channel NDTV left its screen blank in protest for an hour on Sunday evening, at the time it had planned to broadcast the film.One place the ban has support is Ravidas Colony, a collection of around 250 boxlike houses with no indoor plumbing or running water. Mukesh Singh and his elder brother, Ram, had arrived here as most of their neighbors did: from a remote village, the sons of landless laborers. The brothers worked as drivers, and were known as drinkers and brawlers, but not criminals. Neighbor after neighbor recalled them as “regular guys.”“I have known them since my childhood, but I did not imagine they could do anything like this,” said Ram Kishore Anuragi, 17, who grew up two doors away. “They were always together, always drinking. They sometimes got into fights, but they didn’t misbehave with any of the women here.”In the film, Mukesh Singh tells this story tonelessly: It was after an afternoon of heavy drinking that six of them “went out to party” in the bus his brother usually drove. They found the young woman at a bus stop — she had been to see a movie with a male friend — and when the couple climbed on, they knocked the man unconscious and raped the woman repeatedly, including with an iron rod. Mr. Singh, who claimed he drove the bus but did not take part in the attack, said he looked back and saw one of the men pull something from her body.“It was her intestines,” Mr. Singh said. An hour later, they dumped the pair on the roadside, bleeding and naked. The woman died two weeks later.When the men were arrested, the attention that fell on Ravidas — a slum, the newspapers called it — infuriated its residents, who felt their reputation had been besmirched. Despite appearances, they describe themselves not as poor but as middle class; the fathers may do menial work, but the children talk about internships and exams. “There is an expression, ‘One fish can dirty the entire pond,’ ” Mr. Anuragi said. “That is what happened here.”One recent morning, the entire colony smelled of laundry detergent. Young women were crouched over garments, scrubbing them on stones in the footpath, and climbing up to hang them on a spider web of clotheslines suspended above the roofs from trees and utility poles. Ms. Gupta had been listening silently, but when the conversation turned to the question of who is to blame for sexual assault she spoke up sharply.“Everything’s always the girl’s fault, from birth to death,” she said. “If the parents of boys would ask them why they are out so late at night, this kind of thing wouldn’t happen. But when a girl is outside at 7 or 8 o’clock the neighbors start talking about her.”Mr. Anuragi acknowledged her point: For spending money, he said, he is given 500 rupees or about $8, while his sister is given only 200 rupees, though he has never been entirely sure why. Sisters and brothers are raised with an entirely different set of rules, Ms. Gupta said, increasingly angry.“Girls obey their parents, and boys don’t,” she said. “If a girl ever tried to do what a boy does, the family would come down very hard on her.”Posted at their doorsteps a few paces from Mukesh Singh’s padlocked home, a group of older women were too irritated to answer questions, but complained at high volume that the revived talk about the case meant that they could no longer hold their heads up in public.One development that they noted with approval was the lynching of the man accused of rape in Nagaland.“That’s the only thing to do, mob justice,” said one of them. “He deserved what he got.”Advertisement