AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael ForsytheHONG KONG — The Malaysian government released on Sunday the most comprehensive report to date on the circumstances surrounding the disappearance of a Boeing 777 jetliner one year ago, revealing for the first time that the pilot and co-pilot of the plane had displayed no discernible signs of distress before the ill-fated flight.The information on the psychological state of the crew members was but one aspect of the 584-page report on the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, which is presumed to have crashed into the southern Indian Ocean about seven hours after vanishing from air traffic controllers’ screens in the early hours of March 8 last year.The report summarized the maintenance situation of the aircraft and the actions by air traffic controllers, and offered a minute-by-minute account of the events that Saturday morning. No sign of the plane has been found after a year of searching by a host of countries, led by Australia. There have been no definitive clues as to why the plane, with 239 passengers and crew members, suddenly ceased communicating with controllers and made a turn to the southwest on a flight from the Malaysian capital, Kuala Lumpur, to Beijing, causing what is arguably the biggest aviation mystery in history.The search effort in the first month was likely made even more difficult by the fact that a battery on one of the plane’s emergency locator beacons had expired more than a year earlier, the report said records showed. Four ships continue to scour a patch of ocean the size of West Virginia, using special sonar in an effort to locate the aircraft where experts estimate it probably ran out of fuel and crashed into the ocean.“Together with our international partners, we have followed the little evidence that exists. Malaysia remains committed to the search, and hopeful that MH370 will be found,” Prime Minister Najib Razak of Malaysia said in a statement on Sunday, referring to the flight number of the missing plane.This animation shows where floating debris from Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 could have drifted if experts are correct about where the plane went down.In the past year, many investigators have pointed to the possibility that the pilot, Zaharie Ahmad Shah; the co-pilot, Fariq Abdul Hamid; or someone else deliberately flew the plane to its doom.Mr. Zaharie, who was 52 at the time of the disappearance, had no life insurance policy, and neither he nor the co-pilot had shown signs of “social isolation,” drug or alcohol abuse, or any other behavioral changes before the flight, the report said. Closed-circuit television cameras at airport security checkpoints did not spot any changes in the mannerisms of Mr. Zaharie or the co-pilot compared with previous days.“The captain’s ability to handle stress at work and home was good,” the report, which drew on police investigations, said of Mr. Zaharie. “There was no known history of apathy, anxiety or irritability. There were no significant changes in his lifestyle, interpersonal conflict, or family stresses.”Mr. Fariq, who was 26, did have a life insurance policy, though the report did not say whether this was unusual. He was promoted to first officer, though still under training, on the 777 the previous November, and this flight was to have been his last before he became a fully qualified first officer. The report did not go into detail on his psychological profile.What investigators refer to as “the rogue pilot theory” has emerged as the most plausible explanation for the plane’s disappearance. But the investigators have cautioned that the only evidence is circumstantial and that the theory lacks supporting factors, like a motive. Others still suspect some other cause, with possibilities including mechanical failure, fire, hijacking or sabotage.The maintenance information revealed in the report said that the crew’s emergency oxygen supply had been refilled on March 7, just before the flight’s departure.Relatives of the passengers hunger for answers. Some 153 of the 227 passengers were Chinese, and on Sunday, family members and friends of the flight’s Chinese passengers gathered at the Lama Temple in central Beijing to reassert their demands for answers. They have been frustrated by the Malaysian government’s handling of the case.The report released Sunday, required under international regulations, revealed the battery for the locator beacon on the plane’s data recorder had expired in December 2012, with no records showing that it had been replaced. A source close to the Malaysian government said that the airline had changed the battery but that the written records had not been updated.A defective beacon would have added to the extraordinary challenges faced by search teams in the aftermath of the plane’s disappearance, as they listened in vain for signals from the devices in the deep waters far off the Australian coast. The report said that the battery’s expiration meant that there was no guarantee that the data recorder beacon would have sent signals out for the full 30 days it was designed to transmit, if at all. The beacon for the cockpit voice recorder had been replaced and was due to expire in June of last year.Malaysia came under withering criticism after the plane disappeared because the government was seen as withholding crucial information that showed the aircraft probably turned around and flew south and west across Peninsular Malaysia. For days, Malaysia directed rescue ships and planes north and east to the South China Sea, around the area where the plane was last seen by air traffic controllers, who rely on identifying signals emitted from the aircraft’s transponders. That transponder information disappeared from screens at 1:21 a.m. on March 8, 2014.The report was unsparing in its condemnation of the Malaysian authorities’ extremely slow response to the airplane’s disappearance, noting that it took more than five hours from the plane’s last transmission for the government to send an alert that the plane had disappeared and more than 10 hours from the last transmission for the first search-and-rescue plane to take off.The report gave new details on how several primary air search radars, which do not rely on the transponder information, tracked a contact as it moved from Flight 370’s last known position, crossed Peninsular Malaysia and headed out into the Strait of Malacca and the Indian Ocean beyond. But no one that night appeared to associate that blip with Flight 370.Nicola Clark contributed reporting from Paris, Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong, and Edward Wong from Beijing.Advertisement