AdvertisementSupported byLetter From EuropeBy Celestine BohlenPARIS — In the terrible days after the Jan. 7 killings at the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, readers showed their solidarity by rushing out to buy French newspapers, or reading their sites online.The most spectacular run was, of course, on Charlie Hebdo itself, which before the tragedy had struggled to sell half of a weekly distribution of 60,000 copies. In contrast, its Jan. 14 “survivors’ edition” sold almost eight million copies, of which 760,000 went abroad.This staggering show of support — combined with donations, government support and increased subscriptions — is likely to leave the once-faltering Charlie Hebdo with an influx of some 14 million euros, or about $15.5 million, before taxes, which its directors say they want to distribute among the families of the victims, the magazine itself and possibly a foundation to support newspaper cartoonists.But in January there was also a significant rise in sales of newspapers generally, which was both normal and remarkable. It was normal because people were frantically trying to follow the news. It was remarkable because in their quest for information, they turned — or returned — to the major national dailies, whose readership has been steadily declining in recent years.Libération, a struggling left-leaning daily that helped Charlie Hebdo’s survivors produce the Jan. 14 edition, had its best January sales in 11 years, selling on average twice as many newspapers a day — or 62,545 — as in the same month in 2014. Le Monde, the venerable Paris daily, saw kiosk sales jump by 17.3 percent over the month. Other mainstream titles — Le Figaro, and Le Parisien and its regional version, Aujourd’hui en France — had similar increases.Traffic at Agora, a chain of news and stationery shops, was up 25 percent in January, while press sales were up 35 percent, according to Eric Desmarey, commercial director for MLP, which handles 30 percent of press distribution in France, including Charlie Hebdo.“There was quite a bounce for all the papers that focus on news,” said Mr. Desmarey, who noted that the weekly Canard Enchaîné, another satirical newspaper, had also benefited from a burst of public support.The results online were even more striking, according to OJD, a nonprofit that monitors the circulation of the French news media. In January, the top three most visited sites, lemonde.fr, lefigaro.fr and leparisien.fr, posted increases in visits of about 60 percent above their monthly average. According to OJD, the number of visits to news websites and visits relayed to news websites from so-called hybrid pages was the highest since 2001, when it first began to track digital readership. Given the circumstances, no one in the French news media is celebrating the brief boost in readership, let alone counting on it for the future. “It was ephemeral,” said Jean-Marc Lepine, who had already returned to his usual lament about the decline in newspaper readership and the impact on his news and stationery store in central Paris.Like other newspaper sellers, Mr. Lepine struggled to keep up with demand for Charlie Hebdo’s Jan. 14 edition with its cover of a weeping Prophet Muhammad holding a sign saying “I am Charlie” under the headline “All is forgiven.” Mr. Lepine said he had sold about 1,000 copies of that edition; before the attacks, he said he sold about one copy of Charlie Hebdo a week.Now Charlie Hebdo is trying to figure out what to do with the money heading its way. In an interview in Le Monde, Richard Malka, the weekly’s lawyer, said a debate was underway within the newspaper about how to compensate the families of not just the 12 Charlie Hebdo victims, but also of the other five killed in related attacks in the days after. He said discussions were also being held about how to reorganize the paper’s business model and how to set up the foundation. Several customers in Mr. Lepine’s shop said they had been moved to buy Charlie Hebdo’s recent editions. But mostly, they said the events of January had convinced them to pick up old favorites — newspapers whose credibility and analysis they knew they could trust.Advertisement