Henan Province in central China is mostly a flat expanse of fields, towns and villages, whose 100 million or so people are sometimes slurred by others as bumpkins. Adding to the insult, the Chinese government has long skewed opportunities away from Henan in an area of life that matters intensely to many in China: getting their children into universities.This grievance has stung enough that it is one of the few complaints to have ruffled the torpor of this year’s full gathering of the National People’s Congress, the Communist Party-controlled legislature. People in Henan have long complained that education funds and national quotas for places in universities have been tilted away from them and other big, crowded rural provinces, in favor of the wealthier, more privileged parts of the country, especially Beijing and Shanghai. At a gathering open to journalists on Sunday, delegates to the congress from Henan denounced educational inequality, according to reports from the session. One delegate bowed before reporters to demand fair treatment. “In recent years, the Ministry of Education has given Henan a lot of support and care and, on behalf of 100 million Henan people, I thank you,” said the delegate, Li Guangyu, a businessman who runs an education investment company, according to the main evening newspaper of Zhengzhou, the provincial capital. “I also sincerely ask that you continue supporting and helping Henan, and let more kids from Henan win a fair chance for an education.”Other representatives from Henan also spoke up, and the provincial news media has taken up their cause.“The vicious circle persists that it’s better to be born in the city than the countryside, and it’s better to be born in Beijing than Henan,” said a commentary on Tuesday in The Dahe News, a popular newspaper in Henan.China’s system of university recruitment is just one way in which inequity and political favoritism undercut the government’s vows to deliver equal treatment to all citizens. But educational inequality especially riles families who see education, especially a place in a prestigious university, as an escape from a hard, uncertain life for their children.Under China’s intensely competitive and stressful university entrance exams, or “gaokao,” each province and the major cities, such as Beijing, devise and score their own. Students indicate the universities and colleges they want to apply to, and their test scores are used to allocate spots, with the central authorities setting quotas indicating how many applicants schools should admit from each area. The political calculus of distributing quotas across provinces and cities works against students from big provinces, such as Henan, which also have large populations of farmers.The central government has tended to allot a larger proportion of university positions to children from big cities, where keeping the population contented is seen as politically more important. Most of the best universities are also in Shanghai and Beijing, and they have been happy to go along with giving more slots to local students.All that irks people from Henan and similar regions, especially because China’s household registration system means that people cannot freely move from one area to another for better schooling.“My daughter went to nursing college, and my son is going to a vocational college,” said Rong Tiekui, a villager from Sui County in Henan, in a telephone interview. “But they would have had a better chance if there was equal educational opportunity. Everyone knows that Henan suffers from geographic discrimination.”According to Mr. Li, the businessman, Peking University, one of the country’s most prestigious schools, allocated 85 spots in 2013 for the 758,000 students from Henan who took the university entrance exam, making for a recruitment rate of 0.01 percent. The 73,000 students from Beijing were allotted 226 positions, a recruitment rate of 0.31 percent.According to official statistics, last year 24.8 percent of the students applying from Beijing were accepted to bachelor’s degree programs in the most prestigious tier of universities. For Henan, the figure was 6.9 percent. For Sichuan Province in the southwest, it was 5.5 percent.The variation in university admission rates cannot be attributed solely to the different strengths of students, said Terry Crawford, the chief executive of InitialView, a company that performs assessment interviews of Chinese students applying to American and British universities. In emailed comments, he recalled interviewing students from Zhengzhou, in Henan Province, three years ago, when he first started the interview business.“We realized soon after — I think due to a conversation with a parent — that one of the reasons many top students in Henan were forgoing the gaokao was that they did not like their odds of getting into a top university in China,” he said. “This was due to the incredibly high gaokao score they would need in order to be competitive in their province. However, they had realized that they were competitive enough to get into a good college in the U.S.”President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Li Keqiang have promised to provide more university opportunities to children from poorer areas, especially the countryside, and there has been a slight easing of inequities. But many officials, educators and families from the bigger, poorer provinces say the improvements have been too few and too slow.For eight years now, Lou Yuangong, the president of Henan University, has formally raised the issue during China’s annual legislative gathering as a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body that meets at the same time as the National People’s Congress.“Even now at this moment, students from Henan don’t enjoy equal treatment,” Mr. Lou said, according to The Dahe News. “But I’ll keep on calling for it.”For now, the barriers are one incentive for wealthier parents from Henan and similar parts to send children abroad, if they cannot secure a place at a prestigious Chinese campus. Last year, 459,800 Chinese went abroad to study, an 11.1 percent increase over 2013, according to the Ministry of Education.“Students from Beijing and Shanghai who have more resources might — on average — come off in an interview as more urbane, but I would say that about one-third of the students from second- and third-tier cities in populous provinces knock our socks off,” Mr. Crawford said. “I think the lower chances of admission to a top Chinese college is a big reason that so many of the top students applying abroad are not from Beijing or Shanghai.”