By CHOE SANG-HUNMARCH 9, 2015
SEOUL, South Korea —  The knife attack last week on the American ambassador to South Korea, Mark W. Lippert, set off an outpouring of good wishes here for both the envoy and Seoul’s alliance with Washington.But the response, led largely by conservative South Koreans, has provoked a backlash, with accusations that the government of President Park Geun-hye and its supporters are “worshiping” America and politicizing the case to discredit their critics.Kim Ki-jong, a professed nationalist with a history of erratic outbursts of violence, slashed Mr. Lippert with a kitchen knife during a breakfast meeting last Thursday. The assault left a four-inch gash on Mr. Lippert’s right cheek and damaged tendons and nerves in his left hand.When the South Korean news media carried images of Mr. Lippert splattered with blood, the public initially reacted with shock. Well-wishers flooded Mr. Lippert’s blog and Twitter account, and they posted messages on signs that conservative activists put up near the United States Embassy in Seoul. The tone of the messages quickly turned into one of guilt and apology.AdvertisementIn South Korea, mainstream conservative ideology teaches people to regard the United States as a savior that sacrificed the lives of tens of thousands of its soldiers while fighting for the South during the Korean War. Many Koreans, especially those who are older, saw Mr. Kim not only as a senseless criminal, but also as an ingrate — the most despised character in Korea’s deeply Confucian culture.On Monday, a crowd of older South Koreans in military uniforms rallied near the American Embassy, urging fellow citizens “not to forget what the Americans did for us during the war” and to “eradicate jongbuk,” or sympathizers with North Korea, who they said were behind the attack on the ambassador.AdvertisementSuch sentiments reflected fears that the episode might harm the alliance with Washington.Yet it did not take long for a counterreaction to kick in.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“This is too much! What they did was almost like god worshiping,” one blogger said. Another compared the wave of “I love America” feelings to shrines that ancient Koreans built to worship China for sending troops to help fight Japanese invaders.John Delury, an American professor at Yonsei University in Seoul, said, “South Koreans felt shock and deep sympathy on a personal level for the U.S. ambassador, even a sense of guilt that he suffered this brutal attack as a guest in their country.”“But now government officials and political parties are hyper-politicizing what was really an isolated incident,” he said, “linking it to a campaign against ‘pro-North Korea followers’ and as a way to drum up support for the U.S.-South Korean alliance.”Ms. Park and conservative leaders lost no time in insinuating a possible link between Mr. Kim and “jongbuk,” and defined the assault as a “terrorist attack” on the alliance rather than the act of a loner.“I hate the crazy man who stabbed the ambassador, and as a Korean, I feel like apologizing deeply to the Americans,” said Kim Mi-hyun, 36, who watched a group of Christian church members perform a traditional fan dance and kneel in contrition across a boulevard from the American Embassy on Saturday. “But this scene makes me sick at the stomach. They are way overdoing it, and it actually will damage the image of the Americans and the alliance among Koreans.”An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the source of online comments about South Koreans’ reaction to the attack. They were made by two bloggers, not by the same one.An article on Tuesday about South Koreans’ divided reactions to a knife attack on the United States ambassador, Mark W. Lippert, in Seoul referred incorrectly in some editions to Mr. Lippert’s facial injuries. He was slashed on his right cheek, not his left.A version of this article appears in print on March 10, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: South Koreans Debate Attack on Envoy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.