AdvertisementSupported byBy Thomas Fuller and Wai MoeBANGKOK — A proposal to postpone elections in Myanmar caused an outcry among democratic forces on Tuesday, and the government then issued a public reassurance that the voting would take place as scheduled on Nov. 8.The fear and confusion over a possible delay reflected the democracy movement’s underlying mistrust of the military establishment, including the bureaucracy and the government of President Thein Sein.Early on Tuesday, U Tin Aye, a former soldier who represented the governing party before taking his current post as leader of the election commission, summoned representatives of the political parties and proposed a postponement on the grounds that some areas of the country struck by flooding in July and August might not be ready to accommodate voters by the time of the election.But analysts and members of opposition parties immediately questioned the motives behind the proposal at a time when the powerful military’s political rival, the party of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate and leader of Myanmar’s democracy movement, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, is showing signs of strong support.U Yan Myo Thein, a political analyst, said the proposal showed that the election commission and Mr. Thein Sein were “not sincere and trustworthy in politics.”“The ruling party and their allies fear the mounting strength of Aung San Suu Kyi,” he said. “They need more days to prepare their lines of defense and prepare new strategies and tactics for securing seats in Parliament by any means.”On Tuesday evening, state news media announced that after the consequences of a delay were considered, the decision was made to hold the election as planned.The flooding in remote parts of the country this summer was severe, and experts had raised the possibility of a postponement in those areas.Although national law allows the commission to delay or cancel elections in areas affected by natural disasters or security problems, opposition leaders said they saw no reason all voting should be postponed.The elections are a major test for the military establishment in Myanmar. For the first time since 1990, parties will freely challenge the military’s dominance. The military canceled the results of the 1990 elections after Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, the National League for Democracy, won in a landslide. The military then continued its dictatorial rule until 2011, when a nominally civilian government took over.The government has vowed to respect the results of the election, but members of the opposition said they were wary of the military’s continued influence.Mr. Tin Aye, the election commission chief, was quoted in the news media in Myanmar in June as saying that he was still loyal to the military and the governing party, also known as the U.S.D.P.“I love my organization,” he  said in remarks reported by Irrawaddy, a news website. “I love the military. I am willing to sacrifice my life for them.” He continued, “I want the U.S.D.P. to win, but to win fairly, not by cheating.”Thomas Fuller reported from Bangkok, and Wai Moe from Yangon, Myanmar.Advertisement