AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven ErlangerLONDON — Jeremy Clarkson, the hugely popular host of the car program “Top Gear” who relishes the politically incorrect, was suspended by the BBC on Tuesday after a mysterious “fracas” with a producer.Mr. Clarkson, 54, is the Prince Philip of television hosts, given to making impolite comments about foreigners and then apologizing. Even though “Top Gear” attracts strong ratings, the BBC had put him on a “final warning” last year for his behavior after he used a racist word during filming.At the time, Mr. Clarkson said, somewhat jokingly, that the BBC had told him he would be fired if he made “one more offensive remark, anywhere, at any time.”“Top Gear,” which initially aired in 1977 and was relaunched in 2002 as a straightforward program that evaluated cars, has become a phenomenon, sometimes described as the world’s most popular factual television program. Some 350 million viewers in 170 countries watch it each week. That makes it an important source of revenue for the BBC, and Mr. Clarkson, who is paid about $1.5 million a year to present the show, is one of the organization’s most highly paid employees.The BBC announced his suspension late Tuesday “following a fracas” with a producer and “pending an investigation.” The BBC provided no further details, but Mr. Clarkson was reported to have punched a producer last week. The show will not be broadcast as scheduled on Sunday.A petition to the BBC to reinstate Mr. Clarkson was started Tuesday night by Paul Staines, a political conservative who runs a blog called Guido Fawkes. Calling for “freedom to fracas,” it has been signed by more than 140,000 people.In October, Mr. Clarkson and his crew had to flee Argentina after allegedly being attacked by local residents in an incident over a license plate. Mr. Clarkson was driving a car with the plate number H982 FLK, which was understood to be a reference to the British military victory over Argentina in the Falkland Islands war of 1982.Mr. Clarkson and his team insisted — with a wink — that they had no idea what the license plate meant. But most observers saw it as a typical Clarkson ploy to seem both naughty and patriotic.Last year the show was censured for breaching broadcasting rules after Mr. Clarkson used a derogatory word for Asian people in a program from Myanmar.And in May 2014, video footage that was not intended for broadcast appeared to show Mr. Clarkson using a racist term while reciting the nursery rhyme “eeny, meeny, miney, moe.” He later apologized and begged forgiveness, denying that he had uttered the slur but admitting “that it sounds like I did.”Similarly, in January 2012, Indian diplomats complained about a program from the country in which Mr. Clarkson described a car fitted with a toilet as “perfect for India because everyone who comes here gets the trots.”The year before, the BBC apologized to Mexico after Mr. Clarkson and his co-hosts characterized Mexicans as “lazy” and “feckless.” The show has also mocked Germans, Romanians and Albanians, among others.Mr. Clarkson, who also writes a weekly column for The Sunday Times of London, posted a Twitter message in February saying a “new presenter for ‘Top Gear’ ” was wanted. “Applicant should be old, badly dressed and pedantic but capable of getting to work on time,” he wrote.Advertisement