AdvertisementSupported byBy Aurelien Breeden and Jonathan GilbertPARIS — Florence Arthaud competed in solo trans-Atlantic sailing races at the age of 20. Camille Muffat captured three swimming medals at the 2012 London Olympics, including one in the grueling 400-meter freestyle. Alexis Vastine fought his way to a bronze medal in boxing at the 2008 Beijing Games.The three French athletes were flying in two helicopters late on Monday, on their way into a remote gorge in northwestern Argentina for the filming of a new reality show, “Dropped,” in which they would be left to fend for themselves and find their way back to civilization.But the two helicopters touched briefly in midair and then fell to the ground, killing the three athletes and seven other people on board, officials and witnesses said. A video posted in the Argentine news media showed the moment of contact.In France, a country that holds sports stars in high esteem, news of the crash was met on Tuesday with reactions of shock and grief from political leaders and fellow competitors.Speaking to reporters at the Élysée Palace, President François Hollande hailed the three athletes as trailblazers. “Here again, they wanted to push boundaries and make feats, countries and regions known to the world,” he said.Prime Minister Manuel Valls told reporters in Paris that the athletes had “filled the French with wonder, each in their own discipline,” and Thierry Braillard, junior minister for sports, told BFM TV that French athletics had lost “three stars.”Five of the seven other victims were French as well, employees of Adventure Line Productions, which was making the reality show for TF1, a leading French broadcaster. Franck Firmin-Guion, the president of Adventure Line, said in a statement that the crash took place during filming for the second episode of the show, and that the company’s staff was “devastated” by the news.The other two victims were the helicopters’ pilots, both Argentines. Local news media identified them as Juan Carlos Castillo and Roberto Abate.Argentina’s state news agency reported that flying conditions at the time of the collision were ideal. The French government is sending aviation investigators to Argentina to help determine what caused the crash, officials said. Prosecutors have opened a preliminary investigation for involuntary manslaughter, a standard procedure for fatal occurrences involving French citizens abroad, according to the Paris prosecutor’s office.In all, about 80 people were working on the program in the province of La Rioja near the Chilean border, provincial officials said. The mayor of Villa Castelli, a town near the crash site, said the downed helicopters, which witnesses said exploded after the collision, were “totally burned.”Ms. Muffat, 25, retired from professional sports last year after winning gold, silver and bronze medals at the 2012 London Olympic Games. Mr. Vastine, 28, who won a medal in the 60-to-64-kilogram weight class in Beijing, had a sister who boxed as well; she was killed in a road accident in January at the age of 21.Ms. Arthaud, 57, was a symbolic figure in France and the yachting world, nicknamed the Little Fiancée of the Atlantic for her exploits in the Route du Rhum, a trans-Atlantic solo sailing race. After she won the race in 1990, she was named champion of the year by a French sporting newspaper, L’Equipe. Ms. Arthaud was not able to repeat her success in other major races and later struggled to attract sponsors, but her early breakthrough helped inspire other sailors, including the soloists Catherine Chabaud of France and Ellen MacArthur of Britain.Several more French athletes were taking part in the reality show but were not involved in the accident, including the figure skater Philippe Candeloro; the swimmer Alain Bernard; and the soccer player Sylvain Wiltord.Mr. Wiltord posted a Twitter message shortly after the crash on Monday night. “I am sad for my friends,” he wrote. “I am trembling, I am horrified, I have no words. I don’t want to say anything.”Adventure Line Productions made headlines in 2013 when a contestant in another of its reality shows — “Koh-Lanta,” a French adaptation of “Survivor” — died of a heart attack during filming, and the show’s doctor later committed suicide. The new program, “Dropped,” is in its first season.Aurelien Breeden reported from Paris, and Jonathan Gilbert from Buenos Aires. Christopher Clarey contributed reporting from Boston.videoAdvertisement