By CHOE SANG-HUNMARCH 10, 2015
Mark W. Lippert, the American ambassador to South Korea, said he felt “pretty darn good” after he was released from Severance Hospital in Seoul where he was being treated for injuries in a knife attack.SEOUL, South Korea — The American ambassador to South Korea, Mark W. Lippert, said on Tuesday that he would continue to be “open and friendly” in his dealings with people here, as he was released from a Seoul hospital five days after a knife attack that raised concerns about his security.“The bottom line is that this incident has only strengthened our love and affection for this country and our belief in the unbreakable bond” between the United States and South Korea, Mr. Lippert said at a news conference at the Severance Hospital of Yonsei University, where he had been treated since the attack on Thursday. Mr. Lippert was referring to the outpouring of good wishes he had received from South Koreans.Mr. Lippert was attacked at a breakfast meeting by a professed nationalist, Kim Ki-jong, who slashed his face and arm with a kitchen knife. Mr. Kim, who faces charges including attempted murder, said he was protesting joint American-South Korean military exercises.At the time of the attack, Mr. Lippert’s security had consisted of a single, unarmed South Korean police officer, according to an American official. Mr. Lippert said on Tuesday that his embassy would take a hard look at what additional security measures he might need but that he would continue to interact with South Koreans and try to maintain his reputation for being “an ordinary neighborhood guy.”Mr. Lippert said he felt “pretty darn good” and hoped to return to work soon, though he said he would still need to undergo rehabilitation for the injuries to his arm.A version of this article appears in print on March 11, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: South Korea: Ambassador Is Released From Hospital.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.