When The New York Times asked Sim Chi Yin, a photographer based in Beijing, to photograph a story about “beginnings,” she started thinking about the outskirts of her city, which she has been exploring for the past year as part of her continuing work on urbanization in China. This week, we are marking the launch of our primary Instagram account, @nytimes, with images of beginnings by seven photographers around the world. The photos by @chiyin_sim were published on the account over the course of the day on Thursday. — Kerri MacDonaldFor the past year, I’ve been photographing the fringes of Beijing, the areas just beyond the tentacles of one of the world’s most extensive subway networks, where the city just meets the countryside.These areas — extensions of Beijing, where I’ve been based for the past eight years — are often rough and ready and feel a world apart from this capital city. One of the places I’ve stumbled upon in these explorations is a cluster of recycling yards in Beijing’s northern suburbs, where the subway’s Line 5 ends. This is where some of Beijing’s heaps of trash go to die — in order to begin a new life, recycled. Paper and cardboard gets compacted into 700-kilogram cubes and loaded onto 16-wheel trucks to be taken to the eastern province of Shandong to be returned as paper. Plastic bottles — emptied of their Coke, Sprite, iced tea — are sorted before being sent away to be ground and turned into polyester for new clothes, or the filling of duvets and pillows. Styrofoam, metal, glass, they are all collected, with each yard specializing in a specific material. A constant stream of men and women wearing thick coats and gloves trundle in on motorized tricycles, passenger vans and trucks, with rubbish piled on and tied down in any way possible.“This is all household trash. There’s so much of it. If we didn’t help do something about it all, I can’t imagine the landfills that would be needed for all of it,” said Qian Linsheng, 34, a plastics recycler, as he counted each bottle by hand.As Beijing’s population has exploded to more than 20 million people, the amount of waste generated has multiplied too.All the consumer waste that comes here to be reborn tells another story: that of the Chinese urbanite’s changing lifestyle and diet, and the rise of the middle class. There are school textbooks, magazines, calendars, shredded receipts and firecracker boxes left over from the recent Chinese New Year. But there are also brochures for Audi cars, cartons for imported milk and yogurt, Belgian beer cans, brandy and wine crates and so on.There is an endless amount of trash to be sorted, counted and packed, said Mr. Qian, a migrant from the central province of Henan who has been running the plastics yard with his brother-in-law for the past five years, working from 6 a.m. until late in the night, every day, receiving packages large and small from rag-and-bone men.But the pair are planning to call it a day in a couple of years. Mr. Qian said: “It’s dirty, tiring work. I know this stuff gets remade into other things. But I don’t think about it that much. We’re only collecting the trash and make a living at it.”Pictures by @chiyin_sim / @viiphoto for @nytimes #NYTbeginnings