Simple meals, plain boiled water instead of the bottled mineral kind, a paucity of designer logos.The frugal tone President Xi Jinping set after he assumed power in late 2012 and opened a war on official graft has been on full display in Beijing this week during the annual full sessions of the National People’s Congress and its advisory body, the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. Once a stage for some of China’s most powerful politicians and high achievers from business, academia, sports and the arts to strut the trappings of their success, this year, it has been marked by conspicuous nonconsumption.Fruit, flowers and tea bags were eliminated from delegates’ government-provided hotel rooms. Delegates were expected to carry their own bags and polish their own shoes. Some delegates, who in earlier years attracted attention for extravagant attire, appeared to have embraced the new austerity, even incorporating newly fashionable references to environmental sustainability. The state-run broadcaster CCTV reported an “obvious decrease” in designer clothes.In 2012, Li Xiaolin, the chief executive of China Power International Development and the daughter of former Prime Minister Li Peng, was photographed at the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference in Chanel jewelry and a salmon-color Emilio Pucci pantsuit priced at $2,300, setting off critical discussions of the increasing confluence of wealth and political power in China. In 2013, she won notice for showing up at the Boao Forum on Hainan Island in a dress by Azzedine Alaïa.But for last year’s sessions, she switched to a subdued beige suit and a nondescript cloth bag. This year, amid reports that she kept nearly $2.5 million in a secret bank account in Switzerland, she was spotted carrying what the Chinese news media described as an “environmentally friendly bag” printed with the words “Clear Water-Blue Sky” and a reusable insulated cup.Even Xu Jiayin, the billionaire founder of the property developer Evergrande Group who is known for his taste for expensive suits and private jets, struck a modest tone this year, forgoing expensive accessories such as the Hermès gold-buckled belt he wore at the 2012 session.According to photographs that have circulated online, the singer Song Zuying set aside the designer clothes and fur jackets she wore at previous sessions in favor of a plain suit. The singer and “Chinese Idol” judge Han Rong replaced the Bottega Veneta purse that stirred much comment in 2012 with a much simpler bag.The strenuous efforts to project plain living did not escape Chinese online commenters’ notice.“You did the low-key well!” wrote Zheng Jing Zhuo Jian Ji Cui, a user from Zhejiang Province, in response to a report by the state-run China News Service that detailed Ms. Li’s wardrobe change this year.Fu Zhu Lao from Guangxi Province said, “Diligently oppose corruption, and studiously learn.”Commenting on a separate article on this year’s frugality directives, Shu Small Snail wrote: “To be diligent and thrifty has always been China’s traditional moral excellence. The Two Sessions’ thriftiness has made a good start for future meetings. I hope this kind of thrifty style will endure.”Reinforcing just such upright demeanor, this year the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference set up a discipline inspection team to supervise delegates’ meetings, CCTV reported. And boxes were placed in all eight hotels accommodating delegates to allow conference members or employees to “supervise each other” by submitting “suggestions and ideas” to the inspection team.