By DAVID M. HERSZENHORNMARCH 11, 2015
MOSCOW —  Russia’s relations with many Western nations, including the United States, may be at their worst levels since the Cold War, but its relationship with North Korea is blooming faster than the famously lush flower beds of Moscow’s Alexander Garden.On Wednesday, the Russian Foreign Ministry announced an agreement to designate 2015 a “Year of Friendship” with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is regarded by much of the world as a pariah state.The announcement came six weeks after President Vladimir V. Putin’s personal spokesman confirmed that the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, would visit Moscow on May 9 to attend a commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the defeat of Nazi Germany. It is expected to be Mr. Kim’s first trip abroad since assuming power in 2011.Tellingly, news of the Year of Friendship came on the same day that Berlin officials said that the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, had declined Mr. Putin’s invitation to attend the ceremony. The German government cited Russia’s policies in Ukraine, where the Kremlin has annexed Crimea and backed violent separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk, as the reason for her refusal to attend.AdvertisementAsked about Ms. Merkel’s decision, Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, told Russian news services on Wednesday that he had no knowledge of it.AdvertisementThe Foreign Ministry in its statement said that the Year of Friendship would also commemorate the 70th anniversary of North Korea’s liberation, and was intended to bring relations “in the political, economic, humanitarian and other areas to a new level.”“In the Year of Friendship,” the ministry said, “our countries are intensifying exchanges of delegations and contact information on an interagency and interregional level, to hold joint cultural events in Moscow, Pyongyang and other cities.”Mr. Putin has made a pronounced effort to turn his attention eastward to Asia amid the frayed relations with the West over Ukraine, but the closer ties to North Korea may serve only to reinforce his image as increasingly isolated from the world’s more established powers.North Korea, meanwhile, has taken at least one step to reduce its own isolation. Last week, the country said it was reopening its borders, which had been closed to foreigners for four months over fears of Ebola, just in time to allow international participants in the Pyongyang marathon next month. It is only the second year that foreigners have been allowed to participate in the race in the North Korean capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In another sign of Russia’s idiosyncratic foreign policy, the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, met Wednesday in Moscow with Vyacheslav Chirikiboy, his counterpart from Abkhazia, the breakaway region of Georgia.Russia is one of just four countries — the others being Venezuela; Nicaragua; and Nauru, an eight-square-mile island in the South Pacific — to recognize Abkhazia as an independent nation.Some Ukrainians fear that Russia ultimately hopes to turn the embattled regions of Donetsk and Luhansk into a similar quasi-independent, breakaway territory, which it will then grant recognition and protection.Abkhazia is heavily dependent on Russia economically and for security purposes, and Russian forces guard the border with Georgia. The meeting was partly intended to recognize the implementation of a treaty signed in November that further increased Russia’s military and economic sway in Abkhazia. Critics of that accord said it effectively amounted to Russia’s annexation of Abkhazia.A version of this article appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Western Relations Frosty, Russia Warms to N. Korea.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.