By WILLIAM NEUMANMARCH 11, 2015
CARACAS, Venezuela —  Just a few weeks ago, President Obama was being praised across Latin America for his decision to re-establish relations with Cuba, while President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela appeared increasingly isolated — a wobbly, unpopular leader resorting to ever more aggressive tactics to confront an economic crisis and clamp down on the political opposition.But with Mr. Obama’s declaration this week that Venezuela is an “extraordinary threat to the national security” of the United States, that dynamic may be coming undone.Suddenly, the United States is being cast again in the familiar role of the hemispheric bully trying to push around its smaller neighbors. And Mr. Maduro has taken on the mantle of victim, stirring up patriotic support at home, setting the opposition on the defensive and declaring that “we will never kneel before this arrogant empire that attacks and threatens” his country.“The optics of this are really just awful,” said David A. Smilde, a sociology professor at Tulane University who lives part time in Venezuela. “It was a strategic mistake. I think the Maduro government is going to get a lot of play out of this.”AdvertisementThe declaration by Mr. Obama came in an executive order that he signed on Monday. It authorized the American government to freeze any assets in the United States held by seven Venezuelan law enforcement and military officials whom Washington identified as being responsible for human rights abuses or violations of democratic due process.AdvertisementWhile Washington hoped the move would focus attention on deteriorating conditions in Venezuela, it may have backfired by giving Mr. Maduro new momentum. Critics fear that he will use it as an excuse to crack down harder on an opposition that he characterizes as siding with the enemy.On Tuesday evening, Mr. Maduro went before the National Assembly, warning that the United States was poised to attack Venezuela and saying that legislators should grant him decree powers that will allow him to make laws on his own.“The aggression and the threat of the government of the United States is the greatest threat that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, our country, has ever received,” he said to applause, with the yellow, blue and red presidential sash draped over his shoulder and a gold medal pinned over his heart. “Let’s close ranks like a single fist of men and women. We want peace.”He spoke of past American military interventions in Latin America and warned that the United States was preparing an invasion and a naval blockade of Venezuela.“For human rights, they are preparing to invade us,” he said, adding that he would personally oversee military exercises this Saturday for the defense of the country.“I invite the entire Venezuelan people, in all the states and regions of the country, to join in,” he said. “No one messes with our country. The Yankee boot will never touch it.”Venezuela and the United States have long had troubled relations, even though the United States is a major buyer of Venezuelan oil, the country’s main export.AdvertisementMr. Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez, delighted in taunting and criticizing Washington. Mr. Maduro has followed Mr. Chávez’s lead, accusing the United States of sabotaging the economy and planning to overthrow him — accusations that officials in Washington have forcefully denied.In recent months, as the Venezuelan economy has faltered and oil prices and his popularity have plunged, Mr. Maduro has raised the volume.Officials in Washington said that declaring Venezuela a national security threat was largely a formality required by law in order to carry out sanctions, as was a further declaration in the executive order that the threat constituted a national emergency for the United States.They also stressed that the sanctions were not against the country of Venezuela but only against individuals deemed responsible for human rights or other violations.“The action taken earlier this week sends an unequivocal message on human rights and corruption,” William H. Duncan, the director of the State Department’s office of Andean affairs, said in a telephone interview Wednesday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He rejected criticism that the action had backfired.“This is not something you can take a snapshot of,” Mr. Duncan said. “It’s not about today, it’s not about tomorrow, it’s about what happens in Venezuela over the long haul.”He added, “The Venezuelan government’s suggestion that we would meet this national emergency with force is simply not true.”In part, the reaction seemed shaped by the language in the executive order, which declared that a small country in the midst of an economic crisis was a threat to the United States. To some, it raised the specter of past instances when Washington had manufactured threats to justify military action.And it did not sit well in a region that resents historical American heavy-handedness and enjoys an increasing sense of independence from Washington.AdvertisementSome Venezuelan opposition leaders cringed at the American move and said that it had put them on the defensive.“Venezuela is not a threat to any country,” said the main opposition coalition, Democratic Unity, in a statement distancing itself from the American action and voicing disapproval of “unilateral sanctions.”The Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and members of the Union of South American Nations, two regional bodies, issued statements expressing concern.President Rafael Correa of Ecuador, a leftist ally of Venezuela, was more forceful, blasting the American move on Monday in a series of Twitter posts.“It ought to be a joke in bad taste that reminds us of the darkest hours of our America, when we received invasions and dictatorships imposed by the imperialists,” Mr. Correa wrote. “Can’t they understand that Latin America has changed?”Cuba issued a statement giving its “unconditional support” for Venezuela, a vital ally that supplies it with subsidized oil. It called the sanctions “arbitrary and aggressive.”Many regional leaders remained silent, but Mr. Smilde said that the greater damage could come in a lack of support for American-led attempts to pressure Venezuela to ease up on the opposition.“It makes it much less likely that all the countries in the region are going to make statements or take actions or do anything that could look at the basic issues in Venezuela of human rights and governance,” he said.AdvertisementThe Obama administration last year resisted Congressional efforts to impose sanctions on Venezuela, which were pushed by legislators from both parties most closely tied to the traditional Cuban-American lobby advocating tougher actions toward Cuba and its leaders, Fidel and Raúl Castro.But Congress passed a sanctions law in December and Mr. Obama signed it the day after announcing that he would normalize relations with Cuba and lift many of the elements of the economic embargo against Cuba.The Cuba initiative won Mr. Obama resounding praise in Latin America — even from Mr. Maduro — and seemed to clear a fresh path for American diplomacy in the region. At least some of that new atmosphere seemed to evaporate this week.“It’s a distraction from the real problems,” said Alfonso Marquina, an opposition legislator. “Last week, people talked about the lines and the shortage of milk and diapers, and today they only talk about Barack Obama’s declaration.”Patricia Torres contributed reporting.A version of this news analysis appears in print on March 12, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Hands Venezuelan Leader a Cause to Stir Support.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.