AdvertisementSupported byBy Jim Yardley and Gaia PianigianiROME — Former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has no shortage of legal woes. His conviction on tax fraud was upheld last year, costing him a seat in Parliament. He remains under investigation by one magistrate for witness tampering, while he is also on trial in Naples on charges of political corruption.But Mr. Berlusconi, 78, did get some good news on Tuesday night when Italy’s highest court upheld his acquittal in what became known as the “bunga bunga” case — in which he was accused of paying for sex with an underage Moroccan prostitute during one of the infamous “bunga bunga” sex parties at his villa near Milan.The case made for tabloid catnip: Prosecutors alleged that Mr. Berlusconi first paid Karima el-Mahroug, then 17 and nicknamed Ruby Heart-Stealer, for sex and later tried to pressure the police to release her after she was arrested on suspicion of theft. And it also helped erode Mr. Berlusconi’s political standing and led to accusations by his supporters that the proceeding was politically motivated.“A huge weight has been lifted from my heart,” the Italian newspaper, Corriere della Sera, quoted Mr. Berlusconi as saying late Tuesday. “I won’t get drunk, but this time we should toast.”The immediate question is whether the acquittal will revive Mr. Berlusconi’s political standing at a time when his center-right Forza Italia party is divided and Italy’s center-left prime minister, Matteo Renzi, has emerged as the country’s dominant political figure. Forza Italia is part of Italy’s awkward left-right governing coalition, but the party’s influence has declined as Mr. Berlusconi has seemed distracted by legal and business concerns. “It won’t change much,” said Roberto D’Alimonte, a political analyst. “Berlusconi’s decline is well established. It matters for him because he ran the risk of going to jail. But politically, it doesn’t matter.”The controversy over Mr. Berlusconi’s parties became public at the same time he was in the midst of a political crisis in which he was ultimately forced to resign as prime minister in 2011, at the height of the European financial crisis. Mr. Berlusconi and Ms. Mahroug have denied ever having sex. Mr. Berlusconi also has argued that he was unaware that she was a minor.The legal journey has been a circuitous one: A lower court initially convicted Mr. Berlusconi in the case, sentencing him to seven years in prison, only to see that verdict overturned last year on appeal. “The verdict speaks for itself,” Filippo Dinacci, one of Mr. Berlusconi’s lawyers, said on Wednesday. “It’s a victory for justice and for the law in the country.”Mr. Berlusconi recently completed a year of community service, volunteering at an Alzheimer’s clinic, for his conviction on tax fraud. Mr. Berlusconi’s conviction also led to his being barred from public office.Even so, Mr. Berlusconi’s loyalists said the intense publicity connected to the “bunga bunga” case created broad political damage that cannot be undone. “It had heavy political consequences in this country,” said Renato Brunetta, the leader of Forza Italia’s delegation in Italy’s lower house of Parliament. “Who is going to compensate us for that?”Advertisement