AdvertisementSupported byBy Edward WongBEIJING — The top court in Xinjiang, the vast western region of China troubled by ethnic violence, has posted statistics online showing that criminal trials there increased 40 percent last year over 2013, according to an analysis released on Wednesday by the Dui Hua Foundation, a human rights advocacy group based in the United States.The sharp rise in criminal trials indicates that the authorities “heightened the suppression of human rights activism and dissent in Xinjiang” last year, the group said.In recent years, there has been a significant rise in the number of protests and violent acts reported by the Chinese state news media in parts of Xinjiang heavily populated by Uighurs, a mostly Sunni Muslim, Turkic-speaking ethnic group whose members often complain about rule and discrimination by the ethnic Han, the dominant group in China. The official news reports have often talked about clashes between Uighurs and Han-dominated security forces or Uighurs and Han civilians.Those reports frequently attribute the violence to terrorist groups and Islamist extremists. Foreign scholars and human rights advocates say it is difficult to distinguish between what the Chinese government calls terrorism and what Uighurs would call resistance to rule by the Han or by the Communist Party.The statistics on criminal trials in Xinjiang were part of an annual work report posted online by the region’s highest court. The website dates the report to Jan. 22 and includes graphs showing comparative annual numbers.The statistics show that the number of trials of defendants charged with endangering state security, one type of criminal charge, remained the same from 2013 to 2014.That charge is often used by the authorities to suppress dissent, since several of the specific crimes that fall under it are associated with certain kinds of speech and association, said Dui Hua, which has a long history of tracking political prisoners in China. Hence it appears that courts in Xinjiang are using other kinds of criminal charges to suppress dissent and human rights activism, according to the group’s analysis.The foundation said a handful of charges or categories of crimes accounted for the surge in criminal trials. One was the charge of obstructing social administrative order; the number of trials doubled to more than 4,500 in 2014.“This category of crimes can be used to target unauthorized Islamic and Christian groups or ‘cults’ and covers activities including the distribution of religious materials as well as assemblies and demonstrations,” Dui Hua said.Trials for infringing on a citizen’s personal and democratic rights also doubled, to nearly 7,500. “This category of crimes includes the offense of ‘inciting racial hatred and discrimination,’ which may be applied to people who disseminate information that ‘tarnishes’ China’s ethnic harmony by, for example, challenging government bans on beards, veils and religious observance,” Dui Hua said.Last year, the trial of Ilham Tohti, an ethnic Uighur economics professor teaching in Beijing, drew greater criticism from international observers and foreign governments than any other in China.Mr. Tohti was put on trial in Xinjiang last September on the charge of separatism, a crime that falls under the category of endangering state security. He was found guilty and sentenced to life in prison. The court also ordered the confiscation of all his assets, even though he has a wife and two young sons who live in Beijing.Foreign scholars, diplomats and human rights advocates said he had simply spoken out against harsh Chinese policies in Xinjiang and had done nothing to advocate for the independence of the region.Seven of his students from Minzu University in Beijing were later put on trial for their involvement with a Uighur news website started by Mr. Tohti. They were sentenced to prison terms of three to eight years, said Li Fangping, a lawyer for Mr. Tohti. All the students were Uighur except for one ethnic Yi.Advertisement