The American writer Michael Meyer first arrived in China in 1995 as a Peace Corps volunteer and has since documented changes in disparate corners of the country. His first book, “The Last Days of Old Beijing,” was based on research and observations from living in a traditional hutong, or alleyway, in the Qianmen area of Beijing, south of Tiananmen Square. He was there at a time when city officials were intent on destroying homes in the area to make way for new developments, a phenomenon that has been unfolding across older neighborhoods in the center of the Chinese capital.His latest book, “In Manchuria: A Village Called Wasteland and the Transformation of Rural China,” published last month, is based on his time in the childhood village of his wife, Frances, in northeastern China, a region known to most Chinese as Dongbei (东北, Northeast) and to people of a bygone era as Manchuria. Mr. Meyer, who now splits his time between Singapore and Pittsburgh, is returning to Beijing for the annual Bookworm Literary Festival, which runs from Friday to March 29. He will take part in events on March 21 and 22. In an interview, he discussed the experiences behind his book:What were the biggest contrasts between living in the hutongs south of Tiananmen Square in Beijing and in a rural village home in northeastern China?
The biggest change was an expansion of space, both geographical and personal. The village is called Wasteland, and looks nothing like it. Picture flat rice paddies on a fertile floodplain stretching to foothills on three sides of the horizon. A high, clear-blue sky, and land quiet in winter and in summer scored by the sounds of frogs and ducks and dragonflies. To a visitor from Beijing, it felt reviving. I even trained for a marathon out there. As in Beijing, my home’s door had no lock, but unlike Beijing, no one ever walked in without knocking.  What were the most notable similarities?A hutong neighborhood is, in essence, a village, albeit one surrounded by a megacity. Life in Wasteland feels similar in that, when you step outside, everyone knows who you are, what role you play in the community and what you were up to the night before. The other similarity, unfortunately, was the lack of administrative transparency. In Beijing, my neighbors and I woke up and checked the outside wall of our courtyard to see if The Hand had painted “chai” [raze] overnight. People always asked me when the neighborhood would be torn down. In Wasteland, people constantly asked if I knew the agribusiness plans for the village.Some people describe northeastern China as a land where waves of invaders or occupying foreigners have left their marks. Your book discusses the history of foreign presence there, including the Japanese and the Russians. How does this history have an impact on daily life today in the region?The book is structured around two types of time: the rice-growing season, which is cyclical and eternal, and the man-made historical eras, which are transitory and ephemeral. The northeast is unique in that it’s always been a place that people passed through. Those who attempted to stay, to bend it to their own narrative, have largely failed. When you live there, you hear, unlike elsewhere in China, a more nuanced version of Chinese history, one of overlapping narratives instead of the usual single-minded telling. And you can see the remains — Orthodox cathedrals, Shinto shrines — across the northeast, which are scattered like playing pieces on a board game called Empire. While the Russians and Japanese brought the advanced railway network and developed early mining and manufacturing in the region, they were also joined — and subsumed by — Han Chinese migrants who passed through the Great Wall to settle there as pioneers. That past plays out in the present via a willingness to experiment, to break from tradition, both economically and culturally. Manchuria is also the place where the conquering Manchus came from, of course. You talk in the book about how they established the Qing dynasty to rule over Han China but also how their culture gradually disappeared. What vestiges of Manchu civilization in the northeast did you find to be the most interesting?I liked that villages around Wasteland kept their Qing-era names — the Barracks, Birchbark Factory — which manufactured imperial saddles — and that the former naval yard in Jilin is sign-posted. Other relics were harder to find. The one that I most enjoyed hunting down was the remains of the Willow Palisade, the “lesser Great Wall” that once formed a 1,000-mile barrier around land the Manchu protected from Han settlers as a reserve to which they could retreat. Wasteland sits just inside its northern boundary, but the village kids were not taught about it at school, and even my Manchu roommate had never heard of it. Another fast-vanishing vestige of Manchu civilization can be heard in the northern village of Sanjiazi, where the last native Manchu speakers live, a trio of women in their 80s. Half of the world’s 6,800 languages are predicted to go extinct by the end of this century, but none were once as prominent as Manchu. There’s a flicker of hope there, though, in the form of a villager whose grandmother taught him Manchu, which he’s teaching as an extracurricular activity at the local elementary school. What was most surprising about the changes you saw happening in the rural lifestyle of the northeast? To what degree are these changes taking place in other parts of rural China?When I moved to Wasteland in 2010, I did not expect to see, let alone write about, the transition to agribusiness. Wasteland is at the front of a nationwide push to “scale up” farms, from family-tended subsistence plots to large, mechanized operations run for profit by companies. At least the village’s company, Eastern Fortune Rice, is locally owned. As the book went to press, a Singapore-backed “super farm” broke ground near the village. It will be 500 square miles, equivalent in area to Los Angeles.  “In Manchuria” delves much more deeply into your love life than your first book ever did, and your relationship with Frances, originally from the northeast, is a central element of the book. Was it difficult to write openly about your relationship? As a writer, did you find the story of your relationship helpful in providing narrative structure or a narrative hook? After years of being a fly-on-the-wall reporter in China, it was fun to write something personal, since she is my connection to the village. I just finished three weeks of talks in the U.S. and was struck at the expressed surprise that a village named Wasteland could produce an independent, funny, Berkeley-educated lawyer who is also a woman. But anyone who has been to contemporary China will not be shocked to learn that Frances has never weeded a paddy in her life, and opted to continue her career in Hong Kong as I stayed in the village.  Tell us about one of the more colorful characters you encountered in your life in Wasteland or in your travels in the northeast, and how did this person embody the characteristics of someone from that region?The lumberjack Meng Zhaoguo, who claims to have not only had contact with extraterrestrials, but actually impregnated one. I visited him twice: once on his defunct logging commune where the tryst originated, and then at his new workplace on a college campus, where he tended the plant. The latter provided education at the university-affiliated middle school for his children.  Manchuria is a vast region that is seldom visited by foreigners these days, at least compared with China’s first-tier cities. You traveled widely across it to do research for your book. Which specific areas of Manchuria would you recommend that a foreigner visit to get a feel for the region and its history?It’s a great place to travel, because you can cover all of it by rail, and even stay in the Russian- and Japanese-built railway hotels, many of which have been restored to their early 20th-century form. I recommend starting at Manchuria’s de facto border, the First Pass Under Heaven at the Great Wall in Shanhaiguan, and then taking a high-speed train north to Harbin (5.5 hours), home to China’s largest ice lantern festival but also a colonial-era cobblestone street lined with shops that look like they took the train in from St. Petersburg and decided to settle down. From there, head along the former Japanese-run South Manchurian Railway to Changchun (two hours), the former capital of the Japanese puppet state Manchukuo, whose palace and ministerial buildings, built in a style dubbed “Rising Asia,” are open for tours. The Japanese-built South Lake Park is the best I’ve ever run in anywhere in China. North Korea-watchers should detour southeast on a spur line to the Koguryo Tombs on the border in Ji’an, also home to a new cross-border market. But to see a completely different — and wholly modern — face of the region, head south to Dalian (four hours), a beach city along the Yellow Sea known for its Fashion Week, fresh seafood restaurants and traffic jam-free streets.  