By CLAIR MacDOUGALLMARCH 12, 2015
MONROVIA, Liberia — Finda Fallah sat in her tiny one-bedroom apartment, boiling up rice and leftovers with one of the few children in her family still alive.It was the night before Decoration Day, one of the nation’s most important public holidays, when Liberians clean, paint and decorate the graves of their relatives to honor lost loved ones.But this year, after the Ebola outbreak decimated her family, there were no plots for Ms. Fallah to tidy. Burials were banned because of the highly contagious nature of corpses. The only grave Ms. Fallah could visit was that of her brother-in-law, whose funeral led to the infections in her family.The thought of his grave made her angry, especially because her mother, sister, husband, two nephews and her 6-year-old son, Fayiah, were cremated, leaving painfully little to mark their passing.Advertisement“I can’t go outside,” she said the next day, when the holiday came.Decoration Day is a tradition adopted by freed American slaves who in the early 1800s settled in the area of West Africa that became Liberia. The national public holiday, which had its 99th anniversary on Wednesday, is often as much a celebration of life as a memorial to the dead.AdvertisementBut this year, it was a somber affair in the aftermath of the Ebola epidemic. The outbreak disrupted the intimate funeral practices that sometimes involve the bathing of dead relatives, the braiding of hair and the kissing and touching of bodies at burial services.“May we pause to remember all of those who lost their lives during this Ebola crisis; I say they were heroes and not victims,” said the Rev. Christopher Toe, at a church service for Decoration Day on Wednesday. “Had they not died, the international community would not have come. Had they not died the U.S. government would not have sent all the U.S. Marines they sent.”“They did not die in vain,” he added.A handful of deputy ministers and ministry of health staff members sat in the pews of the half-filled Presbyterian church in the heart of the capital, Monrovia, for the national celebration. Members of the United Nations Ebola mission and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention joined them.GUINEASIERRALEONELIBERIAAFRICAMonroviaLIBERIAAtlanticOcean100 milesMARCH 12, 2015
“Today is not an official government of Liberia memorial day ceremony for Ebola victims,” said Tolbert Nyenswah, the head of Liberia’s Ebola response. “Because Ebola is not over.”The countdown until Liberia is officially declared Ebola-free is on. It began on March 5, when the last known Ebola patient, Beatrice Yardolo, 58, an English teacher, was discharged from a Chinese Ebola treatment unit.Ms. Fallah, who herself was infected with Ebola, had to care for her children, nieces and nephews in an elementary school that was turned into a makeshift holding center where people suspected of having Ebola were housed, in squalid conditions, before being taken to one of the few treatment centers in the city at the time.In a damp blue classroom, Ms. Fallah fed and cared for them, trying to separate the sick from the well. She was the only adult caring for seven children. Then the center was ransacked by angry residents in August, and she and her children were left wandering through the vast neighborhood, known as West Point.AdvertisementMs. Fallah still dreams about her little nephew Tamba Nino, who died in a treatment center, rolling around in a long T-shirt, saying, “I’m hungry.”Ms. Fallah believes her psychological survival now depends on forgetting. She bows her head and passes through special routes in the narrow sandy alleyways to avoid the school and the cramped house where she and her family used to live. She tries not to let her eyes dwell on women who remind her of her mother.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While Ms. Fallah survived, she does not know how much longer she can last, having only limited support from a nongovernmental organization that is paying her rent and sponsoring her niece’s school fees. Ebola survivors are now lobbying for more support.“I hope that Decoration Day will be used to reflect on the situation of survivors and the difficulties we still face, with stigma, with our health, with finances,” said Korlia Bonarwolo, a physician assistant who was infected at Redemption Hospital and is the head of an Ebola survivors association.The gates of Monrovia’s Palm Grove Cemetery, surrounded by the city that fans out around its walls, were open, and young men and boys offered services to brush the surface of graves in colorful paint and to rewrite the names of the dead, with their dates of birth and death.Burial is important in Liberian culture, and cremation is an uncommon practice. Many relatives of Ebola victims were afraid that they would not be able to give their loved ones a proper burial once the government took away the bodies.“I want to know where they buried my wife at least so I can clean her grave during Decoration Days,” the husband of one early victim in the outbreak was quoted as saying last spring.The authorities had tried to stop secret burials that were occurring throughout the city. President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf made cremations mandatory, an order that has been lifted since the opening of a safe burial site in Disco Hill, on the outskirts of Monrovia.Wearing white hazmat suits, burial teams had picked up bodies, zipped them up in white bags, and placed them into the beds of pickup trucks, traveling with convoys of police to protect them during the height of the outbreak in August, September and October.AdvertisementDarlington Doe, the team leader of “Safe and Dignified Burial Team 1” — formerly known as a “Dead Body Management Team” — remembers the days when each of the 12 teams picked up as many as 20 bodies a day, many of which were taken to a mass cremation site and burned.“Cremation was a taboo in Liberia; communities were resistant,” he said.Three thousand of the more than 4,100 Liberians who died during the outbreak were cremated, their bones and ashes often thrown together into barrels and left out in the open despite assurances by the government that remains would be handled with care.The ashes were transported from the crematorium in Boys Town to Disco Hill last week and are now housed in 16 black barrels that are sheathed in white, with red ribbons wrapped around them.At Disco Hill, families trickled in to place plastic wreaths and flowers on the clay mounds facing north for Muslims and on graves marked with simple white wooden crucifixes for Christians. Six bodies were buried on Wednesday in the cemetery, which is now the only place people can legally be buried in Monrovia and its surroundings.A group of women and survivors who lost family members but have no grave to visit wailed and wept, placing wreaths at the foot of the closed black iron doors of the concrete hut that now contains the barrels of ashes. Around 10 minutes later they were ferried into a bus and taken back to Monrovia.The Monrovia Journal article on Friday, about the disruption wrought by the Ebola outbreak on Liberia’s Decoration Day, an annual ritual of cleaning and painting the graves of loved ones, misstated the age of Fayiah, a victim of Ebola who was the son of Finda Fallah, who had no plots to tidy this year because her loved ones had been cremated in a government effort to halt the spread of the virus by contagious corpses. Fayiah was 6 years old, not 8 months. The article also misstated the middle name of a nephew of Ms. Fallah who also died of the virus. He was Tamba Nino, not Nilo.A version of this article appears in print on March 13, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Ebola, Thief of Rituals, Leaves No Graves to Decorate.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.