AdvertisementSupported byBy Rick GladstoneUnicef’s Syria representative touched off a minor tempest on Friday by appearing to propose that governments try to talk to the Islamic State, one of the world’s most violent extremist groups, about allowing aid workers to reach children in areas under its control.Unicef, the United Nations Children’s Fund, quickly clarified the remarks by the representative, Hanaa Singer, saying they were misconstrued. What she meant, it said, was that any governments with influence over militant groups in the Syrian conflict should be pressing them to permit aid workers into all areas where access has been denied.“Unicef would like to stress that all parties to the conflict in Syria have an obligation and a responsibility to allow humanitarian access to reach children wherever they are inside the country,” a spokeswoman, Juliette Touma, said in the statement. “This is something we have stated repeatedly since the beginning of the conflict.”The reaction to Ms. Singer’s remarks, at a United Nations news conference in Geneva on the Syria conflict illustrated the hypersensitivities over any dealings with the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which controls parts of Syria and Iraq.The group has beheaded and incinerated captives, kidnapped Westerners and others, including aid workers, plundered antiquities and attracted thousands of foreign fighters. Its brutality and deft use of social media have caused widespread revulsion.ISIS commanders are training child soldiers and subjecting children to videos of beheadings. The group recently circulated a propaganda video that purports to show a child recruit shooting a hostage in the head.Ms. Singer said Unicef and other aid organizations in Syria had often been stymied in their efforts to reach children living in militant-held territory. Sometimes aid can be delivered through intermediaries, she said.Asked at the news conference how Unicef and other aid groups should deal with the group, Ms. Singer said: “They refuse to talk to the U.N., for the time being, they don’t talk to us. But at the same time, it’s not the responsibility only of the humanitarian agencies. This is a political responsibility, and for the political parties to talk, to put pressure and start a dialogue with ISIS.”She said that by political parties she meant other states and “political parts of the U.N.,” and that the purpose should be to “protect the children.”Some news agencies seized on Ms. Singer’s response, and ISIS critics said the remarks seemed to signal a naïveté about a militant group regarded as implacably hostile and duplicitous.“Unicef urges talks with ISIS for aid access,” Al Arabiya, the Saudi-owned satellite news service, said on its Twitter account. Matthew Levitt, a senior fellow at the Washington Institute of Near East Policy, who directs its program on counterterrorism and intelligence, said in a Twitter posting: “Unicef doesn’t get ISIS.”J. M. Berger, a nonresident fellow at the Brookings Institution who specializes in recruiting and social media use by Islamic militant extremist groups, called the idea of talking with ISIS for gaining humanitarian access within its domain “a noble thought, but a terrible, terrible idea.”Ms. Touma dismissed the suggestion that Unicef had wavered from long-held positions at the United Nations on humanitarian access in Syria. She noted that the Security Council had passed resolutions, starting in February 2014, calling on “all parties” to permit aid to flow unfettered to civilians in the conflict.Ms. Touma said that for ISIS to allow humanitarian access, “there has to be pressure by those who have influence.” She called the reaction to Ms. Singer’s remarks a misinterpretation and “a bit of a storm in a teacup.”Advertisement