AdvertisementSupported byBy Steven Erlanger and Jane PerlezLONDON — The “special relationship” with Britain has been a cornerstone of American policy for generations, but in a tough election campaign, David Cameron, Britain’s Conservative prime minister, has distanced himself from the United States on two critically important issues — military spending and China.Mr. Cameron emphasized when he took office five years ago that Britain would be a loyal but not slavish ally of the United States, a popular view here after what is regarded as the fiasco of the Iraq war and the miasma of the decade-long Afghan war. Even within the Conservative Party, there is some skepticism about American leadership, a feeling long shared on the British left.Mr. Cameron hopes to retain office in the May 7 election by focusing on fiscal responsibility, a growing economy and improvements in trade. So he wants not only reduced government and military spending, but also better relations with China, with Britain announcing over Washington’s objections that it intends to be a founding member of Beijing’s new development bank for Asia.“Sometimes for economic growth you have to do what you have to do,” said Robin Niblett, the director of the London think tank Chatham House, citing Mr. Cameron’s wariness about meeting the Dalai Lama and Britain’s soft tone on the pro-democracy demonstrations in Hong Kong, as well as its intention to cut military spending below the NATO guideline of 2 percent of G.D.P.“It reminds voters that Britain’s relationship with America is essential, but does not always have to be a special relationship in lock step,” Mr. Niblett said.Britain’s announcement on Thursday that it intends to join the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which China is largely funding in hopes of becoming the dominant influence in Asian affairs, has bolstered the fledgling bank’s reputation even before it begins operations, analysts said, and will encourage other American allies, like South Korea and Australia, to become members.Membership by Britain, America’s closest ally and the first would-be member from the Group of 7 leading economies, would be a major step toward China’s goal of making the bank a global financial institution rivaling the World Bank.On the military side, senior members of the Obama administration, joined by a number of senior Conservative Party legislators, are pressing Mr. Cameron to spend more on the military, arguing that Russia is on the march and that Britain risks losing further influence if it trims too far.Britain is one of the few countries in Europe to have a serious military and to spend 2 percent of G.D.P. on defense, a guideline to which Mr. Cameron committed himself at last year’s NATO summit meeting in Wales.But military experts assert that Britain is already falling below that percentage, and budget plans for the next five years, should the party regain office, will bring even sharper cuts even as NATO faces new threats from a revanchist Russia.Britain’s military establishment has come out strongly against further projected cuts on top of those of the last five years, and so, now, have senior American officials, like Gen. Raymond T. Odierno, the Army chief of staff.President Obama brought up American concerns that Britain is losing crucial military capabilities, making it a less effective ally, when he met privately with Mr. Cameron in January, in what was otherwise described as a warm meeting between two pragmatic politicians.But as with the Chinese bank, Washington is also concerned that if Britain breaks its pledge on 2 percent, it will encourage other European countries to spend even less than they are spending now. Washington, which already accounts for about 70 percent of NATO’s military spending, wants the Europeans to shoulder more responsibility.The Royal United Services Institute, a research institution on military and security matters, warned this week in a report that Britain would be spending 1.95 percent of G.D.P. on defense in the next fiscal year — excluding spending on operations — and 1.85 percent in 2016-17. To meet the NATO target, defense would need another 3 billion pounds — about $4.5 billion — and by 2019-20, an additional £5.9 billion.The study’s pessimistic scenario sees a cut of 10 percent in real terms for defense over the next four years; the optimistic one sees an increase in spending of about £4 billion a year, but still only 1.75 percent of G.D.P. by 2019. It warned that the combined strength of the army, navy and air force could fall from 145,000 personnel to 115,000 by 2020.The group also noted that since 2010, military spending has decreased 4.3 percent in real terms, mostly represented in cuts to personnel, but similar savings are harder now and new equipment costs are high.Mr. Cameron and his Conservative Party are running an election campaign for May’s vote on their stewardship of the economy and their commitment to a balanced budget and a smaller state. His campaign strategist, Lynton Crosby, is discouraging Tory candidates from talking about much else, to the point that defense is not even mentioned as a possible voter concern.On Thursday, John Baron, a Conservative legislator and former army officer, led a backbench debate on military spending, urging the government to keep to the 2 percent target and condemning both his own party and the Labour Party for refusing to commit to the target in the next Parliament.“Having lectured other NATO members as to its importance, we ourselves should lead by example,” he said.On the Asian bank, the chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, made it clear Thursday that Britain was intent on joining, calling it “an unrivaled opportunity for the U.K. and Asia to invest and grow together.”The Chinese have been promoting “the new Silk Road” binding China and Europe together on trade, and Britain, which is seeking to expand its exports, does not want to offend Beijing.The Chinese Finance Ministry warmly welcomed the British announcement, saying on its website on Friday that if all went well, Britain would formally become a “prospective founding member” of the bank by the end of March.Washington has expressed reservations about the new institution, on the ground that it would not meet environmental standards, procurement requirements and other safeguards adopted by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank for their lending projects.But fundamentally, Washington views the Chinese venture as a deliberate challenge to those postwar institutions, which are led by the United States and, to a lesser extent, Japan.Washington is facing a similar challenge to the postwar order in Europe from Russia, which is why the Americans want NATO to bolster its defenses and deterrence.The National Security Council in Washington implicitly criticized Britain’s decision on the bank, suggesting that it had gone against Mr. Obama’s desires.“This is the U.K.’s sovereign decision,” a spokesman at the National Security Council said. “We hope and expect that the U.K. will use its voice to push for the adoption of high standards.”In South Korea, Britain’s announcement is likely to reignite the government’s internal debate about the merits of membership, said Hahm Chaibong, president of the Asian Institute for Policy Studies in Seoul.“It will give a lot of ammunition to those who have been pushing for it,” Dr. Hahm said. “The Ministries of Trade and Finance have been for it. The United States has been unremittingly negative.”Having South Korea as a founding member would be a considerable coup for Beijing. President Xi Jinping of China has been wooing President Park Geun-hye, who must balance the security that the United States provides to South Korea against the relatively new economic clout of China.Steven Erlanger reported from London, and Jane Perlez from Beijing.Advertisement