By HELENE COOPER and ERIC SCHMITTMARCH 13, 2015
WASHINGTON — The United States has carried out airstrikes against a senior member of the Shabab extremist group who is believed to have helped plan the 2013 attack on the Westgate mall in Kenya, American officials said Friday.Pentagon officials said they were still assessing the results of a drone strike, carried out Thursday against the senior member, Adan Garar, and two other militants near a Somali town west of Mogadishu, not far from the border with Kenya. It was unclear whether Mr. Garar and his associates had been killed, they said.“U.S. military forces conducted a counterterrorism operation in Somalia yesterday, March 12, against the Al Shabab network,” said Col. Steve Warren, a Defense Department spokesman. “We are assessing the results of the operation and will provide additional information as and when appropriate.”For nearly a decade, the United States has been trying to fight the Shabab through economic sanctions, missile strikes and commando raids. Last year, the Obama administration stepped up its efforts, and in September an American drone strike killed the leader of the Shabab, Ahmed Abdi Godane, one of the most wanted men in Africa.AdvertisementAt the time, President Obama drew a direct link between the killing of Mr. Godane, who turned an obscure Somali militant group into one of the most fearsome franchises of Al Qaeda in the world, and American plans for the leaders of the Islamic State in Iraq. The Pentagon press secretary at the time, Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, called the death of Mr. Godane “a major symbolic and operational loss” to the Shabab.AdvertisementBut if the Shabab suffered a major setback with the killing of Mr. Godane, the group’s remaining leaders have vowed to attack in Kenya, Uganda and Somalia.The siege on the upscale Westgate mall in Nairobi, where dozens were killed, heightened American concerns that the Shabab’s desire to inflict casualties extended beyond Somalia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Defense officials cautioned that they did not know yet if the drone strikes were successful in killing Mr. Garar or any other Shabab leaders. In the Godane case last year, it took several days of monitoring cellphone traffic, questioning Somali officials on the ground and poring over reports from both American and British intelligence agencies before the death was confirmed.But Ben Mulwa, 34, who was wounded in the attack on the Westgate mall, said he hoped the claims were true.“We’ve been looking to see that justice be done,” he said.Mr. Mulwa, who is now a coordinator for the Terror Victims Support Initiative, a grassroots group that lobbies for support and compensation for victims of terrorism in Kenya, said the Shabab were continuing to make threats. “This assures us that something is being done,” he said.Mwenda Mbijiwe, a counterterrorism analyst in Kenya, said he believed that the small and tight-knit nature of the Shabab’s top leadership meant that the group would “be affected in a big way” with the loss of Mr. Garar even if it continued to carry out attacks.On Friday, the Shabab claimed responsibility for an attack on a governor’s convoy in northern Kenya near the border with Somalia that claimed the lives of three people.“Those who take over may take a more extreme approach, to say, ‘We are still here,’  ” Mr. Mbijiwe said.Isma’il Kushkush contributed reporting from Nairobi, Kenya.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page A10 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Targets Shabab Unit in Somalia.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.