By ISABEL KERSHNERMARCH 13, 2015
JERUSALEM —  When the first election results begin to flow in on the night of March 17, Israelis may need to get out their calculators.Under Israel’s fractious, multiparty system, the leader of the party that garners the most votes is not guaranteed to become the next prime minister. Instead, victory belongs to the party leader who has the best chance of cobbling together a government coalition with smaller parties in order to control at least 61 seats in the 120-seat Knesset, or Parliament.So while the parties making up Israel’s traditional right bloc and left bloc slug it out, the power may rest with kingmakers like the medium-size centrist parties or small factions representing particular interest groups.Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s conservative Likud Party has been trailing in the polls against its main rival, the Zionist Union, a center-left joint slate led by the Labor Party leader Isaac Herzog and Tzipi Livni, a former minister and chief negotiator with the Palestinians. Who wins and who will earn the right to form a government is uncertain.AdvertisementIn the 2009 election, Ms. Livni’s Kadima Party won 28 seats to Likud’s 27, but she was unable to form a coalition; Mr. Netanyahu received a presidential mandate to form the government. In 2013, Mr. Netanyahu won but was unable to form the government he really wanted. An alliance between two newly emergent parties, the centrist Yesh Atid and the rightist Jewish Home, forced him to leave his longstanding ultra-Orthodox allies out of the coalition.AdvertisementLast December, Mr. Netanyahu called this early election, saying his coalition was unworkable and did not allow him to govern.This time around, there are several new permutations and possible variables:■ Mr. Netanyahu may have an easier time recruiting coalition partners among what he calls his “natural partners” — the right-wing and ultra-Orthodox parties.■ For Mr. Herzog to have a chance he may need the fervently secularist, left-wing Meretz Party to agree to sit with the ultra-Orthodox or with Avigdor Lieberman’s fervently nationalist party, Yisrael Beiteinu.■ Facing an increased electoral threshold likely to bar some smaller parties from Parliament, Israel’s Arab political factions have formed a single ticket that could increase voter support and make it the third-largest party. While the Arab leaders say they will not join any coalition, they could help stop Mr. Netanyahu from garnering the required 61-seat majority.■ If the election ends in a kind of tie, there is the possibility of a unity government in which Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Herzog could theoretically rotate the post of prime minister, each serving two years of the four-year term, as Shimon Peres of Labor and Yitzhak Shamir of the Likud did from 1984 to 1988.■ Complicating matters even further, Mr. Herzog and Ms. Livni, as part of their alliance, have already agreed to rotate the post of prime minister between them should they win.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: In Israeli Elections, Winning First Place Is No Guarantee of Becoming Premier.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.