By EDWARD WONGMARCH 13, 2015
BEIJING — The police in Beijing have put five young female activists under formal detention on suspicion of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” lawyers for four of the women said on Friday. The charge is one that the Chinese authorities have increasingly used in recent years to quell activism and discussion of social and political issues.All the women were being held at the Haidian Detention Center in western Beijing, even though two of them were detained last week in other cities in eastern China, according to the lawyers. Only one of the women, Li Tingting, had managed to meet face to face with a lawyer at the detention center.“She has done nothing that would constitute ‘picking quarrels and provoking trouble,’ ” the lawyer, Yan Xin, said in a telephone interview.Mr. Yan said that Ms. Li looked fine when he saw her on Thursday at the detention center. He said she had told him that the police officers who showed up at her apartment on the evening of March 6 to detain her did not present complete warrants or identification cards.Advertisement“We’ll file a complaint over violations of the law during her arrest,” he said.The five women were first detained in coordinated raids by police officers on the night of March 6 and on March 7 in Beijing, Hangzhou and Guangzhou. The women had been organizing a protest across several Chinese cities that would have been carried out around International Women’s Day, on Sunday, to call for an end to sexual harassment on public transportation. The protesters planned to put stickers condemning sexual harassment on buses, subway cars and other forms of public transportation.AdvertisementThe women all have ties to Yirenping, a nonprofit group with offices throughout China that advocates equal rights for people with hepatitis, H.I.V/AIDS and disabilities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They are also considered young leaders in a nationwide network of women’s rights activists. In 2012, Ms. Li, then a 22-year-old student, organized a campaign to call for officials to install more public toilets for women.Besides Ms. Li, the women under detention are Wei Tingting, Zheng Churan, Wu Rongrong and Wang Man. Ms. Zheng had been detained in Guangzhou and Ms. Wu in Hangzhou, cities where they lived. Lawyers for the two women said they did not know why the two were being held at the detention center in Beijing.At least five other female activists were also detained last weekend but were released after being interrogated.International women’s rights advocates have been circulating an online petition in the past week denouncing the seizure of the women and demanding that the Chinese authorities release them.A woman answering the telephone at the Haidian Detention Center on Friday declined to answer questions and said someone would have to present the questions on paper at the center.Vanessa Piao contributed research.A version of this article appears in print on March 14, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; China: 5 Detained for ‘Picking Quarrels’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.