By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICKMARCH 14, 2015
SHARM EL SHEIKH, Egypt —  Secretary of State John Kerry on Saturday promised a decision soon about a restoration of military aid to Egypt that was suspended after the military takeover of the country in 2013.Mr. Kerry spoke at a government-sponsored economic development conference here in this Red Sea resort city, intending to convey American support for promises of economic liberalization laid out by President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the former general who led the military takeover in 2013.American-made Apache helicopters buzzed low overhead during his remarks as a reminder of the importance that Egypt attaches to American military aid.In the aftermath of the takeover and a crackdown on supporters of the ousted president, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, the Obama administration suspended more than $700 million of the $1.3 billion in annual American military aid to Egypt.AdvertisementThe failure to release all of the aid, including the delivery of some F-16 fighter planes, has become a major issue for Mr. Sisi’s government and among his supporters.AdvertisementThe government is struggling to squash a campaign of attacks against military and police personnel by Islamist militants based in the North Sinai, and Mr. Sisi’s supporters argue that his government needs the heavy weaponry and other aid to help fight the militants.Last month, Egypt used some of its F-16s to carry out an airstrike aimed at Islamist militants in the Libyan city of Darnah, in retaliation for the beheading of a group of Egyptian Christians by allied militants in another Libyan city.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Congress has required the Obama administration to certify that Egypt is taking steps toward democracy or to issue a national security waiver sidestepping that requirement before restoring the military aid.Either step would open the administration to criticism from human rights groups. They argue that Egypt has made little or no progress toward democracy or to correct its rights abuses, sometimes recalling President Obama’s past statements about the importance of such American values.But asked about the F-16s on Saturday, Mr. Kerry appeared to indicate that he expected the full shipment would soon be on its way.“I really expect a decision very soon,” he said. He did not comment on the possibility of either a certification or a waiver.On Friday, Mr. Kerry ended a speech to the conference by saying, “I promise you, directly from President Obama and from this administration, the full commitment of the United States in this journey towards security, shared prosperity, and peace that the Egyptian people both desire and deserve.”A version of this article appears in print on March 15, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. to Decide Soon on Restoring Military Aid to Egypt.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.