The State Council, China’s cabinet, released details on Monday of a plan for Chinese soccer that calls for cleaning up the administration of the sport and increasing the number of young players. It also recommended that the country compete to host a men’s World Cup tournament.China has bolstered its performance in a wide range of sports at the international level, and it won more gold medals than any other country at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing. But the performance of its men’s national soccer team has never lived up to the expectations of Chinese fans.President Xi Jinping of China, himself a soccer fan, presided over a meeting last month of a group charged with proposing overhauls to how soccer is managed in the country. But success is far from certain. The country’s national men’s team is ranked 83rd in the world, just behind Guatemala and Honduras. The women’s team has traditionally fared better, finishing second in the 1999 World Cup and now ranking 13th in the world, down from the Top 10 a decade ago.The shortcomings of the men’s team have variously been attributed to match-fixing, disorganization in the professional leagues, a rigid state-organized sports system and a limited pool of young players. But a strong performance at the 2015 Asian Cup in January in Australia, in which China won its group before being eliminated by the host country that went on to win the event, led to comments by China’s anticorruption body, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, that a crackdown on graft was paying dividends for the sport.The plan for the sport in China includes separating the country’s soccer association from the national sports administration, to give it more autonomy.The medium-term goal is to greatly expand youth involvement in the sport and to bring “the organization and competitive level of the professional league on par with the top class in Asia,” the State Council announcement said, “bringing the men’s national team to the forefront in Asia, and returning the women’s team to the top ranks in the world.”The long-term goals include hosting a World Cup and elevating the men’s team to the top ranks of international competition. The event has been held in Asia only once, when it was played in South Korea and Japan in 2002. Qatar will host the competition in 2022.Under the new proposals, China will widely expand soccer education at schools and universities. There are more than 5,000 elementary and middle schools in China today that provide soccer coaching, a number that is forecast to reach 20,000 by 2020 and 50,000 by 2025, according to the announcement on Monday.The plan also calls for a board to oversee the country’s professional leagues, and for strict enforcement of rules concerning cheating and corruption among players and referees.Chris Buckley contributed reporting.