AdvertisementSupported byBy David D. Kirkpatrick and Merna ThomasSHARM EL SHEIKH, Egypt — President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi knows how to haggle, if he does say so himself.An executive from General Electric recently told him that it would take at least 24 months to finish a utilities project, but Mr. Sisi demanded just eight, he boasted Sunday in a televised address.When he heard the company’s price, he exclaimed, “For God’s sake!” Mr. Sisi continued, asserting he had talked the prices down until the executive pleaded that General Electric could reduce its cost no further — and even then, Mr. Sisi said, he had squeezed out a little more.“I said, ‘Please, again, let’s remove this 100 million,’ and he did! General Electric did!” Mr. Sisi declared, to rapturous applause in a packed conference room here.His tales of his negotiating prowess, which could not be confirmed, are in many ways emblematic of his efforts to turn around Egypt’s sputtering economy: energetic and well publicized, centered on top-down direction from his own office, and with results that remain to be seen.Four years after a popular uprising forced out President Hosni Mubarak — and 20 months since Mr. Sisi assumed power in a military takeover — Mr. Sisi knows he needs to act fast, said Richard Shediac, a managing director of the consulting company Strategy&, formerly known as Booz & Company. His firm was hired by the United Arab Emirates, a major financial backer of Mr. Sisi’s government, to help advise him on overhauling the economy.“The window for the president and Egypt to show change is not long, and he sees that,” Mr. Shediac said in an interview here. “I think he has a couple of years to show that he has made change happen, or we risk going back to noise from key constituencies.”Mr. Sisi spoke at the end of a three-day development conference here that he has made a centerpiece of his economic program. The conference was intended to showcase his promises of investor-friendly reforms, but it also included some reminders of his government’s continued dependence on the Persian Gulf monarchies that backed his ouster of President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates each pledged $4 billion in aid, adding to a total of more than $20 billion they had contributed after the takeover.Egyptian state television and other networks filled the weekend with broadcasts of its sessions. Panel discussions and speeches were sometimes interrupted with chants of Mr. Sisi’s campaign slogan, “Long Live Egypt,” or, in English, “Go, Egypt!” Ibrahim Mahlab, Mr. Sisi’s prime minister, even shed a few tears in the conference’s closing moments, apparently overcome by emotion, and an aide rushed forward with a handkerchief to wipe away his tears.To impress foreign visitors, the provincial government even issued every taxi driver a dark business suit, several drivers said, and two said they were warned of a financial penalty if they wore more casual clothes during the conference. But amid all the cheerleading, some businessmen complained that the government had still done too little to prune back a bloated bureaucracy, unaffordable subsidies and burdensome regulations that have drained its coffers and deterred investment.“New ministers are stuck with old baggage,” Naguib Sawiris, a telecommunications mogul who is one of Egypt’s richest men, told the investment minister, Ashraf Salman, in one panel discussion. “They should have fired all the people from the past,” calling them “slow, inefficient and unable to get anything done.”When the minister began to extol steps taken in the past seven months, Mr. Sawiris shot back, “In the private sector, their seven months is just a day for us.”Economists fault Mr. Sisi for seeking to stimulate growth primarily through state-sponsored “mega-projects” like a plan to dig a new channel for the Suez. Housing Minister Mostafa Madbouly unveiled a plan for a new “administrative capital,” to be built from scratch just east of Cairo. An initial “center city,” he said, would be complete in less than seven years and would include a presidential palace, a diplomatic district, as well as malls, universities and skyscrapers in an urban area that would ultimately be “12 times the size of Manhattan.”But the financing and details remain to be seen.Ragui Assaad, an economist affiliated with the Economic Research Forum in Cairo and the University of Minnesota, said that so far he would give Mr. Sisi’s program about “a B-.”“He is just looking for silver bullets that will restart the economy,” he said, “but it is only going to generate short-term economic activity unless you change the rules.”Mr. Sisi has made some reforms. Helped by declining oil prices, he has trimmed Egypt’s energy subsidies, which have drained more than a quarter of the federal budget in recent years. His government has allowed its official currency exchange rate to float down to the market rate, easing trade and eliminating a black market. And he recently rushed out an investment law providing new incentives and legal protections.After the 2011 uprising, Egypt fell as much as $7 billion behind in its payments to international energy companies that pump its oil and gas, leading many to halt new investment or even some maintenance. But the new government has paid down those debts, and BP Group recently announced plans to invest as much as $12 billion over several years to develop gas reserves in the West Nile Delta.“The fact that we would commit to this now should be viewed as a positive sign,” Bob Dudley, BP’s chief executive, said in an interview here.Mr. Sisi, meanwhile, spent the conference surrounded by burly guards, meeting with diplomats, Arab royals and businessmen.Joe Kaeser, chief executive of the German company Seimens, announced a $4.2 billion contract to build a power plant and a wind-power field, saying that talks had begun three weeks ago with a visit to Mr. Sisi’s office. “In my long career, I think that was the first deal I ever negotiated with a president,” he said.Mr. Sisi, for his part, bragged that he had successfully bargained down Mr. Kaeser’s price as well. “Kindly reduce your profit margin; I need this from you!” Mr. Sisi said he told Mr. Kaeser. And he complied, the president insisted.Advertisement