By MICHAEL FORSYTHEMARCH 15, 2015
HONG KONG — A former top Chinese general who was facing a trial after admitting he took bribes in exchange for promotions and other favors died Sunday of bladder cancer, according to Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency.Until 2012, Xu Caihou, 71, was one of two generals serving as vice chairman of the Communist Party’s Central Military Commission and also held a spot on the party’s elite 25-member Politburo. He became one of the highest-ranking targets of President Xi Jinping’s campaign against official graft after the party announced the investigation into him last June.Accounts of his illness circulated in Chinese political circles in the year before his corruption inquiry was announced.Even in death, a disgraced Chinese official gets no words of sympathy from the state. In a terse announcement, Xinhua said that because of his death, the criminal case against General Xu would not go forward. “It is clear that Xu Caihou took bribes; the evidence is both reliable and ample,” it said.AdvertisementThe website of Liberation Army Daily, an official publication, went much further on Monday, vilifying the dead man. “Thanks to his corruption and personal ruination, Xu Caihou, who has such an illustrious reputation as a general in uniform, ended his lamentable and disgraceful life under guard on a sickbed,” the paper wrote in an article titled “This One Is Already in the Coffin, but the Fight Against Corruption Won’t Stop.”The death of a former senior leader usually gets top billing in China’s state-run news media. But General Xu’s death received little mention and no public condolences, a reflection of his official disrepute. Most papers instead focused on a Sunday news conference by the country’s premier. General Xu was expelled from the Communist Party last June in the midst of Mr. Xi’s anticorruption campaign, in which he has vowed to target top officials like General Xu, the so-called tigers, as well as lower-ranking officials, or flies.In October, military prosecutors said that General Xu had confessed to taking “particularly huge bribes” either in person or through family members, in exchange for promotions and other favors, which were not specified.AdvertisementAs one of the two most powerful generals in China, General Xu was feted by defense chiefs across the globe. In 2009, the United States secretary of defense at the time, Robert M. Gates, met with him at the Pentagon. But after Mr. Xi took office in late 2012, General Xu became embroiled in a crackdown on corruption that is sweeping the military, which has an annual budget second only to that of the United States’ armed forces. This month the military announced that the son of Gen. Guo Boxiong, the other uniformed member of the Politburo during General Xu’s tenure, was among a group of 14 generals being investigated on suspicion of corruption.The announcement of General Xu’s death came three years to the day after a fellow Politburo member, Bo Xilai, was removed from office, igniting one of the most spectacular corruption scandals in modern Chinese history. Days before his March 15, 2012, dismissal, Mr. Bo and General Xu lingered on the stage at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, talking to each other after the other top leaders, there to attend a speech, had left.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.High-level Communist Party members have said that Mr. Bo’s case, as well as the subsequent downfalls of the former security chief Zhou Yongkang and another top party official, Ling Jihua, are linked.The latest person to do so was Zhou Ruijin, a former deputy editor in chief of People’s Daily, the party’s flagship newspaper. In an interview with Caijing, a prominent Chinese business and current affairs magazine, he said the cases were intertwined.“Zhou Yongkang has been accused of being deeply entwined with the Bo Xilai, Xu Caihou and Ling Jihua cases,” Mr. Zhou told the magazine.During China’s annual meeting of the legislature, or National People’s Congress, which also ended on Sunday, a former subordinate of General Xu said that a senior officer in a major military region had once tried to secure a promotion with a bribe of 10 million renminbi, or about $1.6 million, to General Xu. But that was not enough, and the officer paid an additional 20 million renminbi, said Mr. Zhou, the former editor.“Someone like Xu could not have climbed so high in the military hierarchy without the help and support of numerous military and civilian leaders in the regime,” Victor Shih, a professor at the University of California, San Diego, who focuses on finance and Chinese politics, wrote in an email.The South China Morning Post, citing people close to the military and military observers whom it did not identify, said that General Xu may have died days or even more than a week earlier, but that announcement of his death was delayed until after the close of the National People’s Congress to avoid the news distracting from the proceedings there.General Xu was born in 1943 in the northeastern province of Liaoning and spent much of his military career in the region. He was a Politburo member from 2007 to 2012.Chris Buckley contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Ex-General, Charged With Corruption, Dies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.