By MICHELLE INNISMARCH 15, 2015
SYDNEY, Australia —  Struck by a ferocious cyclone, the South Pacific islands that make up Vanuatu were expected to discover widespread destruction and a sharply higher death toll with aerial surveys beginning Monday.The cyclone is thought to have wreaked utter havoc on outer islands of the archipelago when it struck Friday. Driving rain and high seas across the islands destroyed resorts and left yachts and other boats smashed on piers and moorings. Crops have been flattened, and Vanuatu’s natural coral reefs are likely to have been damaged.The aid group Oxfam said in a news statement that about 90 percent of the housing in Port-Vila, the capital, had been damaged.The death toll, which stood at eight, will probably rise sharply as rescuers reach more far-flung areas, aid agencies said.Advertisement“A lot of these islands can only be reached by sea or air,” Alice Clements, a Unicef communications specialist, said in Port-Vila. She said she had heard that on some of those islands, everything had been flattened.SANTA CRUZISLANDSSOLOMON ISLANDSPacific OceanVANUATUPort-Vila200 milesEQUATORPAPUANEWGUINEATUVALUFIJIArea of detailAUSTRALIASydneyNEW ZEALAND1000 milesMARCH 14, 2015
“All this development has been wiped out,” Vanuatu’s president, Baldwin Lonsdale, said shakily Monday in Sendai, Japan, where he had been attending a conference on reducing the risk of disasters. “So this means we will have to start anew again.”AdvertisementHe said in remarks carried by Australian television that he would be heading home Monday and acknowledged that with communications still not fully restored, the extent of damage was not clear.The government declared a state of emergency for the province of Shefa, which includes the capital. Vanuatu, which has a population of about 250,000, is made up of more than 80 islands, some sparsely settled. Islands to the south, especially Tanna, are thought to have been worst affected.Tom Perry, an aid worker for CARE Australia, said Monday by telephone from Port-Vila that people there had started to form long lines for gasoline, and that power to some parts of the capital had been restored.Meetings early Monday will aim to determine where aid is needed most. “Aerial surveys will begin,” he said, “but some of these airstrips are very close to the ocean and may have been damaged.”The Australian Bureau of Meteorology said Tropical Cyclone Pam started in the sea near the Solomon Islands before intensifying and tracking south to Vanuatu. By Thursday, it had sustained winds of more than 125 miles an hour and peak gusts of more than 180 miles an hour.The bureau’s senior meteorologist, Craig Burke, said that satellite imagery showed the cyclone’s center as 18 to 25 miles wide, and that the eye-wall — where a cyclone’s fastest and most destructive winds are concentrated — was spread across an area about 250 miles wide. He called it “one of the most intense, severe tropical cyclones to have affected the southwest Pacific.”AdvertisementWhile it struck Vanuatu on Friday morning, the southern islands were still affected Saturday, Mr. Burke said, before the storm headed toward New Zealand and its intensity dropped.“Vanuatu has a cyclone season,” the Oxfam country director in Port-Vila, Colin Collet van Rooyen, said by telephone. “But local residents say they have never experienced anything like this.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Communications were being restored in the capital on Monday, but aid agencies still had little information on the state of outlying islands, where residents often live in simple thatched homes.Mr. Perry said a small village would normally have a school or church that would provide some shelter against cyclonic winds. “But we have heard that roofs were just blown right off,” Mr. Perry said. “It is critical we get to these places as soon as we can.”Tanna, thought to have been the worst affected island, is south of the island of Efate, where the capital sits, and can be reached only by boat.Australian officials announced plans to help. The foreign minister, Julie Bishop, said Australia would provide about $3.8 million in aid, and Defense Minister Kevin Andrews said two Royal Australian Air Force planes had left for Vanuatu carrying fresh water, blankets, sleeping mats, water purification tablets and hygiene kits.A version of this article appears in print on March 16, 2015, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Flights Over Vanuatu Are Expected to Reveal Cyclone Devastation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.