AdvertisementSupported byBy Chris BuckleyHONG KONG — China’s premier, Li Keqiang, delivered his government’s highest-profile warning yet to Myanmar over violence spilling across the border, when he used an annual news conference on Sunday to condemn the deaths of four Chinese farmers he said were killed by a bomb from a Myanmar warplane.At his news conference in Beijing marking the end of China’s annual legislative session, Mr. Li took up the deaths of the farmers, who were tending a sugar cane field in southwest China on Friday when, according to Chinese officials, the bomb from the plane struck them. The Chinese Foreign Ministry and a military commander have already condemned the cross-border incursion, and so did Mr. Li.“On our side of the Chinese-Myanmar border, some of our country’s residents have suffered loss of life and property,” he said, offering condolences to the dead farmers’ families.“Our government, the Foreign Ministry and military, has made stern representations to the Myanmar side,” he added. “We have the responsibility and the capacity to firmly safeguard the security and stability of the Chinese-Myanmar frontier.”A senior Myanmar official in the presidential office, speaking on the condition of anonymity, denied that one of the country’s planes was responsible for the deaths, The Associated Press reported on Sunday. He suggested the deaths may have been the work of a group attempting to stir up trouble, but he also promised to cooperate with Beijing in dealing with the incident.But Beijing appears to have no doubt that the Myanmar military was involved. On Saturday, a senior Chinese commander, Gen. Fan Changlong, a vice chairman of the Central Military Commission, also warned that Myanmar’s military must prevent warfare with armed ethnic groups spilling from the northern part of the country into China.Late on Saturday, too, a spokesman for Chinese Ministry of National Defense, Senior Col. Geng Yansheng, said in a statement on the ministry’s website that Chinese forces had stepped up their patrols on the border with Myanmar. “If there is another incident of a Myanmar military plane overflying the border or other serious acts that endanger Chinese territorial sovereignty and national security, the Chinese military will respond by taking decisive measures,” Colonel Geng said.The farmers’ deaths were the worst instance yet of recently renewed fighting between the Myanmar Army and armed supporters of Kokang, an ethnic Chinese minority, spilling into neighboring Yunnan Province in China, where many thousands of Kokang refugees have fled. Nine other people were wounded by the bomb on Friday, according to Chinese officials.Advertisement