AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael R. GordonLAUSANNE, Switzerland — Iranian officials questioned Secretary of State John Kerry about a letter that Tom Cotton of Arkansas and 46 other Republican senators issued last week arguing that a potential nuclear accord would not be binding unless it was approved by Congress.“The Iranians raised it,” a senior American official told reporters on Monday, after Mr. Kerry opened a critical round of talks here with his Iranian counterpart. “It was of concern.”Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, also said that his side had pressed the issue.“We see the letter as a political move, but we need to know the U.S. government’s stance on this issue,” Mr. Zarif was quoted as saying by Iran’s state television. The American official declined to say how Mr. Kerry had responded in the closed-door meetings, which lasted nearly five hours.In recent days Mr. Kerry has publicly criticized Republican lawmakers for interfering in the talks and has asserted that they were wrong when they wrote that Congress would have the power to change the terms of an executive agreement that the United States and its negotiating partners are seeking to conclude with Iran.The letter warned that any nuclear agreement could be reversed by the next president “with the stroke of a pen.”“As we have said, these kind of distractions are not helpful,” added the senior official, who noted that the Iranians had also raised the letter in a Sunday meeting between the two sides’ negotiating teams.“The negotiation is about whether Iran can make the necessary decisions to give the world confidence that their program is peaceful,” said the official, who could not be identified under the protocol for briefing reporters.Facing a deadline at the end of this month for hammering out the outlines of an accord to limit Iran’s program, the two sides are holding intensive talks this week in a luxury hotel by Lake Geneva.The Obama administration is hoping that an initial agreement this month would be specific enough to enable the White House to rebuff congressional attempts to impose more stringent economic sanctions on Iran. The deadline for finishing a comprehensive agreement is the end of June.The senior official, however, tried to underscore that even an initial accord was not yet at hand.“Iran still has to make some very tough and necessary choices to address the significant concerns that remain about its nuclear program,” the official said.The official declined to describe the areas of disagreement, but officials have previously said that the remaining gaps include provisions for extensive verification and the speed with which sanctions by the United Nations and others would be lifted.The Iranian negotiators plan to return to Tehran for Nowruz, the Iranian New Year’s celebration, which begins Saturday. And Mr. Kerry plans to meet Ashraf Ghani, the Afghan president, when he visits Washington next week.So if no accord is reached by Friday, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Zarif will meet again later this month to try to complete the agreement.What the United States and Iran want out of discussions over Iran’s nuclear development.The open letter to Iran’s leaders from the Republican lawmakers cautioned that any agreement on Iran’s nuclear program that was not approved by Congress would not be legally binding and could be modified by lawmakers or even revoked by a future president.The Obama administration has made it clear that it does not plan to seek congressional approval for the emerging accord, which is expected to last about 15 years and would remove economic sanctions in return for imposing constraints on Iran’s nuclear program.Mr. Kerry acknowledged in testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last week that without a congressional vote the accord would not be “legally binding.” But Mr. Kerry also asserted there have been many “executive agreements” in that category that were a “necessary tool of American foreign policy.”The talks here include Ernest Moniz, the United States energy secretary, and Ali Akbar Salehi, the head of Iran’s Atomic Energy Organization. Mr. Kerry and Mr. Zarif met one-on-one for about 20 minutes. Mr. Zarif later flew to Brussels to meet with the top diplomats from France, Britain and Germany, three of the United States’ negotiating partners in the talks, and with Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s foreign policy chief.Laurent Fabius, France’s foreign minister, said that “important points remain which are not resolved.”Mr. Kerry and Mr. Zarif plan to resume their talks here Tuesday morning for what is likely to be a marathon series of talks this week.Advertisement