By AUSTIN RAMZYMARCH 16, 2015
HONG KONG — A daughter of the jailed Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim was arrested Monday afternoon over criticism of the country’s judiciary she made during a speech in Parliament, her lawyer said.The arrest in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, of Nurul Izzah Anwar, herself a member of Parliament, heightened questions about whether the country’s sedition laws were being used to muffle dissent.Ms. Nurul Izzah’s father, a onetime deputy prime minister, was sentenced to five years in prison last month after losing his final appeal of a conviction on a sodomy charge, which disqualified him from Parliament.In her speech on March 10, Ms. Nurul Izzah criticized the country’s judiciary in relation to her father’s case. Those comments were cited in her arrest, said her lawyer, Sivarasa Rasiah, who is also a member of Parliament.A British colonial-era law is being used to charge and investigate politicians, activists, academics and students in Malaysia. But a law professor is challenging its constitutionality.Ms. Nurul Izzah is an important figure in the People’s Justice Party, which her father founded. She was expected to remain in detention overnight before a hearing Tuesday morning.Advertisement“Fight for a fair Malaysia!” a post from her Twitter account said Monday. “Allahuakbar! Remanded but never defeated!’’AdvertisementMr. Sivarasa called the arrest an effort to punish her and intimidate others into moderating their criticism of the government.“If a parliamentarian cannot criticize the judiciary, it has major implications for speech in Parliament and raises major questions about the institution itself,” he said.Malaysia’s prime minister, Najib Razak, had pledged in 2012 to retire the sedition law, which dates from Malaysia’s era as a British colony, but last year reversed his position and said it should be strengthened. Critics say his government is increasingly wielding the law as a tool against its opponents. Ms. Nurul Izzah’s arrest follows a series of detentions on sedition charges over the past year of outspoken commentators, a group that includes a cartoonist, scholars and opposition politicians.A version of this article appears in print on March 17, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Malaysia: Lawmaker Arrested After Criticizing the Judiciary.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.