AdvertisementSupported byBy Karen Zraick and Irit Pazner GarshowitzThe Israeli political leader who could prove key to determining who becomes the next prime minister is a popular right-leaning former member of Parliament, and was a longtime member of Benjamin Netanyahu’s party.But Moshe Kahlon, 54, was holding his cards close Tuesday night, saying he had spoken with leaders of the two top parties and would only make his decision after all the votes were counted.Mr. Kahlon may be a career conservative, but he also broke with Mr. Netanyahu in a public spat and started his own centrist party, called Kulanu, in December. In the election on Tuesday, according to the YNet news site, Mr. Kahlon’s slate won 10 seats in the Knesset, or Parliament. Although Mr. Netanyahu’s Likud Party won a solid victory, with 29 or 30 seats to 24 for the center-left Zionist Union, he still needs the support of other parties to form a government. That’s where Mr. Kahlon’s 10 seats can make the difference.Mr. Netanyahu and Isaac Herzog of the center-left Zionist Union both called Mr. Kahlon on Tuesday night to ask for his support.“There is bad blood between the two, but not a complete breakdown of communication,” Nadav Peri, a television commentator, said of Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Kahlon. “There is great optimism among Netanyahu’s associates regarding the ability to quickly establish facts on the ground.”The left, of course, is also vying for Mr. Kahlon’s support.In televised remarks, Zehava Galon, a member of Parliament and chairwoman of the left-leaning Meretz party, called on Mr. Kahlon to team up with Mr. Herzog as a partner in a center-left government.“And if that doesn’t work, then go to the opposition,” she counseled.Israel’s political leaders will now begin the complex choreography of assembling a coalition government. The president will poll party leaders and then ask either Mr. Netanyahu or Mr. Herzog to try to assemble a government that represents a majority of the 120 seats in Parliament.“Through the campaign, it was quite clear that Kahlon is the key person,” said Avraham Diskin, a political scientist, suggesting that he would most likely join Mr. Netanyahu. “Kahlon does have the power to say, ‘No, I don’t want to go with you,’ ” Mr. Diskin added. “Israel, as you know, is a political system full of surprises. We’ll have to wait and see what comes next.”A smiling Mr. Kahlon appeared on Israeli television on Tuesday night.“I will recommend whoever will solve the social crisis,” he said, referring to whom he would support for the premiership.On Israel radio, Mr. Kahlon said: “This election campaign, to my regret, reached levels that we don’t remember. It created rifts and polarization among our people. We stand here on this stage, I stand here as your representative. And I say: Now is the time to heal, to unite; it is not the time for rifts. Now is the time to do what is best for all of us. This evening is about recognizing the good — an evening of modesty and good conduct. I am not arrogant, and I certainly won’t gloat.”Mr. Kahlon was first elected in 2003 and became communications minister six years later. He also served as minister of welfare and social services. His campaign focused on the high cost of housing, unemployment and corruption, issues that resonated with the Israeli public. Earlier this week, Mr. Netanyahu offered him the post of finance minister, which he at least initially rebuffed.At a polling station in south Jerusalem, Shlomo Ben-Gur, 55, who owns a chain of food stores, said he normally voted for Likud but found it hard to do so this year because he had soured on Mr. Netanyahu.“There’s only one issue in these elections: the socioeconomic issue. Nothing else,” he said.During the campaign, Mr. Kahlon spoke infrequently about foreign policy, including negotiations with the Palestinians.His platform promised to safeguard the main blocs of settlements and not allow the return of Palestinian refugees to Israel. But in December, Israeli news outlets reported that he had told a young audience in Tel Aviv that he was not opposed to land concessions if they would bring about peace.Moshe Cohen, a 24-year-old student at Ariel University, said he had decided to vote for Mr. Kahlon because he was disappointed with the other candidates. Mr. Cohen said it was nearly impossible to survive as a young adult or as a newly married couple without parental assistance because of the high cost of living.“Bibi did nothing. On everything,” Mr. Cohen said, referring to Mr. Netanyahu by his nickname. He said he had decided to give Mr. Kahlon a chance because he liked his financial approach.“I have to say that I am voting for him because I am disappointed in the others, not because I believe he is the best,” Mr. Cohen said.Karen Zraick reported from New York, and Irit Pazner Garshowitz from Tel Aviv. Gabby Sobelman contributed reporting from Rehovot, Israel; Carol Sutherland from Jerusalem; and Diaa Hadid from the West Bank.Advertisement