By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEMARCH 17, 2015
GENEVA —  United Nations investigators monitoring the conflict in Syria said Tuesday that they would share details on suspected war criminals with judicial authorities in countries preparing to prosecute them, calling it “a first step” to ensuring accountability.Frustrated by the United Nations Security Council’s paralysis over referring Syria to the International Criminal Court, the panel announced last month that it was considering releasing names from confidential lists of people it had linked to massacres, torture, summary killings and other abuses.Reporting to the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the panel’s chairman, Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, retreated from that position on Tuesday. Instead, he said the panel had opted for a policy of “targeted disclosure.”“We will share names and information about specific alleged perpetrators with state prosecution authorities that are preparing cases to be heard before a competent and impartial judiciary,” he said. “We encourage these authorities to contact us with requests for information.”Three European governments have requested information from the investigators this year, Karen Koning AbuZayd, one of four members of the panel, told reporters in Geneva. She declined to identify the governments or what they had sought.AdvertisementPanel members said they would not respond to “fishing expeditions” by countries seeking names on the confidential lists. Rather, the members said, they would supply information to a judicial investigation into specific individuals and events.AdvertisementThat process would balance victims’ right to truth and the right of the accused to a fair trial, Mr. Pinheiro said, echoing concerns expressed by diplomats that publicity surrounding a release of names could undermine prosecutions.“It is a first step to justice,” Carla del Ponte, a member of the panel and a former chief prosecutor for two international tribunals, said of the information-sharing initiative. She said the focus of inquiries was likely to be on foreign fighters returning from Syria and subject to prosecution under a national jurisdiction.Prosecution of the most senior military and political figures implicated in atrocities would most likely still require an international tribunal, she said. Names of suspects compiled by the panel were derived from information gleaned in the course of more than 3,000 interviews about atrocities in the Syrian war. The names are believed to include individuals directly implicated or having command responsibility.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Panel to Share Details on War Criminals.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.