AdvertisementSupported byLetter From IndiaBy Ellen BarryNEW DELHI — In the afternoon confusion of South Delhi, it seems, nobody took notice of the wraithlike woman struggling uphill to the place local people call “the forest,” one young daughter held in the crook of each arm and a third, a little girl in pigtails, scrambling behind.When she reached the place she was looking for — a trash-strewn indentation in the earth — the woman strangled all three of them, the police said, and laid them on the ground in a row, the 8-month-old tucked between her sisters, ages 3 and 7. Then the woman tore a strip of fabric from her sari and fashioned a noose. She tried to hang herself but only lost consciousness. The story of the mother, Radha Devi, figured in the newspapers for a few days last week, another of the domestic horrors that make up this city’s crime blotter. There was cursory speculation about what it meant: Neighbors said Ms. Devi, 27, was mortified over having no sons, which have traditionally been prized above daughters in India, in part because girls’ parents must provide a dowry, whereas boys are seen as future earners.Yet it was impossible to point to one answer. Ms. Devi had been under psychiatric treatment, something her husband, Raju Singh — a slight, wilted-looking tailor — struggled to make possible in the hours before and after his shift. Educated through the fifth grade and married at 13, Ms. Devi became part of the great tide washing from India’s villages into its cities, hoping to rise out of poverty. Most people struggle to survive. Some get lost altogether.The triple killing landed on the desk of Inspector Ajab Singh of the Delhi Police, who sent detectives to the 10-by-12-foot room the family rented for about $16 a month. The room was windowless, infested with mice and a few steps from a stinking commode. On the wall were children’s drawings, people with elephant ears and bumblebee bodies.Ms. Devi wanted a boy, said the landlady, Vijay Lakshmi, and she slid into a darker place after the birth of a fourth daughter. The family included a 10-year-old, as well as the three girls who died. During her pregnancy, Ms. Devi and her husband traveled to see a doctor who she believed would help her bear a son. When that failed, she still talked about a fifth child, though her youngest girl was listless from underfeeding, the landlady said.“She used to go out and tell people, ‘Take my daughters, take my girls,’ ” Ms. Lakshmi said.Mr. Singh, 32, said he had never pressured his wife for a boy. He said she had disappeared into a catatonic silence so profound that he would brush her teeth for her as she lay in bed. He took her to a psychiatrist, who prescribed an antidepressant and an anticonvulsant, clonazepam, which is sometimes given for panic disorders. When he returned from work at night, he said, the girls would tell him about their mother’s frightening speeches.“She used to talk about killing them,” he said. “She would say, ‘I won’t go home, I’ll go somewhere, I’ll just throw these girls away.’ ” Last week, on the way to a state hospital to refill her medications, she suddenly threw the 8-month-old, Sulena, into a sewage drain, he said. He snatched the baby out and wiped the filth off her, and they continued on their way — he on a bicycle, she and the three girls in an auto-rickshaw. The 10-year-old was at school.They became separated at a red light. The bicycle stopped at the light; the auto-rickshaw shot forward. Ms. Devi’s telephone rang and rang, but nobody answered. Other than that account, the only real information has come from interrogations by the police. Something had pulled Ms. Devi toward the forest, she told them, and when she got there, she was at peace. She said she had dreamed of killing the girls the day before, said Anand Kumar Jha, a sub-inspector on the case. Voices had told her what to do. Inspector Singh was one of the first to see the bodies of the three girls, and he said they looked as if they could speak up at any moment. He seemed weary as he recalled the case. In a neighborhood like this one, he said, “that pressure is always at the back of the mind: how they will provide for girls.”“The first thing that came to my mind,” he said, “is that nobody should live in poverty.”Advertisement