By SAM ROBERTSMARCH 10, 2015
James H. Molyneaux, the self-described “dull old dog of Ulster politics” who for 16 years symbolized Protestant resolve to keep Northern Ireland British, died on March 9 in Killead, County Antrim. He was 94.His death, in a nursing home, was announced by a spokesman for the Ulster Unionist Party, which Mr. Molyneaux joined in 1946 and led from 1979 to 1995.Compared to his bombastic rival, the Rev. Ian Paisley, Mr. Molyneaux was seen as perpetually polite, guileless and unbigoted but, nonetheless, politically unyielding.His mainstream Unionists resisted overtures to reunite with the predominantly Catholic Republic of Ireland and refused to join in face-to-face talks with Sinn Fein, the Irish republican political party. At least twice he was the target of unsuccessful terrorist bombers.AdvertisementIn 1994, Mr. Molyneaux described an Irish Republican Army cease-fire as one of the most “destabilizing” events since the country was partitioned. He later qualified that remark, saying he suspected that the cease-fire was merely a ruse to spur unification between north and south. He demanded that the I.R.A. renounce violence, which it did a decade later.James Henry Molyneaux was born on Aug. 27, 1920, in Killead to William Molyneaux and the former Sarah Gilmore. His father was a poultry farmer. James left school when he was 15 to work on the farm.In 1941, he joined the Royal Air Force, landed in France on D-Day and was among the first British troops to enter the newly liberated Bergen-Belsen concentration camp in Germany.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.After the war, he worked in an uncle’s printing business and went into local politics before representing South Antrim and Lagan Valley in Parliament for nearly three decades. According to political lore, when asked the size of his majority in the previous election, he replied, “38.” To which a colleague in Westminster wished him well running for re-election in what he assumed was a marginal district. Mr. Molyneaux quickly corrected him, explaining that he meant 38,000 — the largest majority in the House of Commons.He spent much of his political career fighting what seemed like a losing battle, comparing himself to “a general with an army that isn’t making anything much in terms of territorial gains but has the satisfaction of repulsing all attacks on the citadel.”To thwart Irish nationalist goals of unification with the Republic of Ireland, he wanted Ulster governed from London, not Belfast. He denounced Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher as a traitor for signing an Anglo-Irish agreement in 1985, which gave Dublin an advisory role in Northern Ireland’s government.He also opposed the Good Friday, or Belfast, Agreement, which was negotiated by his successor, David Trimble. Signed in 1998, it created a complex power-sharing framework between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which is to remain part of the United Kingdom until a majority decides otherwise.AdvertisementMr. Molyneaux was knighted in 1996. The next year he was named Lord Molyneaux of Killead. He had no immediate survivors.Douglas Dalby contributed reporting from Dublin.A version of this article appears in print on March 18, 2015, on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: James H. Molyneaux, 94; Led Unionists in Belfast.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.