By SAM ROBERTSOCT. 14, 2015
Diepreye Alamieyeseigha, a former governor of a Nigerian state who gained notoriety for building extravagant public works and embezzling as much as $55 million in Oil Ministry revenue, spending it on luxuries and homes around the world, died on Saturday in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. He was 62.His death, at a hospital, was announced by Bayelsa, the oil-rich Nigerian state that he governed from 1999 until he was impeached in 2005. The cause was given as complications of high blood pressure and diabetes.Mr. Alamieyeseigha’s health problems resulted from his transfer from a hospital in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, to avoid being extradited to Britain, where he was wanted on money-laundering charges and for skipping bail, according to his successor, Gov. Seriake Dickson. He was also charged with money laundering by the United States.Nonetheless, Mr. Dickson said Bayelsans “are proud of his life and the legacies he left behind.”As governor, Mr. Alamieyeseigha (pronounced al-uh-mess-EE-ya) brought Nigeria’s notoriety as a source of global flimflam to a new nadir a decade ago.AdvertisementAmassing a fortune in foreign bank accounts, he acquired houses in London, California and South Africa and an oil refinery in Ecuador, all while tapping public coffers to build an airport in his hometown and an Olympic-size stadium in the state capital, among other public projects.AdvertisementThe United States Justice Department won a forfeiture judgment against him in 2012 for money laundering and corruption.Justice officials said he had accumulated millions of dollars’ worth of property and bank accounts around the world during his six years as governor, a period in which he was paid a total of $81,000 in salary and declared $248,000 in income from all sources.After Mr. Alamieyeseigha was charged with money laundering in London in 2005, the police found that he had $3.2 million in cash and bank accounts and $15 million in real estate holdings there. Two months later he jumped bail — disguising himself as a woman by some accounts, although he denied that.“Given that Alamieyeseigha had been accused of robbing blind his own people, it seems fair to assume that he would have tried to keep his return as low-key as possible,” Mark Hollingsworth and Von Kemedi wrote in the book “Against the Odds: President Goodluck Jonathan, the Rise of Nigeria as Africa’s Economic Superpower and the Threat of Boko Haram,” published this year. But they added, “Far from it.”Addressing his cheering supporters back home, they wrote, Mr. Alamieyeseigha said: “ ‘I cannot tell you how I was brought here. It is a mystery. All the glory goes to God. Today I am back at my desk, forever committed to serve the people of Bayelsa and Nigeria. I thank the almighty God for his protection.’ ”The state legislature impeached him in December 2005. While he insisted that the accusations of corruption were politically motivated, in 2007 he pleaded guilty to failing to declare his assets, and front companies he controlled were convicted of money laundering.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He was sentenced to two years in prison but, credited with time served, he was imprisoned for just one day. He was pardoned in 2013 by President Goodluck Jonathan, who had been his deputy and had succeeded him as governor. (Mr. Jonathan was defeated in a re-election bid in May.)The United States Embassy said it was “deeply disappointed” by the pardon. It was granted in a country with a reputation for a kleptocratic culture, which has manifested itself in everything from government corruption to millions of emails sent worldwide by scam artists posing as Nigerian bankers seeking the help of unsuspecting people in transferring cash out of the country.AdvertisementDiepreye Solomon Peter Alamieyeseigha was born on Nov. 16, 1952, in Amassoma, a town in the Niger Delta. He trained as a cadet in the Nigerian Defense Academy and joined the Air Force, serving until 1992.After working as an executive for a fertilizer company, he was elected the first civilian governor of Bayelsa as a member of the People’s Democratic Party in 1999. He was re-elected four years later.Nigeria’s new president, Muhammadu Buhari, has vowed to combat corruption and to rehabilitate the country’s image.In its 2014 index of perceptions of 175 corrupt governments, with No. 1 being the least corrupt, the nongovernmental group Transparency International ranked Nigeria 136th.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page B18 of the New York edition with the headline: Diepreye Alamieyeseigha, 62, Ex-Governor Impeached on Corruption Charge in Nigeria .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.