By ISABEL KERSHNERMARCH 18, 2015
A look at how inaccurate exit polls contributed to the surprised reaction Wednesday morning that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had defeated his main rival decisively.JERUSALEM — Israelis woke up to a surprise on Wednesday morning, having gone to bed the night before with the results of their national elections in a near tie.By dawn, it was clear that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had decisively defeated his main rival, Isaac Herzog, and assured himself a fourth term.The cause of the confusion: inaccurate exit polls that showed Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud Party and Mr. Herzog’s center-left Zionist Union winning about 27 seats each in the 120-seat Knesset.Instead, with 99 percent of the votes counted, the Likud had won 30 seats to the Zionist Union’s 24.AdvertisementIt is an election-night ritual in Israel to gather around the television to watch the results of the exit polls broadcast on the three major channels at precisely 10 p.m., when the voting stations close.AdvertisementThe major commercial stations, Channel 2 and Channel 10, made particular efforts to create a spectacle. Channel 2 broadcast from a specially built glass studio in front of the Knesset, and Channel 10 set up a similar studio on a rooftop overlooking Rabin Square in Tel Aviv.On Wednesday, the leading Israeli pollsters who conducted the exit polls were called to account.Mina Tzemach, who together with her colleague, Mano Geva, conducted the poll for the popular Channel 2, appeared again in the studio to explain what had gone wrong. Though Ms. Tzemach’s poll included mock ballots in 60 voting stations serving 25,000 voters around the country, she said an unusually high number of voters refused to participate, particularly in Likud strongholds and in areas with many immigrants from the former Soviet Union, who tend to be wary of sharing their views, a phenomenon that might have skewed the results.Ms. Tzemach said that anger among Likud supporters and their right-wing allies at the Israeli news media, which has been critical of Mr. Netanyahu, may have played a role.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In addition, the exit polls ended at 8:30 p.m., 90 minutes before the voting stations closed. Mr. Netanyahu was appealing to voters to come out and support him with increasing intensity as the day wore on.“We saw that the later it got, the stronger the right became,” Ms. Tzemach said.Camil Fuchs, a professor of statistics who conducted the exit poll for Channel 10 by questioning voters after they had cast their ballot, said he heard the real results when he woke up on Wednesday morning. “I nearly died,” he told the Haaretz newspaper.Mr. Fuchs said that 30 percent of those asked to take part in his poll had refused. “Perhaps some of the Likud voters refused because of their perception that the media is leftist,” he said.Stella Karayoff of Teleseker, the institute that conducted the exit poll for the public Channel 1, told Army Radio that she had not noticed a drop in the number of voters willing to participate in her poll.For many, the real results were more familiar than the projections — whether they were welcome or not.“Anyone hoping to wake up today to the dawn of a new day will wake up instead this morning to another yesterday,” Sima Kadmon, a political columnist, wrote in Wednesday’s issue of the Israeli daily, Yediot Aharonot.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.