By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEOCT. 14, 2015
GENEVA — A United Nations official who investigated allegations that French peacekeepers had sexually abused children in the Central African Republic says she informed the French military authorities within a month of having started her inquiry, giving a possible new twist to a long-running scandal that led to the intervention of Secretary General Ban Ki-moon.The official, Gallianne Palayret, a human rights investigator who led the first inquiries into suspected abuse, said in a Skype interview that she had informed the French peacekeepers’ commanding officer and the unit’s legal affairs officer about the allegations in May 2014. This was the same month that she started interviewing children who might have been victimized and two months before the French authorities have said they first heard about the matter.Ms. Palayret first went public with her assertions Oct. 1 in the French news media. There has been no response so far from France’s Defense Ministry, and her account has not been publicly corroborated by others directly involved.Nonetheless, Ms. Palayret’s assertions, if accurate, would shed new light on a scandal that is the subject of investigations by two United Nations panels and by the French government, and they would raise fresh questions about when the French authorities first learned of the abuse and what action they took.AdvertisementMr. Ban dismissed the head of the United Nations mission in the Central African Republic, Babacar Gaye, this past August in the aftermath of further allegations of sexual and other abuses by peacekeepers assigned to protect civilians in that country, among Africa’s poorest and most unstable.AdvertisementThe child abuse allegations against France’s peacekeepers became public in April when a six-page report compiled by Ms. Palayret was leaked. It detailed how, over five months, French peacekeepers in Bangui, the capital of the Central African Republic, had lured young boys into oral sex in return for food and sometimes money. The testimony she collected also implicated peacekeepers from Chad and Guinea.France’s Defense Ministry said at the time that it had become aware of the allegations only when it received a copy of Ms. Palayret’s report from Anders Kompass, a high-ranking official in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva, at the end of July 2014.However, Ms. Palayret said that she met the colonel in charge of the French peacekeepers in May and June 2014, requesting extra patrols where abuse was suspected to prevent any recurrence. She informed her superiors in the human rights office in Bangui of those meetings, she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The French officers reacted with shock and disbelief, Ms. Palayret said. “They told me: ‘This is hardly possible because if one soldier did this, the other soldiers would kill him. This is not accepted in our ranks,’ ” she recalled.“They said they would take this very seriously, that they would inform Paris, that they would do as I asked to put more patrols and controls” around locations where children said the abuse had occurred, Ms. Palayret said, although she never ascertained whether they had done so.More than a year after the French government said it first learned of the allegations and 16 months after Ms. Palayret says she brought the issue to the attention of French military authorities in Bangui, no charges have been brought.Anger over the abuse case deepened when it emerged that Mr. Kompass’s superiors had pressured him to resign and then briefly suspended him, leading to accusations that they were seeking to cover up embarrassing evidence of abuse and their failure to act on it.Those issues are the subject of separate inquiries by a United Nations office and an independent panel appointed by Mr. Ban. Both are expected to issue their findings in the coming weeks.Ms. Palayret said she had only recently decided to talk about the case because United Nations officials agreed in July to give her whistle-blower status, protecting her from punishment or recrimination. Ms. Palayret, who left Bangui in July 2014, said she had never had contact with Mr. Kompass and had no direct knowledge of what action he had or had not taken over the abuse allegations against French peacekeepers.AdvertisementMr. Kompass has not made himself available for interviews.Ms. Palayret said she had been shocked to receive a telephone call from a French police officer early in August of 2014 asking to interview her and informing her that he had received a complete copy of her report from the United Nations human rights office in Geneva, including the names of child witnesses. “This is extremely dangerous for the kids. What are we doing?” Ms. Palayret said she had asked her superiors in Geneva. Her alarm deepened, she said, over news media accounts in April drawing on leaked copies of her report that included the children’s names.Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 15 about assertions by Gallianne Palayret, a United Nations human rights investigator looking into reports that French soldiers had sexually abused children in the Central African Republic, that she had informed French authorities two months earlier than they have acknowledged misstated the timing of her public revelations. Her assertions were first reported Oct. 1 by France 2, a TV station, not the week of Oct. 4.A version of this article appears in print on October 15, 2015, on Page A9 of the New York edition with the headline: U.N. Official Says French Learned Early of Abuse.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.