AdvertisementSupported byBy Sophia KishkovskyMOSCOW — Valentin Rasputin, a patriarch of the so-called village prose writers who emerged in the Soviet Union in the 1960s to address moral and environmental issues and depict the remains of a rural Russia about to be consumed by industrialization, died here on Saturday. He was 77. He died in a hospital one day short of his birthday after falling into a coma, the Russian Union of Writers said.In a reflection of Mr. Rasputin’s stature, Patriarch Kirill I of the Russian Orthodox Church led his funeral service at Christ the Savior Cathedral in Moscow on Wednesday, and President Vladimir V. Putin paid his respects on Tuesday. The inward-looking worldview that shaped Mr. Rasputin’s writings and public statements has in recent years been mirrored by the positions of Mr. Putin and the patriarch. Mr. Rasputin, who was baptized into the Russian Orthodox Church in 1980, had advocated the prosecution of members of Pussy Riot, the feminist collective that was tried for performing a “punk prayer” at the cathedral in 2012. In 2014, he signed a letter by writers in support of Mr. Putin’s annexation of Crimea. “It seems there are no grounds to believe, but I believe that the West will not get its hands on Russia,” Mr. Rasputin said in a series of conversations that first appeared in the newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya and were published in 2007 as a book called “Valentin Rasputin: Pain of the Soul.” “It’s not possible to drive all patriots to the grave, and there are more and more of them. And if they were driven to the grave, the coffins would rise upright and move to defend their lands.” He also defended Joseph Stalin. In a flurry of commentary after his death, conservatives praised Mr. Rasputin as a keeper of the Russian soul, and liberals, even while praising his writing, expressed concern about his nationalist, Stalinist and anti-Semitic views. For example, he told The New York Times Magazine, in an interview published in 1990, that Jews bore responsibility for the terror that followed the Bolshevik Revolution and that “their guilt is great.” Mr. Rasputin’s books sold millions of copies under communism, and toward the end of the Soviet era he received major state awards. But he and the other village prose writers, with their alternately romantic and brutal portraits of peasant life, were seen by some members of the Communist establishment as deviating from the socialist realism that the state usually demanded of artists and writers. Valentin Grigoriyevich Rasputin was born on March 15, 1937, in the village of Ust-Uda in what is now the Irkutsk region. His parents, Grigory and Nina, were peasants. After completing primary school in the village of Atalanka, he had to travel, alone, to another town to continue his education in the hungry postwar years — an experience he portrayed in the story “French Lessons,” published in 1973.His writing first attracted attention when he was a student at Irkutsk State University and wrote for a youth newspaper during the thaw begun by the Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev after Stalin’s death, when the bounds on expression were relaxed. He continued to work as a journalist after graduating in 1959. But Khrushchev’s agricultural and industrial policies were also a death knell for traditional village life. The fate of Mr. Rasputin’s childhood villages became fodder for one of his most famous works, the 1976 novel “Farewell to Matyora.” The novel is about an island village on the Angara River that is about to be subsumed in the 1960s by construction of the Bratsk hydroelectric plant, and the elderly residents who try to resist resettlement and cannot adapt to city life. After a vivid description of the beginning of spring in the opening chapter, Mr. Rasputin — an ardent environmentalist who fought to protect Lake Baikal, the world’s largest freshwater lake — continues, “Everything was in place, but everything was wrong.” Mr. Rasputin had difficulty working for years after being beaten by street thugs in Irkutsk in 1980. He returned with “The Fire” (1985), and then focused increasingly on essays that reflected his fears about the state of Russia under Mikhail S. Gorbachev’s reforms and, later, in the post-Soviet era. He served in the Congress of People’s Deputies, a legislative body created by Mr. Gorbachev, from 1989 to 1990, and was appointed to the presidential council in 1990. But Mr. Rasputin quickly lashed out against Mr. Gorbachev and co-signed letters with nationalist cultural figures, academics and politicians that provided an ideological basis for the 1991 coup against him.Mr. Rasputin is survived by a son, Sergei, and a granddaughter. His wife, Svetlana, died in 2012, and his daughter, Maria, died in a plane crash in 2006. Kathleen Parthé, the director of Russian studies at the University of Rochester and the author of two books that address village prose, said of Mr. Rasputin in an email, “Like many of Russia’s best-known writers, he was always slightly out of step with the times — too bold in the 1960s and 1970s with his nostalgia for the radiant village past, too critical of the Soviet destruction of the environment around his beloved Lake Baikal, too disdainful of Western-style democracy, too bitter about those he said had brought a millennium-old civilization to an end in 1917.” She added, “As a writer he may have been a spent force, but as a cultural icon who helped legitimize the latest version of Russian authoritarianism,” he was receiving “a very grand send-off.”Advertisement