AdvertisementSupported byBy Aurelien BreedenPARIS — The provocative French comedian Dieudonné M’bala M’bala was found guilty on Wednesday of condoning terrorism after a Facebook message he posted in January suggested sympathy with one of the gunmen in the attacks that killed 17 people in Paris.The court in Paris gave him a suspended two-month jail sentence.Mr. M’bala M’bala was convicted under a new law enacted in November meant to rein in speech supporting terrorism. The law was aggressively enforced by the French authorities in the wake of the January attacks.While the law allows for up to seven years in prison and 100,000 euros in fines, prosecutors in Mr. M’bala M’bala’s case had sought a fine of €30,000, or $32,000, converted into 200 days of jail time if he failed to pay.Just days after the attacks that killed 12 people at the offices of the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, one municipal police officer south of Paris, and four people at a kosher supermarket, Mr. M’bala M’bala wrote on his Facebook page that he felt like “Charlie Coulibaly.”The message, which blended the popular “I am Charlie” slogan with the name of the gunman at the supermarket, Amedy Coulibaly, was posted on a day when millions had rallied around France to condemn the attacks.David de Stefano, one of Mr. M’bala M’bala’s lawyers, said in a telephone interview that they would appeal Wednesday’s conviction.“When you put that phrase back in the context of all the other messages he published on Facebook, you realize that he had a peaceful approach,” Mr. de Stefano said. “Publicly and repeatedly, he paid tribute to all the victims of the attacks and clearly condemned the acts.”The “Charlie Coulibaly” post was one of many controversial statements and gestures the French comedian has made over the years. While he has been convicted and fined dozens of times in the past for anti-Semitic statements or slander, this was the first time he faced a potential jail sentence.Mr. M’bala M’bala will face sentencing in another case on Thursday. In that one, he is accused of inciting racial hatred through comments he made in 2013 lamenting that a prominent Jewish journalist did not die in “the gas chambers.”Advertisement