By NICK CUMMING-BRUCEMARCH 18, 2015
GENEVA — Myanmar is reversing democratic reforms at an accelerating rate in an election year that will define its future, a United Nations investigator monitoring developments in the country said on Wednesday.“There are worrying signs of backtracking, and in some areas, backtracking has gained momentum,” Yanghee Lee, the special rapporteur on Myanmar, told reporters in Geneva, drawing attention to harsh treatment and arrests of people who criticize the government or the country’s politically dominant armed forces.Myanmar officially acknowledges 27 political prisoners, but 78 other activists have been detained on political charges, and 200 more are on trial, Ms. Lee said. Human rights activists face regular surveillance, and some have been imprisoned under outdated defamation and national security laws, with a “chilling effect” on activism, she added.President Thein Sein’s government, which won praise for opening up Myanmar to reform, is preparing for elections this year and is promising a referendum on amendments to the Constitution, but government leaders appear to be stonewalling calls to make the Constitution more democratic, Ms. Lee said.AdvertisementIn a report submitted to the United Nations Human Rights Council this month, Ms. Lee noted “a growing atmosphere of fear, distrust and hostility,” urging the government to adopt more equitable development policies and “reverse the current slide towards extreme nationalism, religious hatred and conflict.”AdvertisementMyanmar’s more than one million Rohingya Muslims remain a particular concern, Ms. Lee said, reporting “abysmal” conditions in camps set up for Muslims displaced by violence in Rakhine State last year. The Rohingya are the target of severe discrimination in Myanmar, where Buddhists predominate.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A government decision to invalidate temporary identity cards at the end of the month increases vulnerability for the 800,000 Rohingya Muslims who hold them, she said.Four proposed laws on race and religion submitted to Parliament would cement discriminatory attitudes and prevent Myanmar from becoming a pluralist society, Ms. Lee warned in her report.Ms. Lee said she faced hostile demonstrations in all of the towns she visited during her last trip to Myanmar, in January, when a prominent extremist Buddhist monk, Ashin Wirathu, denounced her as a “whore” for her views on race and religion.Ms. Lee said she was confident that the government would ensure her security when she returned to Myanmar later this year, but last week, after she submitted her report to the Human Rights Council, the monk attacked her again, urging the public to “teach the beastly woman a lesson.”Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the United Nations human rights chief, expressed disgust on Wednesday with the monk’s “clear incitement to violence” and emphasized the government’s responsibility to ensure Ms. Lee’s safety, said his spokesman, Rupert Colville.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: World Briefing | Asia; Myanmar: Democratic Reforms Are at Risk, U.N. Monitor Warns.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.