By AZAM AHMED and TAIMOOR SHAHMARCH 18, 2015
LASHKAR GAH, Afghanistan —  A huge car bomb rocked the capital of Helmand Province late Wednesday morning, killing seven people and wounding more than 45 in an attack aimed at a gathering of officials in a secure Afghan government compound.The blast took place near the governor’s offices in Lashkar Gah, devastating several buildings in the area, including a meeting hall and parts of a government media center. The spokesman for the governor, Omar Zwak, was among those wounded in the attack. Other officials were also wounded, including two district governors and the director of agriculture for the province, according to provincial officials.The dead were all civilians, officials said.The bomb was packed into a minitruck that was driven onto a street beside the governor’s compound, and then it exploded. Police officers guarding the area were on edge late Wednesday, refusing entry to vehicles as cleaners swept debris from the streets.Officials had gathered at the compound to discuss the issue of child trafficking in Helmand, said Mohammad Jan Rasolyaar, the deputy governor of the province, who was unhurt. The governor was in Kabul when the attack occurred, he added.Advertisement“The enemy is trying to get revenge,” Mr. Rasolyaar said.Wednesday’s bombing was the third suicide attack on Lashkar Gah in the past 10 days. On Monday, a car bomb detonated near the gates of the city, killing five people, including two police officers. About a week before that, a suicide car bomber killed seven people and wounded 23 on the outskirts of the capital.AdvertisementAfghan officials say the violence is in response to a military campaign underway in the northern part of Helmand Province, a Taliban stronghold that has long been among the most violent regions in the country. Afghan and coalition officials have hailed the operation as a success so far, claiming that Afghan forces have cleared significant insurgent strongholds.But such assessments are impossible to verify, especially as most of the remaining international forces are consigned to bases and no longer reporting from the field.Interviews with residents and leaders in districts where the anti-Taliban operation is focused, in particular Sangin District, contradicted some of the official depictions of the mission’s success. Some accused the security forces of abusing or killing civilians.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Instead of leaving their bases to clear areas of Taliban fighters, the soldiers are firing mortar rounds into villages, killing civilians, according to Haji Mira Jan, the deputy head of the Sangin District Council. Over the past month, the operation “has made zero gains,” he said.Mohammed Hashem, a resident of Sangin who lives close to the district’s center, said he could no longer tell whether the government was a friend or an enemy. He said soldiers were forcing women and children from their homes before destroying the buildings with bulldozers — with all of their belongings still inside.“We may as well just join the Taliban,” he said. “At least then we can die fighting.”Another Sangin resident, who declined to give his name for fear of reprisal, said the government had destroyed his home and orchard. He said that he had been forced to relocate to Lashkar Gah for now, but that he would return soon for the poppy harvest, when he can earn money.Seated near a used-car dealership in Lashkar Gah amid a crowd of other refugees, the man said the Afghan forces had barely killed a single Taliban fighter.“They are even killing our sheep and hens,” he said. “And they tell us it is because the Taliban have taken control of our areas.”At least one provincial security official made similar assessments. The official said that the police were doing the majority of the fighting and that few areas had been cleared of Taliban.Advertisement“The situation is terrible,” the official said.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: 7 Civilians Die in Bombing Targeting Afghan Officials.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.