By SOMINI SENGUPTAMARCH 18, 2015
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is putting Israel on a collision course with its allies, the Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations said Wednesday, warning that if Mr. Netanyahu succeeded in forming a new government, he would further isolate his country.“He is putting himself and the Israeli government, if he succeeds in forming it, in a complete collision with the international community, including the United States and Europe,” said Riyad Mansour, the Palestinian ambassador. “There’s a global consensus on a two-state solution.”A day before Israelis went to the polls and gave Mr. Netanyahu a chance for a third consecutive term as prime minister, he tried to sway anxious voters by assuring them he would never oversee the establishment of a Palestinian state, despite his earlier endorsement of the two-state solution.Mr. Mansour said Mr. Netanyahu’s volte-face would only further isolate Israel in the world.The Palestinians have tried for months to leverage Europe’s frustration with Israeli actions, and the ambassador on Wednesday suggested that the Palestinians were considering what to do next to ratchet up pressure on their rivals.A look at how inaccurate exit polls contributed to the surprised reaction Wednesday morning that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had defeated his main rival decisively.“We will be strategizing and planning things,” he said. “If Prime Minister Netanyahu is going to stick to fighting all of us, then all of us need to defend ourselves and fight back.”AdvertisementThe Palestinians failed in their bid, last December, for a Security Council resolution that would have set a deadline to establish a sovereign Palestinian state. The United States, along with Australia, voted against it; the American ambassador, Samantha Power, called the resolution “deeply imbalanced” because its deadlines failed to address Israel’s security needs.AdvertisementMr. Mansour said advancing another Security Council resolution to spur the creation of a Palestinian state would make sense only if the United States “goes along with such an idea.” Council diplomats said Wednesday that it was too early to discuss anything of the sort.The Palestinians could also bring the issue to the broader membership of the General Assembly, where they enjoy wide support, or join other international organizations. A 2012 General Assembly resolution recognizing Palestine as an observer state gives them the right to do that. They could initiate a session that denounces Israel’s settlement activity on the West Bank, for instance. The Palestinians have already played one of their strongest cards: In January, they joined the International Criminal Court and submitted documentation on what they say are Israeli war crimes. Mr. Mansour said the Palestinians had more to share with the court prosecutor, who has already opened a preliminary examination.The Palestinians will join the court on April 1, and will be able to refer actions by Israel in Palestinian territories to the tribunal. The prosecutor must ultimately decide whether to open an official investigation, let alone prosecute.Wasel Abu Yousef, a senior Palestinian official, said on Tuesday that the Likud party’s victory in the Israeli elections would mean a continued block in the political situation.“For the prosecutor, the decision to open a full investigation will depend in large part on the quality and quantity of the evidence available,” said David Bosco, a professor at American University who studies the international court. “The more good information that Palestine provides, the better the chance of a full investigation.”The Palestine Liberation Organization has tried other tactics to pressure Israel. In early March, the leadership council of the P.L.O. called for curtailing security cooperation with Israel, but a final decision has yet to be made.Mr. Mansour said Wednesday that the P.L.O. executive committee was to meet Thursday to discuss its options.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The United States remains Israel’s principal champion at the United Nations, though differences have emerged lately. Those differences surfaced Monday night at the opening of an exhibition at the General Assembly building that traces the Jewish people’s connections to the territory of Israel.“For thousands of years, the Jewish people maintained a constant presence in the land of Israel — watching empires rise and fall and conquerors come and go — until 1948 when the modern State of Israel was reborn,” said the Israeli ambassador, Ron Prosor, at the opening of the exhibition, sponsored by Israel, the United States and Canada.Ms. Power, the American ambassador, added a caveat. “While this exhibit focuses on the Jewish people’s longstanding ties to the land, it does not deny others who also have their own history or connection with the land,” she said. “Nor does it in any way change the United States’ deep commitment to a peace process in pursuit of a two-state solution.”An earlier version of this article omitted two of the sponsors of an exhibition at the General Assembly that traces Jews’ connections to the territory of Israel. In addition to Israel, it was sponsored by the United States and Canada.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.