By ALAN COWELLMARCH 18, 2015
LONDON —  Prosecutors in Serbia said on Wednesday that eight men suspected of having participated in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, Europe’s bloodiest slaughter since World War II, had been arrested. The arrests were described by prosecutors as the first by the Serbian police of anyone accused of doing the killing at Srebrenica, where 8,000 Muslims died.The arrests apparently represented a widening of the prosecution beyond high-level officials and commanders. They also seemed to be part of a Serbian attempt to come to terms with the recent past as the authorities in Belgrade, the capital, pursue membership in the European Union.Police officers seized the men in several places across Serbia, and prosecutors accused them of killing more than 1,000 Bosnians at a warehouse in Kravica, near Srebrenica — a name that has become a byword in modern European history for genocide.Bruno Vekaric, Serbia’s deputy war crimes prosecutor, said the case was the first related to people directly involved in the killings.Advertisement“We have never dealt with crimes of this magnitude,” he said. “It is very important that Serbia take a clear stance toward Srebrenica through the judicial process.”AdvertisementHe added, “We have sent a clear message that the Srebrenica victims, perpetrators or even potential war crimes will not be forgotten.”The police had initially put the number of suspects at seven, arrested early Wednesday. But Mr. Vekaric later said that an eighth man had been arrested during the day in the northern city of Novi Sad.The seven men initially reported to have been arrested were identified only by their initials, and the police were also said to be pursuing suspects in neighboring countries. Mr. Vekaric said five more suspects were still at large.The massacre took place over several days after Serbian forces overran Srebrenica, which had been designated as a United Nations “safe haven” under the control of Dutch soldiers during the fighting and ethnic cleansing that marked the breakup of the former Yugoslavia.Some of the most prominent figures of the era, including the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, are standing trial in separate cases at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague, where they are facing charges including genocide.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Serbian officials said the latest arrests were the first of people accused by Serbian authorities of killing Bosnians who had been rounded up, their hands bound, before the massacre. The tribunal in The Hague has prosecuted several low-ranking Bosnian Serbs in connection with the killings. The new suspects are likely to be tried in Serbia, not in The Hague, because the tribunal will soon close, officials said.In 2007, a war-crimes court in Serbia convicted four former Serbian security officers from a paramilitary unit called the Scorpions of killing six Bosnian men from Srebrenica near the village of Trnovo around the same time as the massacre. But the judge, Gordana Bozilovic-Petrovic, said there was no evidence to tie the killings to the slaughter in Srebrenica, 90 miles away.The newest arrests are likely to be closely followed in parts of the former Yugoslavia. “This has already had a major impact on the people here and it will be very important in the process of reconciliation in the region,” said Novak Vuco, a legal officer in the prosecutor’s office in Belgrade.“The hope is to have the indictments ready before the June anniversary of the breakup of former Yugoslavia,” he said.Advertisement“I’m not a politician, but I imagine that this willingness to confront its own past will be a huge step for Serbia on its way to joining the European Union,” Mr. Vuco said.Joanna Berendt contributed reporting from Warsaw.A version of this article appears in print on March 19, 2015, on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: Serbia Arrests Eight Suspected in 1995 Srebrenica Massacre.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.