

      By JODI RUDOREN

MARCH 20, 2015

When Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel first endorsed the concept of two states for two peoples between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River in 2009, a top adviser said he had “crossed a personal Rubicon.” In statements just before and after Tuesday’s election, Mr. Netanyahu seemed to be crisscrossing it. Here is a look back at what Mr. Netanyahu has said on the issue.
Related Article

When Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel first endorsed the concept of two states for two peoples between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River in 2009, a top adviser said he had “crossed a personal Rubicon.”

In statements just before and after Tuesday’s election, Mr. Netanyahu seemed to be crisscrossing it.

Here is a look back at what Mr. Netanyahu has said on the issue.
First elected in 1996 on a promise that he would reverse a freeze on 
the expansion of most Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, Mr.
 Netanyahu was an aggressive builder of settlements in his first term who opposed an independent Palestinian state.“This is the land of our forefathers,” he said in 1997, “and we claim it to the same degree that the other side claims it.”First elected in 1996 on a promise that he would reverse a freeze on 
the expansion of most Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, Mr.
 Netanyahu was an aggressive builder of settlements in his first term who opposed an independent Palestinian state.“This is the land of our forefathers,” he said in 1997, “and we claim it to the same degree that the other side claims it.”A little more than two months after he returned to the premiership in
 2009, Mr. Netanyahu went to Bar-Ilan, a conservative bastion of 
so-called religious Zionism, and stunned many supporters in his speech 
there by embracing the two-state concept. But he set clear limits: 
“public, binding and unequivocal Palestinian recognition of Israel as 
the nation-state of the Jewish people.” “In
 my vision of peace, in this small land of ours, two peoples live freely, side by side, in amity and mutual respect,” he said. “Each will have 
its own flag, its own national anthem, its own government. Neither will 
threaten the security or survival of the other.”In 2010, Mr. Netanyahu acceded to pressure
 from the Obama administration for a 10-month moratorium on construction
 of settlements. Near the end of that period, negotiations restarted 
with President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority, after a 
two-year hiatus, but they broke down, in part because the construction freeze was expiring.“If 
the Palestinian leadership will say unequivocally to its people that it 
recognizes Israel as the homeland of the Jewish people,” Mr. Netanyahu 
said in a speech to Parliament
 in October 2010, “I will be ready to convene my government and request a
 further suspension of construction for a fixed period.”Secretary of State John Kerry cajoled Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Abbas, also known as Abu Mazen, back into talks in the summer of 2013, but they, too, collapsed, in April.In October, Mr. Netanyahu met with President Obama at the White 
House. “I remain committed to a vision of peace of two states for two 
peoples based on mutual recognition and rock-solid security 
arrangements,” the Israeli leader said. For
 most of the campaign leading up to Tuesday’s election, Mr. Netanyahu 
hardly spoke about settlements or a Palestinian state, emphasizing 
instead the Iranian nuclear threat.
 That changed in the final stretch, as opinion polls showed the 
center-left Zionist Union catching up with his party, Likud, and then 
surpassing it.Mr. Netanyahu made a blatant appeal for votes from the right wing.In
 a newsletter distributed in synagogues on March 7, a Likud leader wrote
 that the prime minister had declared the Bar-Ilan speech “null and 
void,” and that his “entire political biography is a fight against the 
creation of a Palestinian state.”When Israeli reporters inquired 
as to whether Mr. Netanyahu was, in fact, reversing his Bar-Ilan stance,
 Likud said the next day via the messaging app WhatsApp: “Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu said that in the situation that has been created in the Middle
 East, any area that will be cleared will be grabbed by radical Islam 
and the terror organizations supported by Iran. Therefore, there will be
 no withdrawals and no concessions. This thing is simply not relevant.”But when the left-leaning newspaper Haaretz published an article
 saying that Mr. Netanyahu had declared the Bar-Ilan speech irrelevant, the prime 
minister’s office insisted that he had “never stated such a thing.”A week later, at a right-wing rally in Rabin Square in Tel Aviv, Mr. 
Netanyahu repeated his pledge that there would be “no withdrawals” and 
“no concessions.” The next day, in a video interview published on NRG, a
 right-leaning Israeli news site, he made similar comments — and took 
them a step further.“I think that anyone who is going to establish a Palestinian state today and evacuate lands is giving attack ground to the
 radical Islam against the state of Israel,” he said. “This is the 
actual reality that has formed here in recent years. Anyone who ignores 
this is sticking his head in the sand.”Asked if that meant a 
Palestinian state would not be established if he were prime minister, 
Mr. Netanyahu said, “Indeed.” (The New York Times previously translated this as “correct”; the words are very similar in Hebrew.)Two days after the elections, Mr. Netanyahu tried to clarify, or perhaps change, his tack 
again. He repeated the same points in three separate interviews with 
international broadcasters.“I haven’t changed my policy,” he said on MSNBC.
 “I never retracted my speech in Bar-Ilan University six years ago 
calling for a demilitarized state that recognizes the Jewish state. What
 has changed is the reality.”Speaking to Fox News,
 he said that Mr. Abbas of the Palestinian Authority had "made a pact with the Palestinian terrorist organization, Hamas, 
that calls for our destruction."He added later, “I haven’t retracted my position.”An earlier version of this article misstated the day that a newsletter quoting a Likud leader was distributed in synagogues.  It was Saturday, March 7, not March 8.Advertisement