AdvertisementSupported byOpen SourceBy Robert MackeyAmid tense negotiations between Greece and its European creditors, the eyes of the German media remained firmly focused Thursday on the Greek finance minister’s middle finger — specifically on the question of whether a two-year-old video clip of him extending that digit in Germany’s metaphorical direction was real or fake.Three days after the minister, Yanis Varoufakis, first denied having made the obscene gesture during a talk in Croatia in 2013 — telling a conservative German pundit that a widely circulated clip of his remarks had been “doctored” — the host of a late-night satirical program stepped forward Wednesday to claim that his crew had indeed faked the video, using green-screen technology and a body double, as a prank.Asked to comment on this latest turn in the unfolding “Fingergate” scandal, which has focused populist rage in Germany over the Greek debt on Greece’s new finance minister, Mr. Varoufakis told Reuters TV in Athens on Thursday that he had been vindicated. “Now it’s quite clear that it was doctored, as I said,” Mr. Varoufakis said. “The German people,” he added, “deserve better media.”The video under discussion was a 17-second clip taken from an hourlong lecture that Mr. Varoufakis, an economist, gave at the 2013 Subversive Festival in Zagreb, long before he joined the Greek government. The video shows him telling a group of Croatian radicals that Greece should have simply defaulted on its debts in 2010 and told the German government to deal with the consequences.At that stage in the crisis, Mr. Varoufakis can be heard saying in the complete recording of the talk posted on YouTube by the Croatian organizers of the event, Greece should have announced that it was defaulting on its debt, like Argentina did, “and stick the finger to Germany and say, ‘You can now solve this problem by yourself.’ ”However, when Mr. Varoufakis was asked about the remark, and his accompanying gesture, by Günther Jauch of Germany’s ARD channel on Sunday, he seemed to stun the host by insisting that the clip had been “doctored” and denying that he had ever made the obscene gesture known in German as the Stinkefinger.After the broadcast, the festival staff in Zagreb undermined that defense by saying that Mr. Varoufakis had indeed made the gesture caught on camera, although they argued that his comments had been perfectly justified, given the German government’s position in the debt crisis. Late Monday, Mr. Varoufakis seemed to suggest that by “doctored” he meant just that the remarks had been taken out of context.The debate over the clip then took a strange twist on Wednesday when the German satirist Jan Böhmermann posted what appeared to be a detailed confession on YouTube to faking the gesture. In it he said that his crew had digitally altered the recording of the 2013 talk, fabricating the obscene gesture through computer-generated imagery, and had the fake video uploaded to the web as if it were genuine by the Croats.By way of explanation, Mr. Böhmermann said that he had devised the prank to expose the ridiculousness of German anger at perceived slights from Greece over the debt talks. “Devastating Europe two times within a century, but going nuts when somebody’s giving us the finger,” he observed. “Objective debate is utterly out of the question. When a Greek gives us the finger, we totally freak out, because we are Germans.”Addressing the editorial staff of Mr. Jauch’s political talk show, Mr. Böhmermann added: “Yanis Varoufakis is wrong. You did not falsify the footage. You simply took it out of context and gave him the runaround so that average Germans could pursue their passion for being angered.”That apparent admission by Mr. Böhmermann, the host of the ZDF late-night show “Neo Magazin Royale,” was eagerly greeted online by supporters of the finance minister in Germany and Greece who argued, under the hashtag #Varoufake, that Mr. Varoufakis was owed an apology by Mr. Jauch and the conservative tabloid Bild, which had called him a liar.The finance minister posted a link to the satirist’s video on the affair on Twitter, and asked if Mr. Jauch planned to apologize.On Thursday, however, suspicions that Mr. Böhmermann’s confession might itself have been an elaborate hoax were confirmed by his channel, ZDF, which clarified that his work was indeed satirical in nature — and joked that it should perhaps carry a warning label.Despite the channel’s statement, as the video confession spread across the German-speaking world, observers who missed it spent hours arguing about whether the video of Mr. Böhmermann’s crew inserting the raised finger into the clip of Mr. Varoufakis was itself real or fake.Mr. Böhmermann released a YouTube statement on Thursday, tongue firmly in cheek, in which he called the accusation that the video was a “fake fake fake fake fake” absolutely false.He also mocked the German media’s obsession with the clip in a sarcastic aside.Tracked down in Zagreb, Martin Beros, the editor who put together the original recording of Mr. Varoufakis’s talk, told Reuters that the clip found on YouTube, and played over and over in the German media, “is the original, undoctored, unmanipulated video that I edited.”“Having edited the original footage,” he added, “I can confirm there is a middle finger being raised by Varoufakis.”Reflecting on what it all means, Leonid Bershidsky, a Bloomberg View columnist in Berlin, suggested that the way the video was edited and presented on Mr. Jauch’s show was indeed misleading.“Saying that Greece should have defaulted five years ago, instead of taking on massive debt to Germany and the other architects of its bailout, is not the same as suggesting Greece should not pay those debts now,” Mr. Bershidsky observed. The way the video was edited by ARD “made it look as though Varoufakis was suggesting the latter,” which was incorrect.That said, Mr. Bershidsky added: “Varoufakis’s barefaced lie on the Jauch show was just as troubling. How does one negotiate with a partner who has no problem denying on camera what can be easily proven?”Advertisement