AdvertisementSupported byBy Azam AhmedKABUL, Afghanistan — Matiullah Khan, whose rise from local militia commander to powerful regional police chief left him one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in southern Afghanistan, was killed on Wednesday in a targeted suicide bombing in Kabul, officials said on Thursday.From his beginnings as an illiterate highway patrol commander in Oruzgan Province, Mr. Khan started a militia operation that made millions of dollars securing military coalition supply convoys through a decade of war and turmoil. He obtained so much influence during his years as a private commander that even before 2011, when he was anointed police chief of Oruzgan by President Hamid Karzai, who hailed from his Popalzai tribe, he could freely appoint government officials in the province.The Afghan government remained silent about Mr. Khan’s death on Wednesday night and through much of Thursday, referring all questions to the spokesman for the Interior Ministry, who did not respond to requests for comment. Accounts of Mr. Khan’s killing obtained from members of Parliament and other officials varied, though Mr. Khan was said to be in Kabul on official business, staying at a downtown hotel, the Safi Landmark.Around 8 p.m., he was walking in the streets of Kabul’s Police District 6 when a person wearing a burqa approached and detonated a suicide vest, according to a senior Afghan security official in Kabul, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing investigation. Officials who saw Mr. Khan’s body said his chest had been wounded by shrapnel.The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack on Thursday afternoon, a seeming insurgent success after trying to kill Mr. Khan at least six other times. Still, while the attack bore all the hallmarks of an insurgent hit job, some warned that Mr. Khan had numerous rivals within the government.An outpouring of condolences followed news of Mr. Khan’s death, even from people who in the past might have criticized his heavy-handed influence.Dost Mohammad Nayab, the spokesman for the governor of Oruzgan, said it “will take 14 years to fill the gap he leaves behind.” Hajji Mohammad Essa, an elder in Tirin Kot, said, “He was like a mountain for us.”For years, Mr. Khan enjoyed unparalleled influence in Oruzgan, where he gained a reputation as a fierce enemy of the Taliban. Villagers and elders came to ask his assistance or seek his guidance.He became a classic symbol of the American-backed strongman turned government official, a hallmark of the long war in Afghanistan. Like his counterpart in Kandahar Province, Lt. Gen. Abdul Raziq, who is widely accused of human rights abuses and running illicit businesses, Mr. Khan enjoyed the support of coalition military officials, who found him an indispensable ally in their fight against the Taliban.“He was representative of a new breed of warlords,” said Anand Gopal, the author of the book “No Good Men Among the Living: America, the Taliban, and the War Through Afghan Eyes.” “These are people entirely created by the international presence.”Mr. Khan first came to power as a commander for the now defunct Afghan highway police. When that group was disbanded, he retained the loyalty of a number of its members who continued working for him as private security along the highway.During those years, Mr. Khan worked extensively with the American and Australian Special Operations forces who fought in Oruzgan. He helped secure the highway that countless convoys traversed, earning millions in contracts to safeguard the international forces who shuttled goods between Kandahar and Tirin Kot, the capital of Oruzgan. He also sent his men on missions with them to upend Taliban-controlled areas.But Mr. Khan was dogged by accusations of aiding, and profiting from, drug smugglers who traveled the same highways, and of running an unregistered, illegal protection force. Over the years, he denied both allegations.Mr. Khan came to dominate the local government even before he was folded into it, undermining the very institutions that the Americans were trying to build in Afghanistan. Some locals fear what will happen now that he is gone.“The death of Matiullah Khan is a big blow to the people of Oruzgan,” said Hajji Sayed Ali, an elder from the Dehrawoud district. “He was strong against the Taliban and actually secured the province.”Like others, Hajji Ali saw Mr. Khan’s absence as a harbinger of Taliban advances in Oruzgan, which has been troubled by heavy violence in the past few months.“The Taliban will come again, and the districts will fall into their hands,” he said. “He was not only good at security, but was good at resolving issues among the tribes.”But Mr. Khan’s tribal relations were not always positive. His uncle, Jan Muhammad Khan, a close ally of Mr. Karzai, presided over the crackdown on several rival groups during his time as the governor of Oruzgan. But those ties also brought Mr. Khan to the attention of the political elite in Kabul.Despite his reputation as a strongman, Mr. Khan talked of reconciliation and engagement with the tribes of Oruzgan. He was known to donate to various charities in Tirin Kot, and tried to cultivate a reputation as a reformed political leader.But he also exemplified the struggle to cultivate a professional cadre of leaders that the West has desperately tried to create, not merely those who have the power and resources to rule.Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Jawad Sukhanyar from Kabul.Advertisement