By JOE COCHRANEMARCH 19, 2015
JAKARTA — An Indonesian court on Thursday postponed a hearing for two Australians facing execution for smuggling heroin, as government officials said it could take months to resolve legal appeals by the men and several other people sentenced to die for drug crimes.Just two weeks ago, it appeared that a total of 10 people convicted by Indonesian courts of drug-related offenses — all but one of them foreigners — would soon face firing squads, a situation that drew protests from Australia and elsewhere. But a flurry of 11th-hour legal challenges has delayed the executions indefinitely.Indonesia has come under intense international pressure since putting five foreigners to death in January for drug offenses. Those executions, the country’s first since 2013, came after President Joko Widodo’s government declared narcotics a “national emergency” and vowed to speed up executions of dozens of condemned drug offenders, most of them foreigners.On Thursday, the State Administrative Court in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, gave lawyers for Andrew Chan, 31, and Myuran Sukumaran, 33, until March 25 to prepare their legal challenge against Mr. Joko’s rejection of their requests for clemency.AdvertisementMr. Chan and Mr. Sukumaran were part of a group of nine Australians arrested in Bali in 2005 and convicted of trying to smuggle 18.5 pounds of heroin off the island. The two have since expressed remorse, and their defenders have portrayed the crime as youthful foolishness.AdvertisementGovernment lawyers argue that no one has recourse under Indonesian law to challenge the president’s sole prerogative to accept or reject a request for clemency. But T. Mulya Lubis, the Australians’ lead defense lawyer, said Mr. Joko had not examined Mr. Chan and Mr. Sukumaran’s case files before rejecting their requests.“While there may be no legal right to challenge the clemency decision, we have to try, because we are trying to save their lives,” Mr. Lubis said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two Nigerians among the group of 10 scheduled for execution are also challenging Mr. Joko’s rejection of their clemency rejections, while a Frenchman and a Ghanaian are asking the Indonesian Supreme Court to review their convictions.Earlier this week, the Supreme Court agreed to a judicial review of the death sentence handed down to the one woman in the group of 10, a convicted drug smuggler from the Philippines.Lawyers for a Brazilian man in the group, meanwhile, are trying to get a stay of execution for their client and have transferred him to a mental institution, arguing that he has schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, as diagnosed by Brazilian and Indonesian doctors.Indonesian officials have said that they wanted to execute the 10 convicts, who also include an Indonesian and a Nigerian who have exhausted their legal appeals, at the same time. They have completed preparations for isolation cells and a field for the firing squads on a remote prison island off the southern coast of Java.On Wednesday, however, H.M. Prasetyo, Indonesia’s attorney general, said the government would wait until legal proceedings for all 10 convicts were concluded before carrying out the executions.“If they were not executed simultaneously, it would create further problems for us,” he was quoted by The Jakarta Post as saying.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.