By JODI RUDOREN and SEWELL CHANOCT. 14, 2015
Responding to a wave of Palestinian knife attacks in recent days, Israeli police have increased security and roadblocks across the country, particularly in Arab areas of East Jerusalem.JERUSALEM — The Israeli authorities erected roadblocks and checkpoints in some Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem on Wednesday and deployed hundreds of police officers and soldiers on the roads and buses, a response to a series of Palestinian knife assaults that the government called a “wave of terrorism.”Even with the intensified security, at least two assaults were reported Wednesday.In the late afternoon, Israeli forces fatally shot a Palestinian teenager who a police spokeswoman said had rushed toward them with a knife at the Damascus Gate of the Old City. Several Palestinian witnesses said they had seen the teenager, who was wearing military-style fatigues, have an argument with his father and run toward the gate, but that he had not attacked anyone.A few hours later, an attacker stabbed and wounded a woman about 70 years old as she was about to board a bus near the central bus station in West Jerusalem, according to the police. A police officer saw the assailant with a knife and shot him, the police said. It was not immediately clear if he was killed.Seven Israeli Jews have been killed this month by Palestinian assailants, including three on Tuesday in Jerusalem: two in an attack on a bus at the juncture of Jewish and Arab areas, and one pedestrian in an ultra-Orthodox neighborhood who was rammed by a vehicle and then hit with a meat cleaver.AdvertisementAn estimated 30 Palestinians, several of them attackers killed by the authorities, have died in the violence, most of it centered in Jerusalem.AdvertisementPalestinians have called the new security measures by the Israeli authorities a disproportionate response of collective punishment that will only worsen the tensions.“East Jerusalem is the capital of Palestine,” Saeb Erekat, chief negotiator for the Palestinian Authority, said on Voice of Palestine radio. “If they think that they can reach security with these measures, they are wrong. The Palestinian people will continue to defend themselves. We don’t have an army, and no one can compare between us and the Israeli Army, but we will defend ourselves with all what is available.”After an emergency cabinet meeting on Tuesday night, the Israeli government directed the police “to impose a closure on, or to surround, centers of friction and incitement in Jerusalem, in accordance with security considerations.” It also authorized the deployment of 300 security guards to patrol public transportation.The public security minister, Gilad Erdan, approved steps on Wednesday that would make it easier for civilians to obtain gun permits. Several Israelis, he said, had helped the police stop assailants.In Jabel Mukaber, a Palestinian area of hilly roads in East Jerusalem, where the two bus attackers on Tuesday were from, the police closed one of three entrances to the neighborhood. Another was half-closed. Some residents were stopped for questioning, but others were waved through.“More than 50,000 people live here, and they are punishing the entire village,” complained a man who asked to be identified by his nickname, Abu Anas, and who said he was trying to take his teenage son to a health clinic. “This is a racist decision and will only bring about more violence in their neighborhoods.”The new security measures seek to halt a series of seemingly spontaneous acts by young people unconnected with any formal political movement, as many observers have expressed alarm that the situation threatens to spiral into a third intifada, or uprising.AdvertisementBut in the daily newspaper Maariv, the columnist Ben Caspit, a frequent critic of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said that the Israeli leader was “dividing Jerusalem” and that the “partial blockade” on Arab neighborhoods “will not last and certainly will not stop stabbers.”Alon Ben-David, writing in the newspaper Yediot Aharonot, said, “The last remnants of the illusion of the unified Jerusalem are being erased.”He continued, “It is true that an absolute majority, perhaps even 99 percent, of the Palestinian population is not participating in the current confrontation, but a few dozen terrorists are enough to unravel the last seams of the coexistence illusion.”Also in Yediot Aharonot, the military affairs columnist Alex Fishman warned, “This terrorism by individuals could become civil war: Jews against Arabs.”Secretary of State John Kerry, in remarks at an event Tuesday night in Cambridge, Mass., sponsored by Harvard University’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, said that he had been in touch with Mr. Netanyahu and the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, over the weekend and that “we’re working on trying to calm things down.”Mr. Kerry also said he intended to visit the region “soon at some point appropriately and try to work to re-engage and see if we can’t move that away from this precipice.”The perception gap between Palestinians and Israelis was on stark display Wednesday at the United Nations.The Israeli ambassador, Danny Danon, called on Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to denounce what Mr. Danon described as Palestinian incitement, and said its cessation was required to “alleviate this dangerous situation.” The Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations, Riyad H. Mansour, told reporters that his delegation wanted an international protection force deployed in the Old City and other areas to ensure the safety of Palestinians from Israeli attack.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the Damascus Gate on Wednesday afternoon, the Israeli police said that officers had spotted a young man in fatigues who seemed nervous, and that as they approached him, he had charged at them with a knife. He was killed on the spot, the police said.AdvertisementA crowd of Palestinians quickly formed behind the police barriers as scores of Israeli officers stood around the teenager’s body. After days of similar shootings by Israeli forces, the Palestinians expressed outrage at what they called a barrage of bullets they had seen. Some accused the police of planting a knife next to the body after the shooting.“They killed him, more than 20 bullets hit his body, and this is only because he was Palestinian,” said Mohammed Jayusi, 27, one of more than 100 people who stood behind police barriers waiting for the teenager’s body to be removed from the scene.Israeli officials have defended the new measures as proportionate and necessary. “First, the goal is to calm people,” Interior Minister Silvan Shalom, who is from Mr. Netanyahu’s Likud Party, said on Israeli radio. “After that, maybe to take more in-depth steps. You can’t, right this minute, take steps without first making plans, without preparation and training.”He promised that “those neighborhoods that were not involved will not be affected,” but he added that “there will also be punitive measures that will be very dramatic” for those responsible for the violence.Mr. Shalom blamed the Palestinians for abetting the violence. “There is no reason for a 13-year-old boy to take up a knife and commit such an act,” he said. “It’s only because he was instilled with hatred from kindergarten to school age. They are told that Jews have no right to live here, or any right to live at all. And this incitement has to stop.”He also said that he had decided to revoke the residency status of 19 residents of East Jerusalem because the authorities suspected that they were involved in the recent attacks. The move would also revoke benefits like health insurance for their families.“Residency was revoked in the past, but not on a large scale,” Mr. Shalom said on Wednesday. “The idea now is to do it immediately. Anyone who took part in an act of terror should not be a resident of the State of Israel. It’s my decision.”In Jabel Mukaber, cars were turned back at one of the neighborhood’s entrances. Ahmad Jaber, 26, a construction worker, said he was trying to go to the house of an Israeli just beyond the checkpoint to pick up some aluminum. Instead, he had to drive a circuitous route to the one exit that was open — a 40-minute journey instead of the usual few minutes.Advertisement“They were very rude, and they told me to turn around,” he said of the border guards.At another exit to the neighborhood, where border guards had set up a checkpoint, Walla Qasem, 24, who was wearing a beige hijab and a long black coat, was 20 yards away when an officer barked at her in Hebrew, “Put your hands up and keep them up.”It took only a few minutes for him to look through her small black handbag, but it frightened her.“I was very scared they were going to make me take my veil off,” said Ms. Qasem, who was waiting to be picked up for a driving lesson.“He asked me about the ring. He said, ‘What is that?’ ” she said, referring to the band she received for her engagement a few days ago, on a finger still showing henna from the celebration.She added, “Because they’re carrying these long guns, I was very scared.”In Issawiya, the site of frequent clashes between young Palestinians and Israeli forces, troops bolstered security at a checkpoint that has been in place on and off since an Israeli gas station was vandalized last fall.An army jeep joined an armored border police vehicle on a rocky plateau overlooking the area, and more than a dozen officers — some from the military, some from the blue-uniformed regular police force and some in border-police khaki — held rifles as they inspected cars going in and out.“It’s a difficult situation, it’s not convenient for anyone,” said one member of the border police force, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not permitted to talk publicly. “It’s not what we want, it’s what we need to do.”Jodi Rudoren reported from Jerusalem, and Sewell Chan from London. Reporting was contributed by Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem, Rick Gladstone from New York and Somini Sengupta from the United Nations.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.