By MICHAEL M. GRYNBAUMAPRIL 15, 2016
Megyn Kelly’s coming broadcast special has a new name, a new time and a new connection to her bête noire, Donald J. Trump.Fox announced on Friday that Ms. Kelly’s prime-time showcase — considered a major crossover moment for the Fox News cable anchor — would be broadcast on May 17, right before the debut of “Coupled,” a new dating show by the reality-show impresario Mark Burnett. His “Apprentice” turned Mr. Trump into a television star. The audience for Ms. Kelly’s show could provide a powerful lead-in for the “Coupled’’ premiere.The special, which Fox is calling “Megyn Kelly Presents,” had been originally scheduled to be broadcast on May 23. Ms. Kelly is hoping to secure Mr. Trump as a guest for the program, which would most likely lift ratings and signal an end to her monthslong feud with the Republican presidential candidate. Roger Ailes, the Fox News chairman, will be the senior executive producer of the show.The anchor spoke with Mr. Trump for an hour this week in Manhattan, in what Ms. Kelly called “a chance to clear the air.” Mr. Trump has derided Ms. Kelly since a debate last August, when she questioned his derogatory remarks about women. At the meeting on Wednesday, Ms. Kelly and Mr. Trump discussed the possibility of an interview, but the candidate has not yet committed.AdvertisementMs. Kelly’s contract with Fox News expires next year and she has said that she will consider leaving the network.Bill Geddie, a longtime producer of Barbara Walters’s popular prime-time specials, will produce Ms. Kelly’s broadcast special.Advertisement“Coupled,” Mr. Burnett’s new dating series, involves a group of bachelorettes who are flown to the Caribbean and presented with a selection of single men from whom to choose. Unlike many dating shows, the contestants will be provided with smartphones, so viewers can follow their texts in real time. No word yet on whether Mr. Trump will make a cameo appearance.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.