By AMIE TSANGMARCH 29, 2017
Laurence D. Fink, the founder and chief executive of BlackRock, has cast his lot with the machines.BlackRock, the largest fund company in the world, plans to consolidate a large number of actively managed mutual funds with those that rely more on algorithms and models to pick stocks.The move is the most explicit action by a major fund management firm to try to take advantage of the increasing opportunities in lower-cost computer driven funds.About $30 billion in assets, or 11 percent of the firm’s active equity funds, will be included. The funds will focus on strategies that adopt a more rules-based approach to investing. Seven of BlackRock’s 53 stock pickers are expected to step down, but some will stay on as advisers. At least 36 employees connected to the funds will leave the firm.“The democratization of information has made it much harder for active management,” Mr. Fink said.AdvertisementCould this be the end of the cult of the brainy mutual fund manager?“These findings reflect an extensive and pervasive pattern and practice of discriminatory and illegal credit practices across multiple lines of business within the bank, resulting in significant harm to large numbers of consumers.”— The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, in its evaluation of Wells Fargo under the Community Reinvestment Act, a 1977 law intended to promote lending in low-income neighborhoods in the United States.AdvertisementThe failing score comes just as the lender is trying to rebuild its reputation after a scandal over sham accounts — on the same day, Wells Fargo agreed to pay $110 million to settle a class-action lawsuit on the matter.The ride-hailing company published its first report detailing the composition of its work force.The basics: It is overwhelmingly white and male. Only 36 percent of its staff are women. (That figure shrinks to 22 percent in the leadership ranks.)Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company forcefully repudiated its past — its workplace culture and image had become a problem after a string of scandals — and said its intense, masculine culture went too far.“What has driven Uber to immense success — its aggression, the hard-charging attitude — has toppled over. And it needs to be shaved back,” said Liane Hornsey, the company’s recently appointed chief of human resources.David Einhorn, the activist hedge fund manager, has called on General Motors to carry out a stock split that he says would end years of underperformance in the share price, The Financial Times reports.The automaker has rejected the plan — and four new directors he nominated — setting up a showdown for the annual shareholder meeting.Mr. Einhorn wants G.M. to issue one class of shares, which he estimates could trade at $17 to $22, that will pay a dividend to satisfy income investors. The other class of shares would trade higher and would entitle its holders to all additional earnings, like stock buybacks, according to The Wall Street Journal.AdvertisementGeneral Motors said that the stock-split plan would put its credit rating at risk. That was later confirmed by Standard & Poor’s, the rating agency.The carmaker also said that Mr. Einhorn’s plan “would not help G.M. sell more cars, drive higher profitability, or generate cash flow.”G.M. has been trying to cut costs and has been buying back shares in an effort to placate investors who are unhappy with the performance of its stock, Reuters reports.• Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain will invoke Article 50 on Wednesday, beginning the formal process of negotiating the country’s exit from the European Union. Just hours before the letter starting the two-year process was to be delivered, the Scottish Parliament approved plans to request a referendum on an exit of its own: independence from the United Kingdom.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.