By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSDEC. 1, 2016
Black Friday deals and postelection confidence helped pull November auto sales in the United States out of their recent slump — and increased the chances that 2016 could set a record for new vehicle sales.Total sales were expected to rise 4 percent for the month to 1.37 million units, according to Kelley Blue Book. That would be the highest November for United States sales on record, beating the previous record of 1.32 million set in 2001.Bill Fay, Toyota division general manager, said November’s sales were so good that the industry might even break last year’s sales record of 17.47 million.“I think it will be right around last year’s record, maybe a little bit less,” Mr. Fay said. “But I think either way everybody will sign up for a lifetime of this.”AdvertisementSales at General Motors increased 10 percent over November 2015. Ford’s sales were up 5 percent, and Toyota and Hyundai both saw 4 percent sales increases. Honda’s sales were up 6.5 percent and Nissan’s sales rose 7.5 percent. Even Volkswagen, which has struggled all year because of its diesel cheating scandal, had an increase in sales of 24 percent.AdvertisementFiat Chrysler bucked the trend, with sales falling 14 percent as it made big cuts in sales to rental car companies. Other automakers were expected to report sales later on Thursday.Higher incentives enticed buyers who sat out much of the fall. July was the last month that sales increased over the same period in the previous year.The average discount per vehicle last month was near $4,000, up by $600 from the same month last year, said Jeff Schuster, senior vice president for forecasting at the consulting firm LMC Automotive.Automakers and dealers have always flooded the airwaves with holiday ads in December. But Black Friday is taking on increasing importance. Since 2013, sales during the weekend after Thanksgiving have been nearly double the sales during a typical November weekend, according to car shopping site Edmunds.com. Before 2013, automakers only saw a 39 percent increase in sales that weekend.“Dealers and automakers clearly have found a way in recent years to break through the Black Friday clutter and connect with more car shoppers,” said Jessica Caldwell, Edmunds’ senior director of industry analysis. An offer for $10,000 bonus cash on a 2016 Kia K900 was among the Black Friday deals Edmunds cited.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Because automakers seem to be willing to discount, Mr. Schuster said the industry probably will have a strong December and probably will break last year’s records.“I don’t think they’re necessarily going to pull back with all the holiday deals in December,” Mr. Schuster said.Automakers said:■ Sales at G.M. rose 10 percent to 252,644. Its Buick, GMC and Cadillac brands all had double-digit percentage increases in sales, while Chevrolet sales were up 8 percent.Advertisement■ Toyota’s sales rose 4 percent to 197,645. Luxury Lexus sales were down 1 percent, but Toyota brand sales rose 5 percent.■ Ford’s sales rose 5 percent to 197,574. Lincoln brand sales were up 19 percent thanks to the new Continental sedan and the redesigned MKX SUV.■ Fiat Chrysler’s sales fell 14 percent to 160,827. All brands saw double-digit percentage declines except Ram, which was up 12 percent on strong sales of pickups and the ProMaster commercial van.■ Honda’s sales rose 6.5 percent to 122,924, a November record for the company. Luxury Acura sales dropped 5 percent, but Honda brand sales were up 8 percent. Honda’s best seller, the Accord sedan, had sales rise 6 percent.■ Nissan Motor’s sales were up 7.5 percent to 115,136, which was a November record.■ Hyundai’s sales rose 4 percent to 62,507, a November record.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Automobile Sales Benefit From Postelection Surge.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.