By AMIE TSANGMARCH 23, 2017
One of the biggest bank robberies of all time has shown what could be the next front in cyberwarfare.The United States attorney’s office in Los Angeles is said to be examining the extent to which the North Korean government aided and abetted a heist in which $81 million was stolen from the central bank of Bangladesh in February 2016.Federal prosecutors are building cases that would target Chinese middlemen who prosecutors believe helped North Korea orchestrate the theft, according to The Wall Street Journal, which earlier reported the potential charges.Using Swift, the global payment messaging system, the hackers persuaded the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to move money from the Bangladesh bank to accounts in the Philippines, where much of it disappeared.AdvertisementPresident Trump pledged that his business empire would forgo new deals abroad during his tenure. Instead, the organization is bringing the foreign deals home.AdvertisementThe company, now largely run by Mr. Trump’s oldest sons, has been pursuing a downtown Dallas hotel project with a real estate firm that has deep Turkish roots.Alterra Worldwide, the firm that would own the hotel and team up with the Trumps, has business ties to Russia, Kazakhstan and at least two dozen other countries. It has worked with an array of companies based in tax havens and done business in countries that have complex or tense relations with the United states, including Turkey.Its president, Mukemmel Sarimsakci, calls himself the “Turkish Trump.”Related reading: Eric Danziger, chief executive of the Trump Organization’s hotel business, spoke to The New York Times about the effect of the presidency on potential deals.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“That’s really hard to answer,” he said. “No one is calling us and saying, ‘Hey, because Donald Trump is president, I want to do a hotel with you.’”If you are a start-up struggling to round up investment at home, it seems logical to turn to places with loose purse strings.And plenty of American firms have done just that. Many start-ups have given Chinese firms owned by state-owned companies or with connections to Chinese leaders stakes in some cutting-edge American technology with potential military applications.Beijing is encouraging Chinese companies with close government ties to invest in American start-ups specializing in critical technologies like artificial intelligence and robots, according to a new white paper commissioned by the Defense Department.This has rung alarm bells in Washington, at a time when some Republicans are calling for tighter regulation of foreign takeovers.“We believe that populism’s role in shaping economic conditions will probably be more powerful than classic monetary and fiscal policies (as well as a big influence on fiscal policies).”— A Bridgewater report on populism, by Ray Dalio, Steven Kryger, Jason Rogers and Gardner Davis.• Jay Clayton, Mr. Trump’s nominee to run the Securities and Exchange Commission, has a confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking Committee. His family owns a stake in a private company that sells services directly regulated by the agency, but he has promised to recuse himself from any work at the S.E.C. that could affect the company’s finances. Mr. Clayton has also promised not to participate in matters that directly affect his former clients, including Goldman Sachs, Pershing Square and Valeant Pharmaceuticals.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.