By JOHN KOBLINDEC. 1, 2016
CBS’s stand-alone streaming app is adding the network’s most valuable property: National Football League games.The network announced Thursday that it struck a deal with the N.F.L. to stream football games broadcast by CBS, including during the playoffs. Games will be available for streaming beginning Sunday.For CBS, this is a boon for its $6-a-month app. CBS debuted it two years ago, and streams shows like “The Big Bang Theory,” “Survivor,” “The Price is Right” and “I Love Lucy.” In the coming months, CBS will introduce spinoffs of “The Good Wife” and “Big Brother” to the service, along with a new “Star Trek” series. But without the N.F.L., the streaming package lacked one of CBS’s most popular assets.CBS said in July that the app has about a million subscribers; it also said earlier this year that it expected that number to increase to 4 million subscribers in the next five years.AdvertisementCBS All Access subscribers will be able to stream the game that is being broadcast by their local CBS affiliate, as well as playoff games and several of next year’s Thursday night N.F.L. games.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Adding the most-watched programming on television to the most-watched network on television will be a powerful combination as we continue to grow CBS All Access into the future,” said Leslie Moonves, CBS’s chief executive.The N.F.L., which has seen steep ratings declines in prime-time games this season, has been toying with various digital experiments recently. Earlier this year, the league signed a deal with Twitter to live stream its Thursday Night Football games.AdvertisementThe deal also comes when many traditional TV networks are making greater efforts to stream their products. In October, CBS signed a deal to join a YouTube live-streaming service that is expected to debut next year and cost $25 to $40 a month. Last month, Hulu signed its part owners 21st Century Fox and Disney’s cable networks to join a live streaming service that it also plans to roll out next year.A version of this article appears in print on December 2, 2016, on Page B11 of the New York edition with the headline: N.F.L. Games Come to CBS App.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.