AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Quentin WebbNever mind Frankenfoods: The China National Chemical Corporation’s takeover of Syngenta will need Frankenfinancing.If successful, the Chinese company’s near-$44 billion purchase of Syngenta, the world’s top agribusiness company, would be a real milestone, even by the increasingly acquisitive standards of the People’s Republic. It will also call for a monstrous funding package both in Switzerland, where Syngenta is based, and back home.ChemChina, as the company is known, is moving fast under its chairman, Ren Jianxin. Last year, he invested $7.7 billion in Italy’s Pirelli. Already this year, he has taken a stake in Mercuria, the commodity trader, and acquired the German machinery maker KraussMaffei. Now, Mr. Ren is offering 480 Swiss francs a share for Syngenta. The outlay would total roughly $46 billion, including $2.6 billion of net debt.To get a sense of Mr. Ren’s boldness, consider this: Thomson Reuters data records just a handful of cash takeovers that have topped $40 billion, including Anheuser-Busch, AT&T Wireless, Genentech, TXU and Alcan. And there have been just three $40-billion-plus deals involving private buyers: Dell-EMC, Heinz-Kraft and the disastrous leveraged buyout of the American utility TXU. Excluding acquisitions in Hong Kong, the Syngenta offer is also worth nearly as much as China’s four biggest outbound takeovers to date combined.Though HSBC and Citic Bank are providing acquisition financing, the question is how to fund the deal in the long term. Syngenta itself could shoulder some of the burden. Analysts expect earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, for the coming year to total a little more than $2.8 billion. Cranking debt up to a buyout-style 6.5 times those earnings would let the target assume $15.8 billion more in bonds and loans. That looks doable, if not cheap. Seven-year bonds issued by Platform Specialty Products, a similarly indebted chemicals group, yield about 12 percent.That just leaves ChemChina needing to scrape together the remaining $28 billion to complete the deal, which values Syngenta at more than 16 times the pretax earnings. The group had cash of 29.8 billion yuan, or $4.5 billion, as of the end of September, and total debt of roughly 232 billion yuan, filings show. So it will need the help of China’s big banks. These lenders in turn can tap the Shanghai bond market or wealthy individuals through so-called wealth management products. Banks will draw comfort from the fact that the buyer is wholly owned by China’s central government. Even then, its financing package looks genetically modified.Quentin Webb is an associate editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement