AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie RogersThere is perhaps no creature more vulnerable to scrutiny — or capable of fiercely scrutinizing others — than the teenage girl.For girls, navigating the world while staying happy, accepted and — yes — popular has always been a complicated process. But social media has added a broadcast element to girlhood, one in which the once-fluid notion of popularity comes with tangible metrics.At least that’s the theory of two 28-year-old women, Casey Lewis and Liza Darwin, who this week sent Clover, an email newsletter, into hundreds of teenagers’ inboxes. They hope Clover will allow girls to catch up on the news, express themselves and learn about one another in a private space.Both women have digital publishing chops: Ms. Lewis left her job at Teen Vogue in December, and Ms. Darwin is a former editor at the culture and fashion magazine Nylon. The speed of the Internet took its toll, as both said in an interview that they had grown tired of writing so-called clickbait headlines that promoted superficial stories about starlets like Kylie Jenner and Miley Cyrus to a young audience. They decided to create a quieter environment for teenage girls.“The actual meaningful stuff gets kind of lost,” Ms. Lewis said, “and teenagers are the ones who need that info the most.”Taking advantage of a boomlet in e-newsletters for women seemed like an obvious choice. But what to call it? The two said they wanted a name that did not sound twee or overly cute, opting instead for one that symbolized good luck. And Clover was born.But teenagers, who have a limited tolerance for traditional advertising and have billions in potential spending power, have proven themselves to be the next big challenge for publishers and marketers.Will they take Clover’s (non-click)bait?Ms. Lewis believes they will, if they’re provided a bit of direction. She said the young girls they interviewed before Clover’s debut said they felt bombarded with information.“From every angle, they’re just getting hit with notifications and headlines and attention-grabbing exclamations,” Ms. Lewis said. “They want to be informed, but they don’t know where to look.”Research backs that up, and also suggests that millennial women use email as a tool more than their male counterparts, MaryLeigh Bliss, chief content officer of the millennial research firm YPulse, said in an email. YPulse conducts quarterly surveys of 1,000 teenagers, and Ms. Bliss said that 45 percent of women ages 13 to 33 report getting daily or weekly newsletters by email.The research suggests that younger women, ages 13 to 17, don’t check their email as frequently but begin to develop it as a habit as they grow up, Ms. Bliss said.Another obstacle for Clover and other publishers: Teenagers might be overwhelmed by the noise, but they also know how to ignore the overload.“They have always looked for filters to give them a shortcut to what they need to know,” Ms. Bliss said.Email newsletters that offer to filter the noise are not a new concept, but in recent years, their creators have used them as powerful networking and information tools, especially for female readers. In 2012, Danielle Weisberg and Carly Zakin created theSkimm, a newsletter that condensed the day’s news into one conversational email.A year later, TheLi.st, a newsletter and web community created by Rachel Sklar, was transformed from a newsletter into a company that connected career-oriented women, for a fee. And this week, Time began Motto, an advice site for women with an e-newsletter component.At their best, newsletters are digital versions of the zine — small, homemade publications characterized by personal appeal and focused topics. One high-profile example, Lenny Letter, was introduced last fall by the actress and writer Lena Dunham and a fellow writer, Jenni Konner. Lenny has shared essays from high-profile voices and interviews with well-known figures in media (Rachel Maddow of MSNBC), politics (Hillary Clinton) and entertainment (the comedian and actress Whitney Cummings).Newsletter creators know what traditional media has been slow to realize, Ms. Bliss said: Millennial women are an attractive audience because they’re a reliably influential group online.“They are a generation of women,” Ms. Bliss said, “more educated than their male counterparts, beginning to even out the wage gap and bringing a different set of expectations to the brands they buy and the media they consume.”But teenagers, often referred to as young millennials or members of Generation Z, are a harder group to reach than older millennials, Ms. Bliss said. Newsletters geared toward teenagers are rare because teenagers check their email less often. They also are less likely to want to hear from brands through email.“Teens would also rather watch a video than read an article,” she added, “so text-heavy content might not be as appealing.”For now, Ms. Lewis and Ms. Darwin appear to be mixing the tactics of theSkimm with the creativity of Lenny Letter. Their email issues will provide a rundown of the day’s news as curated by editors, but they will end with a daily list of teenagers to follow on Instagram — models, actresses, artists, feminists. Homework, then dessert. (One of Clover’s growth tactics will be to ask its recipients to share the email with a friend to earn a spot on the Instagram list.)Recent issues have included a selection of young adult fiction, news about Planned Parenthood financing and an essay about why it’s O.K. to quit your dream job (written by Ms. Darwin, who now works with Ms. Lewis out of a cafe in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn).For now, Clover has no advertising and is not making money, the women said. Ms. Lewis said that several brands had approached Clover since it began, but she is wary of presenting teenagers with an experience that feels branded. The strategy is to grow slowly, said Ms. Lewis and Ms. Darwin, who are financing the project with their own money.“Teens can smell” insincerity, Ms. Lewis said. “They will know. We really are going to be smart about who we partner with.”More than 1,600 people have signed up for Clover since its debut on Monday, though the metrics used by Ms. Lewis and Ms. Darwin don’t tell them whether the sign-ups are from teenage girls.Still, they see their engagements with influential readers on Instagram and their email exchanges with readers as proof that their efforts are paying off. Ms. Lewis said that they had received hundreds of emails from teenagers interested in writing essays or sharing more about their goals and ambitions in Clover.“The whole idea that millennials are ruining the world — what we’ve found has been absolutely the opposite,” Ms. Darwin said.The women say that, for now, they plan to expand the newsletter without outside help — except from their mothers, back home in Missouri and Tennessee. The millennial daughters are leaning on them to copy-edit each issue.Advertisement