By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and MIKE ISAACAUG. 3, 2016
Jet.com was born out of a dream of taking on Amazon and its grip on the world of e-commerce. But the online discount retailer may instead be poised for a humbling sale to the biggest traditional store chain around.Jet.com is in talks to sell itself to Walmart, two people briefed on the matter said on Wednesday. The talks are continuing and may not lead to a deal.A Walmart representative declined to comment on the talks, which were reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal. A Jet.com representative also declined to comment.The discussions are an acknowledgment of the tough reality of America’s $350 billion e-commerce market, which has for years been dominated by Amazon. While plenty of competitors — including physical retailers and online start-ups — have tried to take on Amazon with strategies like focusing only on specific niches of the market or having flash sales, none have succeeded.AdvertisementOf all that have tried, few have been seen as anti-Amazon as Marc Lore, Jet.com’s founder, has. An entrepreneur who previously founded the parent company of Diapers.com and later sold it to Amazon for $550 million, Mr. Lore and Jet.com were featured on the cover of Bloomberg Businessweek in January 2015 — before Jet.com had made a single sale — with the headline “Amazon Bought Marc Lore’s Company. Now He’s Coming for Them.”AdvertisementFrom offices in Hoboken, N.J., Jet.com tried to chart a different course in the e-commerce market. It attacked Amazon directly, seeking to build a national network of warehouses while offering a similarly broad selection of goods. But it also sought to undercut Amazon on price, using complex formulas that adjust the cost of items based on factors like the quantity of products bought at once. For an annual membership fee of $50, Jet.com consumers could get access to goods priced 10 to 15 percent less than anywhere else on the web.Mr. Lore also tried to make Jet.com different from other start-ups at the workplace. Most start-ups try to bend a reluctant universe to their will, which means employees sweat 12-hour days and seven-day weeks. Private lives go by the wayside. But Jet promoted itself as a start-up with a difference: one focused on employee well-being.“I’m constantly asking people at Jet if they’re happy,” Mr. Lore said in an interview last fall. “It’s really important for me to know that they love working here and think this is the best place they’ve ever worked.”His approach in e-commerce and the workplace may have seemed quixotic, but Mr. Lore succeeded in raising more than $500 million from many investors, including venture capital firms like New Enterprise Associates and the mutual fund company Fidelity. Jet.com quickly gained a valuation of roughly $1 billion.Along the way, it was hailed as a particularly ambitious “unicorn,” the once-ballyhooed class of Silicon Valley start-ups valued at $1 billion or more.But Jet.com has struggled. In an interview  in mid-2015, Mr. Lore predicted that the company would take five years to reach a point where it was not losing money on every shipment. In the meantime, it was spending the cash it raised from investors as it expanded its staff and spent millions on marketing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last October, Jet.com dropped its membership fee. Mr. Lore said in a blog post at the time that he was “enabling even more people to embrace this new way of shopping” by removing the fee.A month later, after Jet.com had finished a fund-raising round, Mr. Lore said: “It was challenging. The market conditions have turned, and there is a lot of negative press around private company financing. The fact that we got it done was on the back of the company’s performance.”AdvertisementFor Walmart, pursuing Jet.com in what would be one of its biggest takeovers, a deal would help the retailer reproduce its off-line dominance in the online world. The Bentonville, Ark., company has pumped millions of dollars into efforts to expand its e-commerce business, such as offering more items online and expanding locations for its grocery pickup service.At the end of 2015, Walmart had about eight million items available at Walmart.com. That’s now up to 10 million. Four years ago, it was under two million, Walmart has said. The retailer does not break out a quarterly figure for online sales, but it said its e-commerce business had grown 7 percent in the last quarter.Still, Doug McMillon, WalMart’s president and chief executive, said in May that progress had been “too slow.” Shoppers continue to shop overwhelmingly at Amazon, which accounts for more than half of all dollars spent online.Walmart recently announced a two-day subscription shipping service for $49, its version of Amazon’s $99 annual Prime membership. Walmart is also trying to take advantage of its position as the nation’s largest grocer, nearly tripling the number of markets where customers can order groceries and pick up curbside.Jet’s model of encouraging bulk buying would complement Walmart in areas where the retailer has lagged, according to Neil Saunders, a retail analyst with Conlumino, a research and consulting firm.A decade ago, consumers might have been more inclined to stop at Walmart for household items like toilet paper and laundry detergent in “fairly reasonable quantities” and pick up other items while they were there, Mr. Saunders said.“What’s happened, though, with these online sites is that people first of all are much more likely to buy in bulk because they can get better deals,” he said.Reporting was contributed by David Streitfeld, Rachel Abrams, Leslie Picker and Katie Benner.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Walmart and Jet.com, an Amazon Rival, Are Said to Be in Talks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.