
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

AUG. 4, 2016
Walmart may be trying to hasten its pursuit of Amazon by acquiring an e-commerce start-up.The retail titan is said to be in talks to buy Jet.com, a fledgling online shopping site, a move that would fit into a bigger plan to enhance its lackluster digital and e-commerce efforts, while Amazon keeps moving ahead with new products and services, like one-day shipping and grocery delivery.Doug McMillon, Walmart’s president and chief executive, has no illusions about how his company is faring on the web. “Growth here is too slow,” he said in May. Online sales clocked in at about $14 billion last year, barely 3 percent of Walmart’s top line. Amazon, by comparison, reported a revenue increase of about one-fifth in 2015 to $100 billion, excluding web services. It also was about a year ago that Amazon charged past Walmart in terms of market value. At $350 billion, it is now 60 percent larger.Walmart lags in other areas, too. Its marketplace that allows consumers to sell their products next to Walmart’s own has more than 10 million items. Amazon counts 200 million, according to Jefferies. What’s more, Amazon is considering turf once claimed by Walmart. It recently expanded the markets in which it delivers fresh food such as milk and produce.Given Walmart’s ambitions, Jet understandably makes for a tempting target. Marc Lore, one of the founders of Jet, also helped start the company behind Diapers.com, which Amazon bought in 2010. Introduced just last year, Jet has been struggling to challenge its larger online rival; already, it has changed its business model. Jet first required a $50 annual membership fee in a bid to mimic the successful Costco structure online. It dropped the idea, however, and turned its attention to other ways to generate revenue.Walmart has been rapidly acquiring start-ups over the last couple of years, including Yumprint, a recipe and meal-planning service, and Adchemy, an advertising technology specialist. Jet would be a bigger acquisition. It has raised more than $500 million and is valued at more than $1 billion. Walmart can afford to buy as it builds, but even a galloping “unicorn,” as start-ups valued at more than $1 billion are known, will struggle to tow the lumbering retailer into a competitive position online.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »