AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesA festering contract dispute between Disney and the nation’s fourth-largest cable distributor broke into public view on Friday night, with Disney warning ESPN and ABC viewers in New York City’s suburbs that those channels could go dark as soon as Oct. 1 if no deal is reached.In response, the cable distributor, Altice USA, which has millions of customers on Long Island and in New Jersey and Connecticut, released a blistering statement accusing Disney of making “outrageous” pricing demands. “Stop the threats,” the statement said. “Focus on negotiating an agreement that is fair.”Disney then fired back. In a statement of its own, Disney took issue with Altice’s characterization of its pricing requests — particularly regarding ABC — and painted the cable distributor as greedy.At issue is how much Altice pays for the right to distribute Disney-owned channels, which include ABC, ESPN, ESPN2, Freeform, Disney Channel and Disney XD. The Walt Disney Company and Altice, which is owned by a European conglomerate, have been negotiating for months with little progress. Disney is seeking price increases that amount to hundreds of millions of dollars, analysts say.Spats of this sort are not unusual. In 2010, Disney and Cablevision — since acquired by Altice — sparred in a similar manner; a new contract materialized only after Disney temporarily pulled ABC from Cablevision customers in the New York area. During that dispute, Disney told viewers in commercials to email Cablevision and say, “Lose my shows, lose my business!”But this particular stalemate has higher stakes.ESPN was once unstoppable. But ratings have tumbled, in particular for “SportsCenter,” as more fans get news and game highlights online. The Altice contract is the first major Disney distribution agreement to come up for renewal since ESPN started having trouble. If it is unable to win price increases from Altice, Disney could be hobbled in coming renewal talks with larger cable distributors.Disney is ceding nothing, in part because it is counting on price increases from the likes of Altice to make up for the subscriber erosion (known as “cord cutting”) that is buffeting the broader cable TV business. Disney’s decision on Friday to begin using commercials and onscreen crawls to warn Altice customers that they could lose access to ESPN and ABC signaled its aggression.“We have a responsibility to make our viewers aware of the potential loss of our programming,” Disney said in a statement. “We remain fully committed to reaching a deal and are hopeful we can do so.”For its part, Altice could face a customer revolt if Disney pulls its channels. Even in a diminished state, ESPN remains a juggernaut. ABC desperately needs new hits, but the network is still quite powerful; WABC-TV is New York City’s top-rated local station. The last thing Altice needs amid increased competition from streaming services — including two on the way from Disney — is to give customers a reason to cut the cord or move to a cheaper provider, such as Sling TV.“We are always working hard to negotiate carriage agreements that reflect the best interest of all our customers,” Altice’s statement said. “We want to carry ESPN and its sister networks, including ABC and Disney Channel, at a reasonable rate and have already offered an increase.”Advertisement