By JOHN KOBLINAUG. 7, 2016
BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — With the number of scripted television shows swelling each year — there were more than 400 last year, and that number is expected to go up this year — anxious network executives are once again attending a news media event here to make the case that their stuff is just a wee bit better than the next guy’s.At the gathering, which lasts 17 days through Thursday, executives have unveiled new strategies to show why their networks are going to be profit engines even as ratings dwindle. And producers and stars have tried to explain why their shows will stand out at a time when the audience has never been so distracted.Here are some of the highlights from the past week at the Television Critics Association:TURNER’S NEW STRATEGY It’s been a year and a half since the television veteran Kevin Reilly took over Turner’s cable stations TBS and TNT. He is explicitly trying to move them in a new direction — something closer to FX or Comedy Central rather than a home for police procedurals or reruns of “The Big Bang Theory.”TNT has several highly rated dramas — “Major Crimes,” “Rizzoli & Isles” and “The Last Ship” were the three highest-rated scripted shows in cable television for the last week of July — but Mr. Reilly wants the sort of television fare that gets buzz and Emmy nominations. That’s not exactly Turner’s current strong suit.Advertisement“It’s not just an ageist thing, but some of these shows have skewed like 64 years of age,” he said, referring to the median age of viewers for some Turner shows. (Advertisers prefer the demographic of 18- to 49-year-olds.) “That is a very particular old-fashioned viewer that is very separated from the new generation. Forget the fact that it is out of the demo. That’s not representative of what’s really driving culture or consumption.”AdvertisementArmed with a big budget, Turner is beginning to roll out very different shows, including Samantha Bee’s weekly late night show, the police parody “Angie Tribeca” and a coming comedy about self-absorbed millennials called “Search Party.” For “Angie Tribeca” and “Search Party,” Mr. Reilly is employing an unusual strategy: releasing them on a marathon schedule when they premiere.“I’m doing all these tricks,” he said. “I mean we’re spinning plates because it’s very hard to get attention and very hard to get traction. We’re using every asset we have to make this work.”NBC COMEDY Propelled by an army of Dick Wolf shows and last year’s standout rookie show, “Blindspot,” NBC is coming off one of its best seasons in years. But if there is one area where NBC remains weak, especially compared with the other networks, it’s comedy.NBC’s top two entertainment executives, Robert Greenblatt and Jennifer Salke, have set out a new strategy: Work with strong creators and worry less about ratings. Ms. Salke pointed to the returning comedy “Superstore” and the new show “The Good Place,” created by Michael Schur, the co-creator of “Parks and Recreation.”Ms. Salke said the comedies they were looking for were the sort that “might not please everyone.”She continued: “When ‘Superstore’ came out, you really felt a collective breath across the company of everyone who had been there for so long through this comedy roller coaster saying, ‘Finally, this feels like back to an NBC smart, specific show that has heart, but it’s not a soft, trying to please the whole world, kind of show.’”AN ALARMING STATISTIC It may be fairly obvious, but before starting to watch a continuing series, viewers really, really want to know that they will be able to watch earlier episodes somewhere.AdvertisementFor many network shows, that’s not possible, with only a sampling of episodes available on platforms like Hulu. More than half of viewers — 54 percent — said they would not bother starting on a new show if all episodes were not available, according to NBC’s head of research, Alan Wurtzel.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Everybody in the business has to take heed of that 54 percent because it’s a huge issue,” he said. “This is what people want, and we have to figure out a way to get it to them.”ABC’S NEW PRESIDENT ABC is coming off a rough season, one that led to the ouster of its former head of entertainment, Paul Lee.ABC Entertainment’s new president, Channing Dungey, spoke at the critics association event for the first time. She expressed an interest in finding more procedurals (ABC’s lineup of shows is heavy on serialized programming) and broadening out the comedy ranks.The network’s stable of comedies is family-centric (“Modern Family,” “black-ish,” “Fresh Off the Boat”) and Ms. Dungey said she hoped a new comedy starring a talking dog (“Downward Dog”) would open the door to other types of shows.“It’s not specifically about a family-family,” she said. “It’s a group of friends, there’s a workplace element to it and it has her relationship with the dog.”One thing in Ms. Dungey’s favor right off the bat is that ABC has the most talked-about new show for the fall season in the Kiefer Sutherland drama “Designated Survivor.” The pilot is about a low-level cabinet member (played by Mr. Sutherland) who becomes president after much of the government is wiped out in an attack during the State of the Union address.When producers were asked whether a real-life terrorist attack could potentially affect or delay any episodes of the show, Mr. Sutherland, an executive producer, was definitive.Speaking of “24,” in which he starred, he said: “Even after the terrible days of 9/11, we did not push that show back. I think television has a responsibility to confront what is actually happening in the world.”AdvertisementMARIAH CAREY Nothing woke up a sleepy group of reporters more than Ms. Carey’s entrance — she was brought on stage by shirtless men — and her unusual brand of wit in promoting her coming E! documentary series, “Mariah’s World.”During her 30-minute news conference, as Ms. Carey sipped Champagne, she worried about a fly on stage (“There’s, like, a fruit fly, and I think he’s smelling the Champagne”), the number of questions she was fielding (“That’s two questions, and that’s almost as high as I can count”) and her shoes (“My feet hurt a little bit”). She also provided one entertainingly dizzying response as to whether her show could be described as a reality show.“There’s no way I was, like, ‘Ooh, let’s do some kind of reality thing,’” she said. “Like, I don’t even watch reality. I don’t even know what reality is, literally, like, in the terms of, like, real or not real.”The show debuts in December.A version of this article appears in print on August 8, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Taking Shows to Audiences, Networks Try to Win Over Critics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.