
Breakingviews By                     
ROBYN MAK

NOV. 29, 2016
Samsung Electronics has set a cautious tone with Elliott Management, an activist hedge fund run by Paul Singer.The South Korean electronics giant, part of the larger Samsung empire that is controlled by the family of its chairman, Lee Kun-hee, says it will consider using a holding company structure. It is a measured but welcome response to the activist investor’s revamping proposals. Plans to increase dividends and buy back more stock also show that the company is serious about improving relations with its shareholders.The tech giant unveiled a set of new measures on Tuesday. Most notably, Samsung has hired advisers to conduct a six-month review on how to improve its corporate structure, including the possibility of splitting into a holding company and an operating company, as well as listing shares abroad. Both options were part of Elliott’s calls for change at the family-run conglomerate, which were made public in October and have since won support from several international investors.On paper, the statement is equivocal: The company did not directly address Elliott’s proposals and has already cautioned that the review “does not indicate the management or the board’s intention one way or another.” But it’s a far more conciliatory tone compared with Samsung’s public brawl with Mr. Singer’s hedge fund in 2015, when the controlling Lee family narrowly succeeded in pushing through the merger of two Samsung affiliates.AdvertisementSamsung’s plans to improve shareholder returns and strengthen corporate governance are also a signal of a more diplomatic approach under the new leadership of the family’s scion, Jay Y. Lee. As part of a three-year shareholder return initiative announced last year, Samsung will commit 50 percent of free cash flow for 2016 and 2017 to dividends and share buybacks.For shareholders who have long accused the company of hoarding cash to no purpose, that is welcome news. The dividend yield on Samsung’s shares is a mere 1.25 percent, much lower than that of its rivals Apple and Intel, Eikon data shows.AdvertisementBut this is no concession to Elliott. Samsung also committed to maintaining a net cash position of 65 trillion won ($55.6 billion) and 70 trillion won, which may be a hint that the company does not intend to pay the 30 trillion won special dividend proposed by the fund. But as a starting point for negotiations, Samsung has sent a careful message.Robyn Mak is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »