By CHRISTINE HAUSERNOV. 28, 2016
Delta Air Lines has banned a disruptive passenger who shouted pro-Donald Trump and anti-Hillary Clinton remarks at fellow passengers on a flight from Atlanta to Allentown, Pa., last week, the airline’s chief executive said on Monday.The chief executive, Edward H. Bastian, said in a memo published on Delta’s website that other travelers on the flight Nov. 22 would receive refunds for their tickets.“This individual displayed behavior that was loud, rude and disrespectful to his fellow customers,” Mr. Bastian said in the statement. He added, “We must require civility on our planes and in our facilities.”The decision by Delta came after the airline received criticism on social media for its initial response to the episode, which a passenger identified as Emma Baum videotaped and released online and to news organizations.AdvertisementMs. Baum was quoted by The Morning Call on Nov. 26 as saying that she had first noticed the man, who was not identified, shouting pro-Trump slogans in the terminal while waiting to board Flight 248. The man ended up sitting next to her, and she told him she had been out of the country and asked him about the election, she said.AdvertisementMs. Baum told The Morning Call that as the man became animated, jumping out of his seat, she began recording him with her cellphone. In the video, the man is seen clapping his hands and shouting at other passengers.He says in part: “Donald Trump, baby! We got some Hillary bitches on here?”The man also yelled: “Donald Trump! It’s your president. Every goddamn one of you. If you don’t like it, too bad.”A Daily Beast writer was also provided with a copy of the video.
            WATCH: Trump supporter calls women "Hillary Bitches" on flight to Allentown. Spoke to Emma Baum who shot video, @Delta did nothing. pic.twitter.com/2ZBjNCurNM Ms. Baum said the man was briefly removed from the plane and then allowed back on the flight before it took off. She said she reported him to the authorities when the plane landed.After the video was posted online, Delta Air Lines issued a  statement on Nov. 26, apologizing to customers for the disruption and saying, “We have followed up with the teams involved and all agree that this customer should not have been allowed to continue on the flight.”Mr. Bastian said in the statement on Monday: “After questioning the customer, our team members made the best decision they could given the information they had and allowed him to remain on the flight.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “If our colleagues had witnessed firsthand what was shown in the video, there is no question they would have removed him from the aircraft. He will never again be allowed on a Delta plane.”The video was shared widely online, with many commentators noting that the man, who is white, was not ejected from the flight, but that passengers who are Muslim, Sikh, African-American and other races and ethnicities have been subjected to extra scrutiny or outright removal by various airlines while engaging in routine activities.It was not immediately clear what, if any measures, were taken at the airport in Allentown when the man disembarked. Assistant Chief Gail Struss of the Allentown Police Department said in an email on Monday: “It’s possible we were called, but no report was taken by us that I can find. We would have referred the caller to the airport police.”Officers at the Police Department at the Lehigh-Northampton Airport Authority were not dispatched to respond to any passenger disturbance on Nov. 22, a spokesman, Colin Riccobon, said in an email.A version of this article appears in print on November 29, 2016, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: After Tirade for Trump, Grounded by Delta.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »