
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

APRIL 13, 2016
When the next financial crisis hits, big American banks will not be able to rely on their internal lifeboats.That was the takeaway on Wednesday after federal regulators rejected some banks’ so-called living wills, which show how major financial institutions would be wound down in a crisis. JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America are two of five companies that failed the test, according to the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. That’s because they count on liquidity help from other subsidiaries that could be cut off from providing that aid when things go awry.
            The Fed and the F.D.I.C. found that the plans of five banks were “not credible.”        Liquidity has been improved at the top banks, but it was still a challenge for living wills. Regulators have demanded bigger cushions since the 2008 downturn. But the escape plans for JPMorgan, Bank of America and Wells Fargo, which also failed, were found to have deficiencies in ensuring they had enough cash on hand when a crisis hits. Officials ordered them to show the stand-alone liquidity of each of their subsidiaries. They also found that the liquid assets of Wells Fargo that would be transferred to the F.D.I.C., as its receiver, would not support the bank in a failed state.Part of the problem is that the banks relied on getting liquidity from other pockets of their far-flung empires. JPMorgan and Morgan Stanley, whose living will was found not credible by only the Fed, are among the banks that count on help from foreign units. It’s a problem because overseas governments could ring-fence the banks in their jurisdictions in a pinch. The banks were ordered to ensure they had enough liquidity without relying on that assistance.The stand-alone resilience is part of a broader message from regulators. The Fed has already made clear that it does not want foreign banks to rely on its discount window lending, as they did in the last crisis. It’s why officials have required the largest overseas companies to revamp themselves to hold more capital and liquidity at home. The living will results show that American companies also should not rely on help from foreign governments.That means the best-laid plans for international cooperation could be thrown out when the next downturn hits. Regulators around the world have worked to avoid a repeat of the global chaos that erupted with the 2008 Lehman Brothers collapse. But American officials’ message to their counterparts and to Wall Street is clear: The saying “every man for himself” will prevail in the next crisis.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »