AdvertisementSupported byBy Jad MouawadRichard Anderson, the outspoken chief executive of Delta Air Lines, who led the airline’s transformation into one of the world’s most profitable and well-run carriers, will retire in May, the airline said on Wednesday.Mr. Anderson, 60, who will become Delta’s executive chairman, will be replaced as chief executive by Ed Bastian, the airline’s president.One of the longest-serving airline executives in recent times, Mr. Anderson took the top job at Delta in 2007 shortly after the airline had emerged from bankruptcy. He orchestrated a merger with Northwest Airlines the following year, a move that helped push the rest of the industry toward greater consolidation and set the template for successful airline combinations.Born in Galveston, Tex., and trained as a lawyer, Mr. Anderson has been a vocal champion of his airline and is known for his blunt views of the industry.He led the opposition to the growth of Middle East carriers in the United States, a position that has the support of American Airlines and United Airlines but divided the rest of the domestic aviation community. The high-profile campaign has so far failed to sway the Obama administration or force a renegotiation of open skies agreements.While Delta’s succession plan was well established, the timing of the announcement took some aviation experts by surprise.“He wrote the book on successful airline merger planning and execution, and on employee engagement, and Delta’s results show it,” said Robert W. Mann Jr., an airline industry analyst.Delta’s performance in 2015, for instance, is testimony to how Mr. Anderson built the airline into a global powerhouse. Delta had $4.5 billion in net income last year, aided by falling oil prices, and it gave $1.5 billion to employees under its profit-sharing plan.Mr. Anderson also helped cement successful joint-venture agreements with foreign airlines, including a North Atlantic partnership with Air France KLM that shares flights, revenues and costs on certain routes between the airlines.In 2012, Delta bought a 49 percent stake in Virgin Atlantic to challenge the alliance of American Airlines and British Airways in their backyard at Heathrow Airport in London.And at a time of rising oil prices, Delta made a bold bet to offset the rising cost of jet fuel: It bought a refinery in Pennsylvania. At the time, Mr. Anderson said the investment was a relatively modest one, comparable to the purchase of a single Boeing 777.The early completion of the merger with Northwest, ahead of United’s complicated merger with Continental and the more recent merger between American and US Airways, also allowed Delta to improve operations before its main rivals.As a result, Delta today is an industry leader in on-time performance. In January, for instance, when much of the East Coast was buried by an enormous snowstorm, Delta’s percentage of flights not canceled, a measure known as mainline completion factor, was an industry-leading 98.7 percent. More than 85 percent of its flights also landed on time.The company was valued at $34 billion on Wednesday after the close of markets.But Mr. Anderson’s legacy is also marked by more controversial positions. He has opposed the extension of financing by the Export-Import Bank, arguing it created unfair competition, and has pressed other airline executives to block the expansion of the Persian Gulf-based carriers in the United States.Delta has opposed a move to privatize part of the nation’s air-traffic control system, saying the move carried serious risks and offered “speculative benefits.” Disagreements over this issue was a reason behind Delta’s decision last year to leave the industry’s trade group, Airlines for America.Mr. Anderson’s planned departure is the third high-profile move recently at the top of a United States airline, after the resignation last year of Jeffery A. Smisek at United and the departure of Ben Baldanza at Spirit Airlines at the beginning of the year.Mr. Anderson began his aviation career at Continental Airlines in 1987, and was at Northwest Airlines between 1990 and 2004, where he served as chief executive for three years before becoming chief of the UnitedHealth Group.Mr. Anderson will step down on May 2, his birthday.“This succession plan has been several years in the making and will keep Delta on top of the global industry,” said Daniel A. Carp, Delta’s chairman of the board.Among other moves at Delta, the airline said Glen Hauenstein, the company’s executive vice president, would become president.“Richard has also done a lot to help improve the airline’s employee culture, which has helped keep Delta relatively union-free,” said Henry Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst and the founder of Atmosphere Research Group. Advertisement