
Another View By                     
DAVID ZARING

MARCH 7, 2016
Until recently, international insurance regulation was a relatively quiet field. But since the financial crisis, that has changed.The globalization of the rules that govern insurance companies has been extremely quick — too quick for the tastes of many American insurers. They are fighting back by asking for process, process and more process.I think that the protections sought would be unnecessary, and even counterproductive. But they are classics. The insurers are asking for more notice and comment and more trial-type procedures. Administrative process, and how much of it someone should get, lacks a bit of glamour. But it is something that the government and the financial industry will always fight about.The request for trial-type procedures has come from MetLife, one of the three largest insurance companies, in the United States. All three have been designated as “systemically important” by the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which means that they will be subject to extra regulation by the Federal Reserve.AdvertisementThe council has coordinated its designation process with that of the transnational Financial Stability Board. The board has developed its own list of financial firms that it thinks could be sources of global systemic risk, and its decision to do so may have influenced Congress when it gave council its own systemically important designation powers.AdvertisementMetLife has challenged the designation process in court on a number of grounds. One that resonated at a hearing before the judge was focused on the fact that the agency officials putting together the case for designating MetLife worked for the officials who made the designation decision. In MetLife’s view, this combined the roles of prosecutor and judge, in violation of the constitutional guarantee of due process.The federal judge who heard MetLife’s argument did not disagree. She worried that the financial oversight council was “an agency that is bundled together.” “This was an adjudication process,” she noted, “but no one is neutral in this process.”We will have to see how the judge ends up ruling, though there is precedent for this sort of combination of functions. State licensing boards both initiate investigations into licensees and decide whether the licensees have done anything wrong. No one thinks licensing boards are unconstitutional.Combining the function of prosecutor and judge would not be acceptable in a court, but agencies do not have to act like courts, nor would we want them to do so. Agencies can even begin a process like the MetLife process with a preconceived notion about what should happen — it could hardly be otherwise. As long as MetLife got a fair chance to try to change minds, I would be comfortable concluding that the agency complied with the law.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other insurers have complained to Congress had the government is also trying to develop a transnational capital requirement for insurance companies that will put American firms at a competitive disadvantage.“We have serious concerns about ongoing efforts to create international regulatory standards for U.S. insurance companies,” one insurance executive testified to Congress, explaining that “any legislation must make clear that our existing state-based regulatory system is effective and must be defended and preserved.” (Disclosure: I also testified at that hearing.)These insurers would like Congress to require the government to go through a number of rounds of notice and comment at home before entering into any agreements abroad.I think this would be a mistake as well. Although the importance of a transparent and open administrative process is undoubtedly significant, the best sort of transparency and democratic accountability is provided by legislative authorization to engage in international negotiation at the beginning of the process, followed by domestic implementation through regular administrative procedure at the end of it.AdvertisementThe government received that authorization in the Dodd-Frank Act, and has not faltered in its use of notice and comment since.Moreover, it is important to remember that no global terms will be imposed upon American insurers until American regulators adopt capital or other rules through notice and comment, on a state-by-state basis, subject to state administrative law, or by the Fed, subject to federal administrative law.In the past, American regulators have tailored international standards to meet the needs of the American market. The Fed’s decision to create two tracks for the adoption of international capital standards for banks in the early 2000s exemplifies this.Trying to add a new set of procedural obligations on top of this to the middle of the process that begins with congressional authorization and ends with domestic notice and comment rule-making just creates more bureaucracy. International insurance standards are worth pursuing, and it would be a shame if domestic administrative law got in the way.David Zaring is assistant professor of legal studies at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »