By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 28, 2016
Vox Media is often considered one of the upstart companies, with the likes of BuzzFeed and Vice, upending the established ways that older news media organizations operate. But on Thursday, Vox Media took another step in its evolution from start-up to mature business and embraced a more traditional executive role.The company, with a stable of sites including Vox, the Verge, Recode and SB Nation, named Melissa Bell, its vice president for growth, as its publisher. Vox Media briefly had a group publisher in 2013, but no one has occupied the position since January 2014.“We thought about the publisher title, and in different industries and at different times, it’s meant different things,” said Jim Bankoff, the chief executive of Vox Media. “Melissa’s job is going to be focused on continuing to grow our brands.”In her new role, Ms. Bell, who left The Washington Post in early 2014 to help start Vox.com with Ezra Klein, will help develop the company’s brands and identify opportunities to build its audience on its sites and across different platforms, such as Snapchat and Facebook. She will work not only with the company’s sales and product teams, but also with its editorial team.AdvertisementPublishers traditionally oversee their organization’s business operations while editors make editorial decisions, a separation that many in the news media industry view as necessary to maintain editorial integrity. But Vox Media is not the first company to also give its publisher editorial responsibilities.AdvertisementIn March, for instance, Tribune Publishing, now known as Tronc, an abbreviation of Tribune online content, announced that it was combining the role of editor and publisher at its newspapers, which include The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times. As the line between business and editorial sides at media organizations continues to blur — many news organizations, for example, now have in-house agencies that work with advertisers to produce ads that look like articles — more companies could decide to expand the publisher role.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Bell, 37, will not determine which articles Vox Media’s sites will publish. That job will still belong to the individual editors in chief, who will continue to report to Lockhart Steele, Vox Media’s editorial director. Rather, Ms. Bell said she would work with the editors in chief to determine how and where to best tell their stories.“What we want to do is to have the E.I.C.’s have the authority and the autonomy to own their own brand voice,” she said. “What I can do is help shape that.”Naming a publisher is the latest move by Vox Media, which has among its investors NBCUniversal and the private equity firm General Atlantic, that suggests it is looking to operate within a more traditional business structure. In April, the company named its first chief financial officer, and recently appointed its first chief technology officer.“We are a growing company that is figuring out how to structure ourselves,” Ms. Bell said. “We are no longer a small start-up but we really, really want to keep that scrappy spirit alive, and we’re trying to figure out how to shepherd that as we grow.”A version of this article appears in print on July 29, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Still Evolving, Vox Media Fills Long-Vacant Publisher’s Job.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.