By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 20, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s coming up this week.INSURANCE INDUSTRYThe first of two proposed health insurance mega-mergers goes to trial in Federal District Court for the District of Columbia on Monday. The $48 billion combination of Anthem and Cigna, two of the nation’s largest insurers, is being challenged by the Justice Department as being bad for consumers. Expect more than the usual drama: Anthem and Cigna have accused each other of breaching the merger agreement, and Cigna is viewed as less than enthusiastic about the deal going through. The case will be followed by a second trial involving the proposed merger of Aetna and Humana. Reed AbelsonECONOMYMario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, will answer questions on Monday at the European Parliament and will probably be asked about how the eurozone may be affected by the presidency of Donald J. Trump. The changes in Washington come as Europe’s central bank is still trying to breathe life back into the slow-growing eurozone economy. Jack EwingOn Wednesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will report data on durable goods orders in October. Economists are looking for a 1 percent increase, mostly resulting from higher aircraft orders. Excluding the volatile transportation category, durable goods orders are expected to inch up 0.2 percentage point. The manufacturing sector has been uneven in recent months, hurt by a strong dollar but benefiting a bit from a rebound in oil prices. Economists will be watching to see which of these trends prevails. Nelson D. SchwartzLater on Wednesday, at 10 a.m., the Commerce Department will release figures for new home sales in October. Economists estimate the seasonally adjusted annual rate of sales for last month will come in at 585,000, barely changed from 593,000 in September. While multifamily construction has been weaker, the market for new single-family homes continues to be robust. Nelson D. SchwartzThe Federal Reserve’s policy-making committee last met before the presidential election, so the account of the early November meeting that the Fed will publish on Wednesday may seem like a time capsule from a different era. But the account, which is expected to portray Fed officials as increasingly eager to raise interest rates, remains relevant because the Fed’s short-term plans have not changed. The economy is still growing, asset prices are still rising and the Fed is still getting ready to raise its benchmark interest rate at its next meeting in mid-December. Binyamin AppelbaumRETAIL INDUSTRYRetailers across the United States have been promoting their sales for Black Friday, traditionally one of the busiest shopping days of the year. But as sales begin earlier and earlier in the season, stores are having an increasingly difficult time luring shoppers out of their warm beds on a cold November day. Rachel AbramsA version of this article appears in print on November 21, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Stores Await Black Friday and Court Mulls Merger  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.