By ALEXANDRA ALTERNOV. 22, 2016
In the summer of 2015, Katy Tur, a London-based foreign correspondent for NBC News, got a surprising offer from the network’s head of news coverage. Would she like to cover Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign? He assured her that it would be a brief assignment — six weeks at the most.It was one of many assumptions about Mr. Trump’s candidacy that proved to be wildly off-base. Ms. Tur was on the campaign trail for 18 months, living out of a suitcase and subsisting on hard-boiled eggs, packets of peanut butter and fistfuls of Cheez-Its. She became a frequent target of Mr. Trump on Twitter and during his rallies, where he accused her of dishonesty and called her a “third-rate reporter,” and she received death threats from his supporters. On election night, expecting to cover his defeat, she instead reported on his victory speech.Ms. Tur will recount those experiences in a book, “Unbelievable,” which will also explore Mr. Trump’s unexpected rise through the Republican ranks and his ascension to the presidency.Ms. Tur’s memoir, which will be published by Dey Street Books next year, is part of a coming deluge of postelection analysis, as agents, editors and publishers race to acquire books that explain the forces that propelled Mr. Trump to victory and assess the future of American politics after a caustic and polarizing election. It is a challenging task, made all the more daunting by the fact that few in the publishing world foresaw Mr. Trump’s rise.Advertisement“As book publishers, we have a responsibility to take two steps back from the nowness of it all and find out what’s going to be relevant five years from now,” said Julia Cheiffetz, executive editor of Dey Street Books. “It’s one of the most extraordinary moments in American history.”AdvertisementSome political books and memoirs that were already in the works before Election Day will take on new resonance. Random House recently acquired a memoir by Khizr Khan, the Pakistani-American Gold Star father who became a prominent surrogate for Hillary Clinton after his stirring speech at the Democratic National Convention. His memoir, which is scheduled to be published in 2017, will tell the story of the Khans’ move from Pakistan to America; the loss of their son, a captain in the Army; and their unexpected role in a heated national debate about immigration, patriotism and religious diversity.“Their story of what it’s like to be a Muslim in America, it feels even more pertinent after the election results,” said Ben Greenberg, Random House’s executive editor.Other books will examine Mr. Trump’s populist appeal and how he capitalized on voters’ economic and social anxiety, or will try to place the Trump phenomenon within a growing wave of populist and nationalist movements. The journalist David Neiwert’s “Militialand USA: The Rise of the Radical Right in the Age of Trump,” to be published by Verso, will examine how Mr. Trump’s campaign helped extreme right-wing voices find a place in the mainstream. This month, Atlantic Books acquired the BBC broadcaster Steve Richards’s “The Rise of the Outsiders: How the Anti-Establishment Is on the March,” which will look at the populist sentiments that drove Trump voters and the movement in Britain to exit the European Union.A normal election year brings a barrage of books from campaign reporters, political pundits and academics, ranging from autopsies of the inner workings of a campaign to wonkier works that explore policies and social issues. There have been some breakout campaign books in recent years, including “Game Change” — a juicy post-mortem of the 2008 election by the political reporters John Heilemann and Mark Halperin, which sold nearly 500,000 print copies according to Nielsen — and books by Obama campaign insiders like David Plouffe and David Axelrod. And an outgoing administration typically produces a flood of memoirs from cabinet members, advisers and, of course, the president and first lady.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But this was far from a normal election year. Like many in the media, publishing industry executives were caught off-guard by the results on Nov. 8, and now find themselves scrambling.“People are curious, and people are baffled, and from the point of view of a publisher that’s both an opportunity and a hurdle, because you need to find a way to explain what happened,” said Peter Osnos, founder of the publishing imprint PublicAffairs, who has worked on books by Barack Obama, Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter. “The big question is who will emerge with something that’s compelling, original, revelatory and provocative.”Some publishers say there’s little appetite for the traditional blow-by-blow account of a contentious campaign that was already the subject of almost nonstop daily news coverage. (Mr. Halperin and Mr. Heilemann declined to comment on whether they planned to write a book about the 2016 election.)“It was such an exhausting campaign, and it was so exhaustively covered that you would really have to come at it in a different way,” said John Sterling, an editor at large at Macmillan.AdvertisementThere’s an evident hunger among readers for thoughtful and nuanced explanations of how Mr. Trump rode a tide of discontent among white working-class voters to the presidency. Immediately after the election, books like J. D. Vance’s “Hillbilly Elegy” and George Packer’s “The Unwinding,” which both examine the country’s growing cultural and political divisions and the grievances of the white working class, shot up on Amazon’s best-seller lists. Mr. Vance’s book, which has 570,000 copies in print, sold more than 19,000 copies in the week ending Nov. 13, according to Nielsen. Several editors and publishers said they were eager to acquire more narrative nonfiction books like “Hillbilly Elegy” that take a broader view of cultural and economic forces.Some see an opportunity for writers and publishers to seize on a moment of uncertainty and take stock of the future of the Democratic and Republican parties.“As surprising as the election was, as gobsmacked as most people were by the results of it, the really interesting part starts now,” Mr. Sterling said.A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Book Publishers Scramble to Make Sense of an Election Few Saw Going to Trump.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »