By JOHN KOBLINMAY 18, 2016
CBS is presenting its 2016-17 fall schedule to advertisers at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday afternoon. Here is a preview.CBS has tried for the last couple of years to find a worthy successor to “The Big Bang Theory,” which remains TV’s top-rated comedy. Those efforts have yet to pay off, but CBS is taking a mighty big swing this year.The network is expanding from one two-hour comedy block in its fall schedule last year (on Wednesday night) to two blocks this year (adding Monday night). CBS’s entertainment president, Glenn Geller, told reporters on Wednesday morning that the network’s development strategy was about “big comedy and big, big stars.”CBS executives are going with three recognizable names:• Kevin James in “Kevin Can Wait”• Matt LeBlanc in “Man With a Plan”• Joel McHale in “The Great Indoors.”AdvertisementMr. James’s show will open the season right behind “The Big Bang Theory” before moving to 8 p.m. on Mondays in October, when the network’s “Thursday Night Football” package ends.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Longtime series like “NCIS” (the most-viewed drama for the last seven years) and “Survivor” continue to hold their 8 p.m. time slots on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. The comedies “Two Broke Girls” and “Mom” both return.AdvertisementCBS is plugging in “NCIS New Orleans” into the Tuesday 10 p.m. slot. And the network is adding a new drama (a reboot of an old one), “MacGyver,” to its Friday lineup.As network television makes greater efforts to diversify its casts, CBS’s pickups caused a small stir: all three of the new comedies feature white men as the lead characters; its dramas also feature male leads. Mr. Geller defended CBS’s efforts, saying “Our new series are more diverse this year than last year.”He also pointed to a midseason pickup, “Doubt,” that stars Katherine Heigl and features the transgender actress Laverene Cox, best known for “Orange Is the New Black.” “We are definitely moving in the right direction,” Mr. Geller said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.