By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 12, 2016
Thirty-two months ago, Al Jazeera America made its debut with ambitious plans (and a big budget) to become a leading voice in cable news. And though the network has garnered a number of prestigious awards, it never attracted a meaningful audience, often failing to draw 30,000 viewers in prime time.Over the last year, it has also had embarrassing setbacks. The network was sued by a number of former employees; its chief executive was let go after staff members complained of a “culture of fear”; and its general counsel was suspended (and subsequently let go) after it was discovered that he did not have a license to practice law. In January, the network announced that it was shutting down. On Tuesday, Al Jazeera America will air its final broadcast. Here is a look back at the network over the last three years:January 2013Convinced that there is room for a thoughtful, sober cable TV news channel in the United States, Al Jazeera buys Current TV for $500 million and announces the creation of Al Jazeera America, kicking off the most ambitious American television news venture since Rupert Murdoch and Roger Ailes started the Fox News Channel in 1996. Time Warner Cable drops Current TV upon Al Jazeera’s acquisition.August 2013The Qatari-owned station names a former ABC executive, Kate O’Brian, as president and Ehab Al Shihabi, a management consultant who worked at firms like Arthur Andersen and Deloitte, as interim chief. The station also hires hundreds of journalists, including some prominent names like Ali Velshi of CNN. The station goes live on Aug. 20 in about 48 million of the roughly 100 million American homes that subscribe to television.April 2014The network is awarded a Peabody and an Emmy award for its “Fault Lines” documentary on cholera in Haiti and goes on to receive multiple awards, including an Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Award, for its journalism.AdvertisementAugust-September 2014The former vice president claims the station owes him and a partner $65 million from a deal to buy his network, Current TV. The network says it is entitled to keep money held in escrow – and conceivably owed to Mr. Gore and his partner, Joel Hyatt – because the two “did not live up to a promise to indemnify the network for claims made against Current TV.”AdvertisementApril 2015Matthew Luke, formerly the network’s director of media and archive management, files a lawsuit in New York Supreme Court claiming wrongful termination. He says he was fired after he complained about his boss, Osman Mahmud, who, Mr. Luke said, told him to exclude female employees from meetings and not involve them in projects that they had previously worked on. In the suit, Mr. Luke asserts that Mr. Mahmud mistreated female employees and exhibited anti-Semitic behavior.The lawsuit was announced the same week an exodus of top executives was announced, bringing to the surface a series of grievances that employees say reflected a deep dysfunction in management of the newsroom.May 2015The network announced the departure of Mr. Shihabi as chief executive, a day after a former executive complained of a “culture of fear” at the network. Mr. Shihabi is succeeded by Al Anstey, who had been managing director of Al Jazeera English since 2010.November 2015David W. Harleston, Al Jazeera America’s general counsel, is suspended after a New York Times investigation finds no records that indicate Mr. Harleston is licensed to practice law in New York State or any other jurisdiction. He no longer works with the company, a spokeswoman for the network said.Mr. Harleston had helped oversee lawsuits against DirecTV and Al Gore, wrongful-termination cases brought by former employees and the departure of the company’s chief executive.December 2015A report on doping by Al Jazeera, published online and broadcast by Al Jazeera America, implicates some of the biggest stars in Major League Baseball and the National Football League, including Peyton Manning, then the quarterback of the Denver Broncos. Two of the baseball players named in the report, Ryan Zimmerman and Ryan Howard, file lawsuits against Al Jazeera America days after the report.January 2016Mr. Anstey announces the shutdown in a memo to the staff, citing the “economic challenges in the U.S. media marketplace.” He said the company would expand its digital presence after ceasing its television operations in April.April 2016 On Tuesday night, Al Jazeera America will close the network with a three-hour broadcast from 6 to 9 p.m., which will be repeated from 9 p.m. to midnight. The final broadcast will feature a number of Al Jazeera’s on-air personalities and has been described as a thank you to the network’s viewers. In a statement, Mr. Anstey and Ms. O’Brian said that strong journalism was a “responsibility which every media organization should carry with determination and resolve. We are proud to have done so since our first to our final moment on air.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.