By SYDNEY EMBERMAY 18, 2016
Elizabeth Spayd, the editor in chief and publisher of The Columbia Journalism Review and a longtime editor at The Washington Post, will become the next public editor at The New York Times, the company announced on Wednesday.She succeeds Margaret Sullivan, who held the post from 2012 until her departure last month. Ms. Sullivan recently started a job as the media columnist for The Washington Post.Ms. Spayd, 57, joined The Post in 1988 and spent 25 years at the paper, holding a variety of reporting and editing positions. In 2008, she was named the paper’s managing editor. She took over The Columbia Journalism Review, a widely respected publication that covers the media, at the start of 2014.“Liz is an exceptionally accomplished journalist,” Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times, said in a statement. “Her work at C.J.R. along with her long and successful history at The Washington Post have given her a broad range of experiences that will serve us well as she assumes this critical position serving as a reliable and engaged representative of our readers.”When he announced in February that Ms. Sullivan was leaving, Mr. Sulzberger said he was committed to maintaining a vibrant public editor position. He said replacing Ms. Sullivan would be a “difficult task.”Phil Corbett, the standards editor at The Times, led the search committee for the new public editor.In a memo to staff members, Mr. Sulzberger; Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times; and James Bennet, the newspaper’s new editorial page director, said Ms. Spayd “had a stellar track record as an uncompromising, honest and intellectually rigorous journalist, one who is deeply committed to the idea of serving our readers and holding this institution to our values.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Spayd will join The Times this summer, according to the memo.“I think the Times public editor has one of the great jobs in journalism,” Ms. Spayd said in an email. “It’s intellectually challenging, complex and, like most jobs I seem to be attracted to, no doubt stressful.” She said one “front-burner topic” she planned to focus on was the digital transition at The Times, which she called a “period of radical change that will never be over.”“The Times has the opportunity to be a pacesetter on this front, and it’s critical that it is. I’ll be watching the process,” she added.The Times created the public editor position after a 2003 plagiarism scandal involving the reporter Jayson Blair. The post comes with a mandate to review standards and practices at the paper while serving as a conduit to readers.Over the years, the five public editors, including Ms. Sullivan, examined issues like anonymous sourcing, gender stereotyping, invasion of privacy and the challenges of transitioning to a digital world.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: The Times Names Longtime Journalist Public Editor.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.