By LIZ MOYERFEB. 1, 2016
Settlements by Barclays and Credit Suisse for misrepresenting their private stock trading sites to customers are unlikely to be the last as regulators continue to pursue abuses in electronic trading.At the heart of the cases are so-called dark pools, a nefarious-sounding term for an activity that actually plays a big role in the way equities markets work. About 42 percent of the average daily trade volume is handled in the “dark,” according to the Tabb Group, a data and research firm. That means no information about the trades is known publicly before they are executed.Conversely, 58 percent of an average day’s trades are done on the “lit,” or public, markets like the major United States stock exchanges, where transactions can be seen by brokers and other market dealers before they are completed. The Tabb Group says last year’s overall average daily trade volume (both lit and dark) was 6.9 billion shares a day.Firms like Barclays and Credit Suisse operate dark pools for customers who want to buy and sell stock without other traders finding out what they are up to before a transaction takes place. These types of dark pools handle 13.6 percent of daily trading, the Tabb Group says.AdvertisementA pension fund with a large block of stock to sell, for example, would want that transaction to be handled as confidentially as possible to avoid affecting the price of the shares until all or most of them could be unloaded.AdvertisementAlthough dark pools have existed for decades, they have become more popular in recent years as high-speed electronic trading has ruled the markets. Supersophisticated computers can search various public exchanges in fractions of a second, ferreting out trades from the moment they are initiated until they are completed. That ability has enabled competing buyers and sellers to react to the trades while they are in progress.An aspect of the accusations against Credit Suisse was echoed in an earlier case settled by Citigroup’s LavaFlow alternative trading system in 2014. Both Credit Suisse and Citi were accused of using information about hidden customer orders to inform trades through computers known as smart-order routers, which continuously hunt for the best way to execute a trade.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In Credit Suisse’s instance, information about customer orders sitting in its dark pool waiting to be completed was sent to its smart-order router and another router designed to detect interest from other traders.That information “leakage” is what dark pools are supposed to guard against.What regulators have focused on are the promises the dark pool operators have made to customers about how their orders are being handled and whether high-speed trading firms have the opportunity to trade against those orders. In November, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed rules that would force dark pools to be more explicit about how they handle customer orders.So far, the S.E.C. has settled several cases, most of them having to do with the disclosures and representations firms made to customers about their dark pools. In addition to Barclays and Credit Suisse, other cases include the one against Citi’s LavaFlow, another against Liquidnet, one against UBS last year, and a more recent one against ITG, which held the previous record for a dark pool fine.The Barclays and Credit Suisse settlements, totaling $154.3 million, are the largest to date.At a news conference on Monday, both Andrew J. Ceresney, the S.E.C’s director of enforcement, and Eric T. Schneiderman, New York’s attorney general, said other investigations were continuing. The two jointly announced the Barclays and Credit Suisse settlements. New York first sued Barclays over issues regarding its dark pool in 2014.“This is an area where both of our institutions are focused,” Mr. Ceresney said.For its part, while it admitted violations of securities laws in settling its case, Barclays got approval for waivers that would preserve its status as a “well-known seasoned issuer,” which means it benefits from a streamlined process for filing securities registrations. Without the waivers, it could have been classified an “ineligible issuer,” which is the status conferred to companies with black marks against them.A version of this article appears in print on February 2, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Regulators Aren’t Done With Investigations Into ‘Dark Pool’ Trading.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.