
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

AUG. 1, 2016
Tesla Motors’ deal to buy SolarCity, officially unveiled on Monday, is still perplexing. But at least Tesla’s boss, the electric-car pioneer Elon Musk, is making the best of the terms and process. At $2.6 billion, the price for the solar-panel installer where he is chairman is lower than expected, and the two boards have done the right things. But it still risks distracting Tesla, valued at $35 billion, at a critical time.There is some industrial logic. The deal will bolt SolarCity, the country’s largest solar-panel installer, onto Tesla’s battery business for cars, homes, businesses and utilities. This overlapping area is where most of the $150 million in expected annual cost savings will come from, covering sales, marketing, installation and servicing.
                From Zip2 to OpenAI, a look at the entrepreneur’s many companies.            There’s logic in the deal math, too. Assuming they materialize — which may be hard to judge amid the changes inherent in such fast-growing businesses — the anticipated synergies, on a multiple of 10, are theoretically worth $1.5 billion given both companies lose money and so essentially do not pay tax. That equates to two-thirds of the acquisition price and several times the roughly $340 million premium.Yet the carmaker’s foremost goal is to produce 500,000 vehicles annually by 2018 — almost 10 times production in 2015. That is a lofty target, especially for a company with a habit of missing them. Owning SolarCity might mean having more people available to install home chargers, but the solar firm has challenges of its own which could take up considerable management time and dilute Tesla’s focus.That in turn is why the family and ownership connections between the two companies raise potential concerns about the motivations for the deal. Chief among the potential conflicts of interest is that Mr. Musk is chairman and owns about one-fifth of both firms, while his cousin, Lyndon Rive, is chief executive of the solar company.Independent board members at both companies approved the transaction, and majority approval from unrelated shareholders at both firms will be required. Mr. Musk has committed to vote his SolarCity shares in favor of a better offer if, after a 45-day period, the company secures one. That is an exemplary approach. Even so, there is still the nagging question of why Tesla would bother buying and integrating a solar-panel player at this moment, if at all.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »