By EMILY STEELMAY 18, 2016
The ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone will no longer draw a salary from Viacom, one of the big media companies he controls, two people briefed on the development said Wednesday.The move follows a drawn-out legal battle in California that highlighted Mr. Redstone’s failing health while challenging his mental capacity. The case was dismissed last week, but the details that emerged prompted Viacom’s board to evaluate his compensation and status.Eliminating his pay is a gesture toward acknowledging that he is no longer involved in operations and deserving pay as a company executive.Mr. Redstone, 92, remains chairman emeritus and controlling shareholder of Viacom and CBS, a $40 billion media empire. He controls about 80 percent of the voting shares in the companies through National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by his father. Control of the two companies will be passed to a trust only after he dies or is declared not competent.AdvertisementFiled in November by a former companion and romantic partner, the lawsuit included embarrassing and salacious claims about Mr. Redstone, who has had minor strokes and has a speech impediment. Those included details about his sexual appetite, incontinence and demands to eat steak while on a feeding tube.AdvertisementThose details prompted investors to raise questions about Mr. Redstone’s pay, his role at his companies and other corporate governance issues. In February, he stepped down as chairman at both companies.In dismissing the case after only one day, the judge relied heavily on videotaped testimony from Mr. Redstone, saying the media mogul had convincingly asserted that he did not want the former companion, Manuela Herzer, to supervise his health care, as she was seeking.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I think he said what he wanted to say,” the judge said.But the same testimony, a transcript of which was released to news organizations, also included halting answers, profanity, forgetfulness and nonresponsiveness — putting renewed focus on the media mogul’s mental capacity. There was also an evaluation by a geriatric psychiatrist.The judge, in his evaluation of the testimony, said, “It is also not in dispute that Redstone suffers from either mild or moderate dementia.”Mr. Redstone’s total compensation was $2 million in the 2015 fiscal year, down from $13 million in 2014.Viacom’s board met on Wednesday. It is not clear whether the board of CBS was making the same considerations. CBS declined to comment.The Viacom development was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.An article on Thursday about a decision by Viacom’s board to stop paying a salary to its chairman emeritus, Sumner M. Redstone, misstated the credentials of the person who evaluated Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity. He is a geriatric psychiatrist, not a psychologist.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Redstone Taken Off the Payroll at Viacom.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.