AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinFor the last two decades, O. J. has been on ice.Hollywood, worried that the American public was still weary from the oversaturation of O. J. Simpson coverage, did all it could to stay clear of the murders, the highway chase and the granddaddy of all celebrity trials.Well, about that O. J. fatigue? FX is convinced that you’re over it.On Tuesday, the cable network will air the first installment of its newest anthology series, “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” a 10-episode drama that stars John Travolta, Cuba Gooding Jr., Sarah Paulson and David Schwimmer.FX is betting that viewers who can vividly recall where they were during the Bronco chase — as well as a younger audience that is only vaguely aware of the black glove and the famous mantra “If it doesn’t fit, you must acquit” — will devour the series. The network says early tracking suggests that it will do better than any show it has put on the air.Not only does the series have the potential to reignite discussion about Mr. Simpson’s trial, but the producers anticipate that the issues at the center of the case — race, celebrity, sexism, domestic violence — will resonate with the public as profoundly as they did 21 years ago.“It’s like a perfect, jewel-like reflection of the contemporary dialogue in America,” said John Landgraf, the chief executive of FX.The monthslong trial proved to be a searing collective experience, and the reaction to the verdict showed a country deeply divided over race. Courtney B. Vance, who portrays Mr. Simpson’s defense lawyer Johnnie Cochran, recalled how he was filming a movie with Tony Goldwyn, who is white, when the verdict was announced in 1995.“I was in Tony’s trailer when the verdict came down, and I said ‘Yes!’ and he said ‘Noooo!’ ” Mr. Vance said in a recent interview. “We looked at each other and realized that’s where we are. And 20 years later we are in exactly the same place.”“American Crime Story” will also air at a time when hit documentaries like “The Jinx” on HBO and “Making a Murderer” from Netflix, along with the popular podcast “Serial,” have spurred discussion about flaws in the justice system. And FX is not alone in bringing the Simpson story out of hibernation: ESPN will release a five-part documentary on Mr. Simpson in June; it had its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival on Jan. 22.But producers believe race will resonate more with viewers than any other theme. “American Crime Story” opens with footage of the Rodney King beating and the 1992 Los Angeles riots, laying the groundwork for Mr. Simpson’s defense in a trial that largely served as a referendum on the Los Angeles Police Department’s treatment of blacks.During the series’s development, its producers thought audiences would be most drawn to how the trial may have given birth to celebrity culture and the 24-hour news cycle. (“Kato Kaelin is arguably the first reality TV star, and the Kardashian kids are genuinely part of the story,” said Brad Simpson, an executive producer.) Race — the through line of Jeffrey Toobin’s 1996 book “The Run of His Life,” which the show is based on — was to be a secondary issue.But that all changed after the events in Ferguson, Mo.; Baltimore; and elsewhere, and the emergence of the Black Lives Matter movement.“As everything unfolded, it affected what we were writing, it affected our conversations,” Brad Simpson said.He said that a scene in the first episode with Mr. Cochran (before he joined O. J. Simpson’s defense team) and the lawyer Christopher Darden (before he was on the prosecution team) discussing police brutality was drawn up only after racial unrest again became a leading national topic.“Throughout the development of the show, national events started bubbling up around this project,” said Dana Walden, a co-chief executive of Fox Television Group, who also heads one of the studios behind the show. “It just gave a spine to the narrative of why this show is important and relevant today.”Though “American Crime Story” centers on a crime, the actual murders are not shown. Producers said they were more interested in the trial than the gruesome stabbings, in part out of sensitivity to the victims, Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman.The producers also insist that the show does not take a position on who committed the murders, even though its source material, Mr. Toobin’s book, concludes that Mr. Simpson was guilty.“It’s not even really relevant to the show,” said Nina Jacobson, an executive producer. “Our intention was to understand how a verdict was reached that we couldn’t understand at the time. And how all these events came into play that gave rise to the verdict.”“American Crime Story” instead leans heavily on character portraits, notably of the defense lawyer Robert Shapiro (played by Mr. Travolta), Mr. Simpson’s friend Robert Kardashian (played by Mr. Schwimmer), Mr. Cochran and the prosecutor Marcia Clark (played by Ms. Paulson).Ms. Paulson’s portrayal of Ms. Clark in particular shows how “American Crime Story” is an exploration of sexism in America as well as an examination of race. In the show, Ms. Clark comes off as an unexpectedly sympathetic character as she confronts withering criticism from the news media and colleagues about her appearance.“I look back and I cannot believe that women all over the country were not standing up saying, ‘What is happening?’ ” Ms. Paulson said in an interview. “Women — women! — were not even behind Marcia.”She recalled one scene in which Ms. Clark walks into the courtroom with a new hairstyle, one she is proud of. Ms. Paulson said she did not have a plan about how to perform it.“And then Judge Ito says, ‘Welcome, Ms. Clark, I think,’ ” Ms. Paulson said, referring to Judge Lance Ito, who presided over the trial. “And there was this tittering of laughter behind me and from the defense table. All of these men. And I burst into tears. I could feel the temperature in my neck rising, I could feel the color change in my face. I remember thinking, ‘I don’t know how she did this.’ ”Other than the occasional TV movie and the “If I Did It” fiasco in 2006 that resulted in a shelved book, a canceled television special and a public-relations nightmare for News Corporation (which at the time owned FX), little entertainment, fictional or not, has been produced based on Mr. Simpson’s story.“People were filled up to the point that they were ready to burst,” said Ms. Jacobson, who was also a producer of the “Hunger Games” films. “It’s like when you’ve had too much of a certain alcohol that you can never go back to drinking that alcohol without feeling sick.”This project had been in development for several years, with FX Productions producing it and Fox holding the rights to broadcast it (both FX and Fox are owned by 21st Century Fox). But it was not until Ryan Murphy, a creator of “Glee” and “American Horror Story,” arrived on the scene that the project picked up any real steam. He read the scripts (which were written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski) and doggedly pushed it forward. (“Ryan wouldn’t let it go,” Ms. Walden said.)After much discussion, Ms. Walden gave her blessing. She and Mr. Murphy agreed it was the perfect subject matter to introduce “American Crime Story,” a spinoff of FX’s anthology series “American Horror Story.”Mr. Murphy became an executive producer of the show and also directed several episodes. He orchestrated the casting, including the monthslong process of persuading Mr. Travolta to take his first regular television role in decades.In an interview, Mr. Murphy said that when he works on a show he generally accepts little feedback. On this project, however, he showed scripts and rough cuts of the show to as many people as he could, black and white. He did not want to screw it up.“These are topics that we’ve never gotten right, and never fully understood,” he said. “It is such an important conversation in our culture now. And such an important thing to get right.”Advertisement