JAN. 31, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.32 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.43 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.23 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Board of Education, $118.4 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.King County, Wash., $279.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYNassau County, N.Y., $120.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAnderson County, S.C., $74.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementTHURSDAYMetro Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, $247.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.South Washington County, Minn., Independent School District, $94.1 million of school district general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementUniversity of Maryland, $201.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKBucks County, Pa., $54.9 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.California School Finance Authority, $87.5 million of charter school revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Cupertino Union, Calif., School District, $76 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Dallas Area Rapid Transit, $482.5 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Hawaii County, Hawaii, $235 million of general obligation bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lamar, Tex., Independent School District, $141.1 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Livonia, Mich., Public Schools, $87.1 million of school building bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Magnolia, Tex., Independent School District, $87.4 million of school refinancing debt securities. Stifel Nicolaus.Minnesota Higher Education Facilities Authority, $63.3 million of revenue bonds. Dougherty.New York Mortgage Agency, $105 million of homeowner mortgage revenue bonds. Bank of America.Prosper, Tex., Independent School District, $75 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.AdvertisementSan Antonio Water System, $215.4 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.San Diego Regional Building Authority, $108.2 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Schertz-Cibolo-Universal City, Tex., Independent School District, $103.9 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Coastal Securities.Shelby County, Tenn., $75.4 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Raymond James.University of Utah, $69.5 million of general revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.