By LESLIE PICKERAPRIL 11, 2016
After five months of pressure, three merger offers and one rejection from regulators, Canadian Pacific Railway said on Monday that it had abandoned efforts to combine with its American railroad counterpart Norfolk Southern.Canadian Pacific withdrew a resolution for Norfolk Southern shareholders to vote on negotiations between the two companies, according to a statement by Canadian Pacific.“We have long recognized that consolidation is necessary for the North American rail industry to meet the demands of a growing economy,” Canadian Pacific’s chief executive, E. Hunter Harrison, said in the statement. “But with no clear path to a friendly merger at this time, we will turn all of our focus and energy to serving our customers and creating long term value for C.P. shareholders.”The terminated offer is the latest black eye for the hedge fund activist William A. Ackman, who is among Canadian Pacific’s largest shareholders and an outspoken proponent of the merger. Mr. Ackman won a proxy battle for control of Canadian Pacific in 2012 and installed Mr. Harrison as chief executive. They have spoken at great lengths on conference calls about the need for consolidation among railroad operators.AdvertisementNorfolk Southern resisted the proposed railroad merger from the beginning, and the termination joins a string of proposed deals that have fallen apart in the last week because of regulatory concerns. New tax rules from the Treasury Department thwarted Pfizer’s $152 billion merger with Allergan. And the Justice Department sued to block Halliburton’s $35 billion acquisition of a fellow oil-field service provider, Baker Hughes, on antitrust grounds.AdvertisementCanadian Pacific disclosed its first unsolicited bid for Norfolk Southern in November, valued at $28.4 billion at the time. From the beginning, James A. Squires, the chief executive of Norfolk Southern, said that he did not believe the merger would get the necessary approvals.The Surface Transportation Board, a division in the Department of Transportation, must approve mergers in the railroad industry. This agency requires that a deal be in the “public interest” in addition to enhancing competition. Canadian Pacific suggested putting its own shares in a voting trust to quickly integrate the companies during the regulatory approval process.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Norfolk Southern rejected the first bid and two subsequent offers.To ease Norfolk Southern’s concerns, Canadian Pacific sought a declaratory order last month from the transportation board to rule on its voting trust plan.Norfolk Southern eventually said it would engage in talks if Canadian Pacific received a declaratory order and could offer a suitable price. In response, Canadian Pacific filed a proxy statement for Norfolk Southern’s shareholders to vote on whether their board should pursue discussions with Canadian Pacific.The Canadian railroad operator said it believed that the combination of the two companies would be in the best interest of the industry because it would create a more efficient system.“Politicians, shippers and others are calling for a strong, healthy and high performing rail system, yet no one has the stomach to challenge the status quo,” Mr. Harrison said in a white paper on April 7. “Clearly, moving goods reliably and efficiently is top of mind for everyone in the industry; we believe precision railroading and a C.P.-N.S. combination addresses those challenges.”Canadian Pacific’s hopes dimmed on Friday, though, when the Justice Department officially opposed its voting-trust structure. The regulator said that the tactic would “compromise Norfolk Southern’s independence” by integrating the two companies before the Surface Transportation Board could complete its review. The Justice Department does not have the authority to approve or reject railroad mergers; that responsibility lies with the transportation board.“We urge the S.T.B. to preserve its ability to review the impact of the proposal on competition and consumers before Canadian Pacific starts scrambling the eggs,” William J. Baer, assistant attorney general of the antitrust division of the Justice Department, said in a statement on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Canadian Pacific Ends Bid for Norfolk Southern Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.