AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Dominic ElliottEuropean lenders’ end-of-year fines for troubled mortgage securities have confounded market expectations and left a clear winner: Deutsche Bank.Although Barclays failed to achieve similar closure, settlements with the United States Justice Department by Deutsche, Germany’s largest lender by assets, and its peer Credit Suisse remove major question marks for both banks.If the combined $11.7 billion number for Deutsche and Credit Suisse seems big, the balance sheet hits are less so. That’s because the bulk of the agreements are in the form of loan forgiveness or credit relief rather than hard cash. Remove that element and Deutsche will pay a $3.1 billion penalty; Credit Suisse will pay $2.5 billion. Factor in the fourth-quarter charges that the banks have said they will take after provisions, and Reuters Breakingviews calculates that both will probably have common equity Tier 1 capital as a proportion of risk-weighted assets at an adequate 11.3 percent.Deutsche Bank investors have the most to cheer. When the Justice Department’s initial $14 billion demand was leaked in September, the bank’s shares plunged. The settlement may slightly slow the attempts by its chief executive, John M. Cryan, to return the lender to economic profitability. But it could have been far worse. Had Deutsche Bank’s $7.2 billion total settlement been entirely in the form of cash, its Tier 1 ratio might have fallen below 11 percent, near a threshold set by its main regulator. A $14 billion hit might have pushed it closer to 9 percent and potentially prompted panic among creditors.Barclays’ readiness to fight on rather than resolve its own mortgage misdeeds is partly because it did something similar with foreign exchange settlements, and partly because it has less to lose in taking on the American regulator than Deutsche, which has other sizable litigation outstanding. But mostly the bank appears to believe that a settlement would be unfair. Using figures from the data provider Inside Mortgage Finance, it points out that its $74 billion issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities between 2005 and 2007 was half the size of the smallest dealer among the seven banks that have settled.Nonetheless, Barclays’ own capital ratio could have fallen below 11 percent had it been fined an amount similar to what the Justice Department imposed on Deutsche and Credit Suisse. A bit of ambiguity over the final legal bill may be preferable to the certainty of a big hit to the balance sheet. But it’s still taking a gamble on regulatory leniency in the era of Donald J. Trump.Advertisement