By AMIE TSANG and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 29, 2017
The largest banks in the United States have passed the latest stress test — the first time this has happened since the Federal Reserve began the exercise seven years ago.And the shareholders who have put up with years of sagging returns finally look set to get their rewards as the banks prepare to pay out the largest dividends in almost 10 years. They can return up to 100 percent of their profits to shareholders.Here’s what some of the top banks are planning:• Bank of America will buy back up to $12 billion of stock and raise its quarterly dividends 60 percent, to 12 cents a share.• Citigroup will double its dividend, to 32 cents a share, and buy back up to $15.6 billion of shares.Advertisement• JPMorgan Chase will buy back up to $19.4 billion of stock and raise its dividend 12 percent, to 56 cents a share.Advertisement• Morgan Stanley will buy back up to $5 billion of shares and raise its dividend 25 percent, to 25 cents a share.• Goldman Sachs … is keeping its cards close to its chest.The billions of dollars of shareholder returns are what investors had hoped banks would deliver under a Trump presidency.The only outlier is Capital One, which has to resubmit its new capital plan, although it can still pay dividends and buy back shares.The results come as efforts continue in Washington to roll back financial regulation and to loosen the rules of the stress tests. There are, however, discussions among federal housing agencies to begin testing firms other than banks to assess their ability to deal with a potential crisis.Online shopping — mostly, read: Amazon — has claimed another casualty: Staples. Now, the private equity firm Sycamore Partners has taken on the task of rebuilding the office supplies company.Sycamore, which already owns retailers like Talbots and Hot Topic, will pay $6.9 billion for Staples.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Staples has been in decline, cutting back on stores as sales and profits have sunk. It tried to stay competitive by merging with Office Depot, but the deal was blocked by a federal judge.AdvertisementMost of Staples’ sales aren’t reliant on customers at bricks-and-mortar locations, however, so there could still be some opportunity for it to make a profit.Staples also has very little debt, which means that Sycamore, despite aiming to borrow much of the money it needs to fund the buyout, will not have to overload its purchase with a crushing burden.And, if Sycamore wanted to test the Trump administration’s business-friendly stance on antitrust issues, it could try reviving the merger with Office Depot.The most recent controversy regarding sexual harassment in the technology world, which emerged barely a day after the ouster of Travis Kalanick over a series of scandals at Uber, has continued to grow.Binary Capital, the venture firm co-founded by Justin Caldbeck — who is accused of sexually harassing several female start-up founders — suffered another blow on Wednesday when its other co-founder, Jonathan Teo, offered to resign.Investors in Binary have decided to effectively suspend both of the firm’s funds, Bloomberg reports.Here’s a recap of what has happened with Binary and Mr. Caldbeck, who previously worked at Lightspeed Venture Partners:• Female technology executives who spoke on the record to the website The Information about Mr. Caldbeck include Niniane Wang of Minted, and Susan Ho and Leiti Hsu of Journy. Recode reported that Katrina Lake of Stitch Fix had signed a nondisclosure agreement after complaining to Lightspeed about Mr. Caldbeck.• Lightspeed said in a statement that it “should have done more” to respond to allegations regarding Mr. Caldbeck’s behavior.Advertisement• Mr. Teo wrote on Facebook, “I take it seriously that I have been misled by someone whom I considered a trusted friend.”• Binary’s third partner, Matt Mazzeo, quit.• Binary now faces a lawsuit by a former employee who contends that she was harassed by Mr. Caldbeck after leaving the firm.“Maybe he’s just nuts, but that doesn’t make you guilty.”— Benjamin Brafman, a lawyer for Martin Shkreli, who is being tried on eight counts of securities and wire fraud related to his time running two hedge funds and a pharmaceutical company. Mr. Brafman said his client was strange and flawed, but still “brilliant beyond words.”The British government is expected to announce this morning whether Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox should be allowed to buy the 61 percent of Sky, the British satellite giant, that it doesn’t already own.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang, and follow Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.