By LIZ MOYERFEB. 25, 2016
Lawmakers heaped criticism on an advisory committee report to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission recommending that the agency scrap its proposed rule on position limits in derivatives trading.The report and a dissenting opinion were presented at a meeting of the commission on Thursday. The report, which was approved 8 to 1 by the Energy and Environmental Markets Advisory Committee, says that federally mandated position limits are not necessary and that the C.F.T.C. should not enact the rule it has been working on. It adds that if the agency goes ahead with the rule, it needs substantial changes.Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, sent a letter to the C.F.T.C.’s commissioner, J. Christopher Giancarlo, on Thursday asking him to withdraw the report, saying that the committee, which was established as part of the Dodd-Frank financial reforms, was skewed toward energy industry insiders and that its conclusions were not supported by the record, much less presented for public debate.The report, Senator Warren said in the letter, “is nothing more than a recitation of industry talking points.” The committee — composed largely of representatives from the oil and gas sector, for-profit futures exchanges, and proprietary traders — is “an industry insider group that produced a product reflecting the highest hopes of the industry for as little regulation as possible.”AdvertisementAnother Democrat, Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, also took issue with the makeup of the committee. “The C.F.T.C.’s leadership needs to take a hard look at how its advisory committees are formed, who serves on them, and how to ensure that consumers and the public have an adequate voice in the process,” he said.AdvertisementAt the committee meeting on Thursday, Mr. Giancarlo said that balancing the committee membership was an “ongoing event,” noting the full commission had unanimously approved the current makeup.“It’s possible that going forward in the future we’ll continue to look to balance the membership and bring broader views,” Mr. Giancarlo said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The dissenter on the committee, Tyson Slocum, the energy program director of the Washington consumer advocacy group Public Citizen, criticized the way the report was produced, saying most committee members were unaware of its existence until a draft was sent to them this month, leaving little chance for their input.The report was drafted at Mr. Giancarlo’s request by Craig Pirrong, a professor at the University of Houston, who recently joined the committee’s membership. He and fellow committee member James Allison, a retired executive of ConocoPhillips, were instructed by Mr. Giancarlo to stick to the transcripts of two meetings last year where position limits were discussed.“I viewed my task as being a fateful scribe of what transpired during the two meetings,” Mr. Pirrong said on Thursday. Mr. Giancarlo added, “They strayed not an inch from what was discussed last year in two meetings.”Mr. Slocum’s dissent says the report’s conclusions rely on selective arguments and ignore research that was not presented at the two meetings last year. The panels at those meetings, one of which included a presentation and comments by Mr. Pirrong, did not have balanced presenters who could offer conflicting views, he said.The report “becomes a self-referencing echo chamber,” he said at the meeting on Thursday.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.