By EMILY STEELMAY 2, 2016
Sumner M. Redstone, the ailing chairman emeritus of Viacom and CBS, will be required to give 30 minutes of sworn testimony as part of the court battle over his mental competency, a California judge ruled on Monday.The session will take place at Mr. Redstone’s Los Angeles mansion at some point this week and will be videotaped. Lawyers for both Mr. Redstone and Manuela Herzer, his former companion and romantic partner, who brought the lawsuit, will be allowed to take 15 minutes of testimony from Mr. Redstone.The videotape will not be made public, but a transcript will be made available.The ruling came in advance of Friday’s scheduled start of the trial in a suit that was filed in November by Ms. Herzer. The case is being heard by Judge David J. Cowan of Los Angeles County Superior Court.Pierce O’Donnell, a lawyer for Ms. Herzer, said that he planned to begin his case with the video. “That is more than enough time to establish what I am going to establish,” he said in a phone interview.AdvertisementMr. O’Donnell did not say what he planned to ask Mr. Redstone.In a statement, Gabrielle A. Vidal, a chairman of trust and estate litigation at the Loeb & Loeb law firm, which represents Mr. Redstone, said: “We appreciate the court’s continued protection of Mr. Redstone’s privacy and dignity.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The development could shed some light on the well-being of Mr. Redstone, who has not been seen publicly since his 92nd birthday party last May. Although he is represented by a team of lawyers, he has not made an appearance or any public declarations during the course of the legal fight.Previously, the judge declined several requests to order the deposition of Mr. Redstone, stating that taking testimony from him would be unproductive because he has a severe speech impediment.AdvertisementWhether the judge’s decision to allow for the examination of Mr. Redstone would bring the two sides back to settlement negotiations remains to be seen. Talks hit a snag about three weeks ago after a framework of a settlement had been reached.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Redstone Ordered to Testify in Mental Competency Suit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.