By CHAD BRAYDEC. 22, 2016
LONDON — United States authorities have accused the British bank Barclays and two former executives of fraudulently misleading the public in the sale of tens of billions of dollars in securities backed by home mortgages.The Justice Department  filed a lawsuit Thursday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn after the two sides failed to reach a settlement despite months of talks.The department has also been in settlement talks with other large European lenders, including Credit Suisse, as the end of the Obama administration nears. Late Thursday, Deutsche Bank said that it had reached a tentative $7.2 billion deal with the Justice Department to resolve a federal investigation into its sale of toxic mortgage securities after months of negotiations.On Thursday, the Justice Department said Barclays’ actions in the packaging and sale of what are known as residential mortgage-backed securities in the years leading to the financial crisis injured tens of thousands of investors when the housing market collapsed. The lawsuit claims that Barclays — which has significant investment banking operations in New York — repeatedly misled investors about the quality of mortgages underlying 36 mortgage-backed securities from 2005 to 2007. Those deals securitized more than $31 billion in subprime and other mortgage loans, according to the complaint. The Justice Department said they turned out to be “catastrophic failures.”Advertisement“More than half of the underlying loans defaulted, causing investors in those deals to lose many billions of dollars, with hundreds of millions more in losses projected during the remaining life of the deals,” the complaint says. “Even many investors in the AAA-rated tranches of these securitizations, which were rated as safe as investments in U.S. Treasury bonds, have suffered or are projected to suffer significant losses.”AdvertisementVendors that the bank hired to perform due diligence on the loans described some of them as “craptacular,” others as “scariest collateral” and others as having the “distinct aroma of default,” according to the complaint.Barclays said the claims by the Justice Department were “disconnected from the facts.”“We have an obligation to our shareholders, customers, clients and employees to defend ourselves against unreasonable allegations and demands,” the bank said. “Barclays will vigorously defend the complaint and seek its dismissal at the earliest opportunity.”In its complaint, the Justice Department also named two former Barclays executives as defendants: Paul K. Menefee, Barclays’ lead banker on its subprime residential mortgage-backed securities; and John T. Carroll, Barclays’ lead trader for subprime loan acquisitions.“The complaint is a misguided attempt to place blame on Paul Menefee and others for losses incurred by sophisticated institutional investors as a result of the industrywide collapse of the housing market,” said Barry H. Berke, a lawyer for Mr. Menefee of Austin, Tex. Mr. Berke said he looked forward to fighting the allegations in court, “where it will be shown why the government’s own witness described Mr. Menefee as ‘honest,’ ‘careful’ and ‘the fairest person he ever dealt with.’”A lawyer for Mr. Carroll of Port Washington, N.Y., did not immediately respond to a request for comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Since 2013, large banks in the United States, including JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup, have paid tens of billions of dollars in settlements over troubled mortgage securities. Goldman Sachs agreed to pay as much as $5 billion to settle an inquiry into mortgage-backed securities in January, while Morgan Stanley reached a $3.2 billion settlement in February.For Barclays, the mortgage litigation is one of several legacy issues that are lingering as James E. Staley, the London-based bank’s American chief executive, seeks to turn it around. The bank also faces several separate civil lawsuits over the sale of mortgage-backed securities. Since joining the bank last year, Mr. Staley has accelerated the sale of businesses that Barclays no longer considers essential and is focusing its strategy on two divisions: the British consumer bank and a slimmed-down corporate and investment bank.The Justice Department litigation was brought under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, which was passed after the savings and loan crisis. It has been an important tool for the government in recent years as it has pursued cases stemming from the 2008 financial crisis.AdvertisementBarclays repeatedly assured investors that “unacceptable” loans had been weeded out through its due diligence process and that the properties underlying the securitized loans had “sufficient value to avoid loss in the event of default,” according to the complaint.The Justice Department said that Barclays’ due diligence on the deals at issue was “a sham.” A large percentage of the properties did not comply with underwriting guidelines or involved borrowers who lacked the ability to repay their loans, the Justice Department said.“Financial institutions like Barclays occupy a position of vital public trust,” Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said. “Ordinary Americans depend on their assurances of transparency and legitimacy, and entrust these banks with their very livelihood.”Barclays was informed by its due diligence vendors that the appraised values of significant percentages of the mortgaged properties were overstated and that thousands of those properties were underwater, or worth less than the amount of loans against them, the complaint says. In one instance, the Justice Department said Mr. Menefee lamented to an unnamed Barclays trader in June 2007 that investors had become smarter about risk factors in loan pools and the bank would not be able to continue its past practice of including defective loans in its residential mortgage-backed securities.“I just don’t think we’re able to hide as much as we were last year, jam things in, you know, bob and weave and hope for the best,” Mr. Menefee said, according to the lawsuit. “And I think those days are behind us.”Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on December 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Justice Department Sues Barclays Over Mortgage-Backed Securities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.