By RANDALL SMITHOCT. 5, 2016
A lawyer for New York State finished questioning Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chief executive of the insurance giant American International Group, without cracking his insistence that he did not know of anything improper in the transactions at the heart of his civil accounting fraud trial.On Wednesday, Mr. Greenberg’s fifth day on the stand in New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, David E. Nachman, a state trial attorney, focused on the windup and aftermath of a two-step $500 million reinsurance deal with General Reinsurance Corp.Mr. Greenberg and A.I.G.’s former chief financial officer, Howard I. Smith, were accused of bolstering the insurer’s reported financial results using bogus transactions about 16 years ago in a case originally filed in 2005 by Eliot Spitzer when he was the New York State attorney general. The trial is expected to last for months.Gen Re was supposedly getting reinsurance from A.I.G. in the deal struck in 2000, paying $10 million for it, according to testimony last month from a former A.I.G. executive, Christian M. Milton. But A.I.G. arranged to repay the $10 million to Gen Re along with a $5 million deal fee, Mr. Milton testified.AdvertisementThe state has charged that the “secret” fee repayment was one sign the reinsurance was bogus, intended mainly to allow A.I.G. to increase its reserves by $500 million. But Mr. Greenberg, who initiated the deal by phoning the Gen Re chief executive, testified on Tuesday that he was not aware of the repayment plan.AdvertisementAsked on Wednesday about a 2002 memorandum from Mr. Milton, who was then still at A.I.G., informing him that Gen Re wanted to unwind the deal, Mr. Greenberg said he was “not involved” in talks among A.I.G. executives that resulted in the reinsurance remaining in place.“I had other things to do,” Mr. Greenberg said, smiling genially as he generally shrugged off about 45 minutes of follow-up questions about why he did not delve personally into the deal’s status. Mr. Greenberg, 91, has fought the state’s accusations for more than a decade to preserve his legacy in building A.I.G.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He also gave noncommittal answers to questions about the role of Mr. Smith in the Gen Re deal. “He would be involved when necessary,” Mr. Greenberg said. Partly because of defense objections, Mr. Nachman could not pin down whether Mr. Smith got involved at Mr. Greenberg’s behest — involvement Mr. Nachman suggested was unusual for most reinsurance deals.When Mr. Nachman asked Mr. Greenberg about resigning as A.I.G.’s chief in 2005 after he could not assure the insurer’s directors that he would testify before regulators investigating the Gen Re transaction, Mr. Greenberg said he was concerned at the time that he would not have access to information he would need. And as Mr. Greenberg’s defense lawyer, David Boies, noted, the record indicated regulators were also planning to ask about other deals.In a half-hour series of questions for the defense after a lunch break, Mr. Boies took Mr. Greenberg through his various civic, philanthropic and business activities, and asked him how busy he had been around 2000, when the transactions in question were initiated.Mr. Greenberg said that at that time he devoted up to one-fifth of his time to being the chairman of the Starr Foundation, a big A.I.G. shareholder, visited 20 to 30 foreign countries annually and participated in 50 to 70 phone calls related to A.I.G. daily.When Mr. Boies asked if he had “relied on other people at A.I.G. to implement the transactions” at issue in the case, Mr. Greenberg replied, “Absolutely.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.