By BROOKS BARNESFEB. 24, 2016
LOS ANGELES — David Litt, known as President Obama’s joke writer in chief, is joining the humor website and studio Funny or Die as it seeks to make even more fun of American politics.Mr. Litt, who left his previous job last month, will become head writer and producer of Funny or Die’s operation in Washington.“He’s funny, clearly much smarter than all of us, and bears a striking resemblance to ‘Tommy Boy’-era David Spade, which means a lot,” Mike Farah, Funny or Die’s president of production, said on Wednesday.Mr. Litt, 29, was a special assistant to Mr. Obama and senior presidential speechwriter until stepping down on Jan. 23. Among his comedic claims to fame is a scripted moment at last year’s White House Correspondents’ Association dinner when Mr. Obama was joined on stage by his “anger translator,” played by the comedian Keegan-Michael Key. A video of the performance was viewed more than 35 million times on Facebook.AdvertisementFunny or Die, which counts Adam McKay and Will Ferrell as founders and Judd Apatow as a principal partner, produces exclusive videos that often feature well-known stars. The company recently made a splash with a fake biopic about Donald Trump, with Johnny Depp playing the businessman-turned-politician.Mr. Litt, who is working on a book about his experience as a young staff member at the White House, served as the lead joke writer for the last four Correspondents’ Association dinners.AdvertisementHe told The Los Angeles Times in April that a favorite joke was this one, from three years ago: “I know Republicans are still sorting out what happened in 2012, but one thing they all agree is that they need to do better at reaching out to minorities. Call me self-centered, but I can think of one minority they should start with.”A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: From the White House to Funny or Die.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »