

 Jim Rutenberg
 

MEDIATOR
MAY 1, 2016
Last Wednesday, the CBS chairman, Leslie Moonves, ducked into that night’s taping of Stephen Colbert’s “Late Show,” and then joined Mr. Colbert in his office above the Ed Sullivan Theater.There Mr. Moonves, Mr. Colbert and the show’s new executive producer and showrunner, Chris Licht, broke out a bottle of vodka and toasted their new mission: to get the “Late Show” on track after an uneven first eight months.It was the first time the three had met since Mr. Moonves persuaded Mr. Colbert to have Mr. Licht join the show two weeks earlier, arguing that Mr. Colbert’s insistence on personally orchestrating details big and small — lighting, script approval, budgets — was diverting his focus from his own performance and that he needed the help.Mr. Moonves says that his visit was a social call on a fledgling show in which he has great faith. “We each had a drink and it was nice,” he told me. “Just three guys.”AdvertisementBut, of course, it was more than that. It was about whether they could pull off one of the most intriguing experiments in late-night television history; whether Mr. Colbert, who became a leading voice in American political satire by playing a fictional character on his Comedy Central show — holding forth before a cable congregation of the converted — could succeed as himself in the big broad tent of network television, whose commercial and corporate imperatives can be homogenizing.AdvertisementCBS and Mr. Moonves have hundreds of millions of dollars riding on the result, not to mention corporate pride. Mr. Colbert has something more personal on the line: his reputation as a comedic actor who used his longtime perch at Comedy Central to show how integrity, grace and wicked intelligence could inject something politically powerful — and powerfully funny — into the late-night lineup of stupid pet tricks and vapid celebrity interviews.He shared that reputation with his friend Jon Stewart, who left Comedy Central’s 11 p.m. “Daily Show” several months after Mr. Colbert left his 11:30 p.m. program, “The Colbert Report.” In their absence there has been a “Where is Superman?” aspect to this year’s presidential campaign, especially in Left America, Centrist-Left America and, yes, Media America.If ever there was an election cycle that called for the sharp satirical analysis that Mr. Stewart and Mr. Colbert once provided on a nightly basis, it is this one. Their successors, Trevor Noah (“The Daily Show”) and Larry Wilmore (“The Nightly Show”) provide their share of edgy satire, but they are relatively new and just starting to build their followings, just as Samantha Bee is on TBS’s “Full Frontal.”John Oliver and Bill Maher have made their marks on HBO, but their shows are not nightly, and have not alleviated the sense that Mr. Colbert and Mr. Stewart are badly missed in the face of all the Trumpmania. That’s why you see headlines such as “Calling Jon Stewart: America Needs You Now More Than Ever” (the liberal website Daily Kos) or declarations like the one made by the former Variety editor Peter Bart, who said that “at the moment of truth” — this election — Mr. Colbert and Mr. Stewart “hid in their foxholes” by leaving Comedy Central.It’s pretty odd when you think about it. It’s like saying, “No one has replaced Stephen Colbert, not even Stephen Colbert,” when, in fact, he’s on television every weeknight, just not as the jingoistic Conservative talk show host alter ego he employed on Comedy Central.But I found myself feeling the same way a few months ago when Donald J. Trump announced his plan for “a total and complete” ban on Muslims’ entering the United States after the San Bernardino terrorist attack. I was curious to see what Mr. Colbert would make of it.The best of what to watch and where to watch it, delivered to your inbox twice a week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I was agog when he opened the show with three lingerie models from a CBS Victoria’s Secret special that was to air the next night, wearing angel’s wings and eating hot wings. Even Mr. Colbert appeared to blanch at what came off as an example of corporate synergy gone awry. Toward the end of the bit Mr. Colbert looked at the camera, noted that “there’s more stuff on the prompter,” said something along the lines of “The heck with it” — but in a way that required bleeping — and cut it short.AdvertisementMr. Colbert did go on to do a fairly serious soliloquy about the attack. But it was hard to square with the hot wings.CBS officials say they didn’t force the Victoria’s Secret tie-in. But it seemed to typify how a big broadcaster will grab what’s special and cool on cable and try pressing it into the advertiser-friendly, safe-for-broad-audiences mold.I sensed the same thing in February, when Mr. Colbert’s interview with the actor Casey Affleck, there to promote the movie “Triple 9,” turned into a snippy back and forth over Mr. Affleck’s wardrobe. Neither acted as if he wanted to be there for the too-familiar promotional exercise.Mr. Colbert has excelled in interviews with big political gets, like Vice President Joseph Biden and House Speaker Paul Ryan, and people who genuinely interest him, like the energy secretary, Ernest Moniz, who, let’s face it, is not the sort of A-lister television executives want to see on their flagship late-night shows, but is typical of many guests on “The Colbert Report.”Of course Mr. Colbert knew what he signed up for when he took the job David Letterman held for more than two decades. He seemed sincere last August when he told GQ he was eager to shed his “Colbert Report” character. The great irony is that Mr. Colbert is still learning how to be himself on television after nine years of pretending to be someone else.Mr. Moonves noted that many late-night hosts before Mr. Colbert needed time to adjust to the 11:30 time slot. “There’s no way you don’t have growing pains,” Mr. Moonves said, adding that he has patience for what he expects to be a long-running show. “These things are generational,” he added. To make some adjustments after eight months “makes sense to me, and to Stephen.”Things could be worse. Mr. Colbert still places second in overall audience — behind Jimmy Fallon on NBC, and ahead of Jimmy Kimmel on ABC. But Mr. Kimmel has been beating Mr. Colbert among the younger viewers advertisers covet. And as Verne Gay of Newsday wrote, Mr. Colbert is lagging in the new currency of viral videos shared through social media. Beyond that, there is the growing consensus that things just aren’t clicking.Mr. Moonves has asked Mr. Licht to fix that. Mr. Licht’s biggest challenge will be redirecting a tight and loyal team that came with Mr. Colbert to CBS from Comedy Central, and which is known for having an almost religious devotion to the star. Mr. Colbert signed off on Mr. Licht’s appointment only after an intense three-hour meeting over drinks at the Parker Meridien hotel bar last month. (It was supposed to be secret but they were spotted by national political reporters staying there for the New York primary.)AdvertisementMr. Licht’s background is in news, not comedy, having come from “CBS This Morning,” which he gave a new identity and a ratings boost. But he appears to be a Colbert kind of guy — for instance, he made a public pronouncement this year that he wouldn’t allow Mr. Trump to do “This Morning” interviews by phone.Mr. Licht has started by taking over some mechanics of the show that Mr. Colbert was insisting on doing himself, so Mr. Colbert can concentrate on being himself.Now it’s up to Mr. Colbert to decide who that is — and for CBS to let him.The Mediator column on Monday, about Stephen Colbert’s efforts to find his footing as host of “The Late Show” on CBS, rendered part of a headline on the website Daily Kos incorrectly. The headline, as it appeared on the website, said “Calling Jon Stewart: America Needs You Now More Than Ever.” (Not “American.”)A version of this article appears in print on May 2, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Let Colbert Be Colbert (Whoever That Is).  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »