
Breakingviews By                     
GEORGE HAY

MAY 4, 2016
Credit Suisse is culling its ugly ducklings. The Swiss bank sold $1.2 billion of distressed credit to TSSP, an affiliate of the United States buyout group TPG, locking in $100 million of write-downs on top of those it has already taken. The financial damage looks less painful than the dent to the group’s credibility.Back in October, Credit Suisse surprised the market by deciding to stick with credit and securitized products it could have sold off. Tidjane Thiam, the chief executive, took the view that the outsize return on the assets justified the risk of losses.Unfortunately, the bet went wrong: Adverse markets meant the bank wound up making almost $1 billion of write-downs, including $338 million on a distressed credit portfolio that stood at $2.9 billion at the end of 2015.Having decided to cut his losses, Mr. Thiam can take comfort that prices of distressed credit don’t look to have largely changed compared to fall. Triple C-rated distressed assets have not budged much from around 80 percent of par, according to Barclays indexes, while the lowest-rated United States high yield debt was trading at 41.9 percent of par on Tuesday, at a slight premium to 35.5 percent on Oct. 21 when Credit Suisse updated its strategy.In other words, the financial damage from selling now looks similar to what it would have been in October. What’s more, while detailed numbers of the TSSP deal announced Tuesday were not disclosed, the sale looks to have been at a smaller discount than previous asset disposals this year.That also implies Credit Suisse could have sold its earlier batches more profitably had it waited, though. And Mr. Thiam does not emerge better off for the whole affair. His handling of it, which included the claim that senior managers had not been kept informed of what was going on, has raised more questions than it has answered — about Credit Suisse’s risk management, its communications and its bosses’ grasp of detail.George Hay is European financial editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »