AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesThis is what to expect from the week ahead:ECONOMYTuesday morning, the European Commission will announce its spring economic forecast for growth and employment across the 28 member states of the European Union. The forecast may also shed light on whether the long-awaited recovery in the eurozone may finally be consolidating and on the effects of falling prices and the economic slowdown in China. The commission, which makes the forecasts three times a year, may update its estimates about the costs and benefits of the ongoing large-scale migrations to European nations. James KanterOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to release its report on the nation’s hiring and unemployment for April. With 73 months of uninterrupted job growth in the private sector, the American economy has already broken a record. In the March report, there were other encouraging gains aside from the impressive addition of 215,000 jobs. Average hourly wages increased by 0.3 percent while the proportion of Americans in the labor force — which had been on the decline — hit a two-year high at 63 percent. While the economy’s overall growth rate has been sluggish, the job market has remained a bright spot. Wall Street estimates that employers hired about 200,000 workers last month, and that wages will continue their forward momentum. Patricia CohenAUTOSAutomakers on Tuesday are scheduled to report sales of new vehicles in the United States in April, and analysts expect the industry to report an increase over the same month a year ago. The research firm Kelley Blue Book has forecast a 4 percent improvement and a seasonally adjusted annual sales rate for the month of about 17.5 million vehicles. While trucks and sport utility vehicles continue to propel the overall growth of the market, passenger cars made by Honda and Nissan are also selling well. Analysts will be watching which auto companies are increasing discounts and other incentives to improve their sales, and whether Volkswagen can halt its steady decline in the United States since admitting last year that it cheated on diesel emissions tests. Bill VlasicThe electric carmaker Tesla Motors is expected to report its first-quarter earnings on Wednesday, and will probably release more details on how much money it raised by taking $1,000 reservations for its forthcoming Model 3 vehicle. The company has said it received deposits for more than 325,000 of its newest electric car, which will not be available for sales until the end of the next year at the earliest. Tesla is preparing to expand its manufacturing operations in California and planning to build a battery plant in Nevada. Bill VlasicBANKSIt will be another busy week for bank earnings as several of Europe’s largest institutions report their first-quarter results. The British bank HSBC, the Swiss lender UBS and the French banks BNP Paribas and Société Générale are all expected to provide updates to their investors. The first quarter has been a difficult one for lenders as uncertainty in the financial markets has weighed on banking results in Europe and  the United States. The challenging environment comes as several of Europe’s biggest lenders are in the midst of reshaping their businesses. Chad BrayTECHNOLOGYAlibaba will look to build on the momentum of its strong earnings at the end of last year when it announces results for the first quarter on Thursday. The Chinese e-commerce giant has struggled to live up to the huge hype ahead of its listing in 2014, and has been working to become more efficient even as it expands operations to rural parts of China. Many analysts will be watching the company’s performance as an indication of the broader confidence of the Chinese consumer as the world’s second-largest economy continues to experience slower economic growth. Paul MozurCOMMODITIESArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steel company, is planning to report first-quarter earnings on Friday. Investors will study the results to see whether the beleaguered steel industry is beginning to turn around. ArcelorMittal, which lost nearly $8 billion in 2015, and other steel makers are having success in persuading the United States and the European Union to impose protective tariffs on Chinese steel exports that the companies say are undercutting their products. But analysts expect the Luxembourg-based company to report lower profits than in the first quarter of 2015. Stanley ReedMEDIAFor the last five months, the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone has been the subject of a salacious legal battle over his mental capacity. On Friday, a public trial is scheduled to begin. The suit was filed in November by Manuela Herzer, a former companion to Mr. Redstone. Ms. Herzer claims that Mr. Redstone, 92, was not mentally competent in October when he removed her from a directive that would have given her supervision over his health decisions. On the same day, Mr. Redstone removed Ms. Herzer from his personal estate, in which he had planned to leave her $50 million and his Los Angeles mansion, valued at $20 million.Ms. Herzer has said that she has fought the legal battle out of love for Mr. Redstone and that she is concerned for his well-being. Lawyers for Mr. Redstone have called the suit meritless and have said that she is after his money.While the courtroom drama concerns Mr. Redstone’s personal life, it could have broad implications for Viacom and CBS, the two media companies he continues to control. Emily SteelAdvertisement