AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Rob CoxAs the most recent merger boom winds down, the broken promises of overeager corporate executives will begin to emerge in earnest. Contrary to the Wall Street spin, one plus one rarely amounts to more than two. The progress of three transactions from the start of the current cycle illustrates the ways investors will be let down in 2017.Worldwide mergers and acquisitions reached $3.3 trillion through December 2016, according to Thomson Reuters, down 18 percent from the record-setting year that preceded it. The crop includes megadeals like AT&T’s proposed $85 billion takeover of Time Warner and the Abbott Laboratories $25 billion acquisition of St. Jude Medical.Some matches will work out as overlapping businesses generate cost savings that fall to the bottom line. In many cases, however, the market prematurely gave corporate chiefs the benefit of the doubt. Disasters like Time Warner-AOL or Vivendi-Universal, which followed the fin-de-siècle surge more than a decade ago, may be avoided, but deals struck in jewelry, artificial limbs and poultry provide a sneak preview.Start with Signet Jewelers. In February 2014, early in the merger bonanza, the diamond merchant bid $1.4 billion for its rival Zales. The projected synergies didn’t materialize, sales disappointed, Signet’s accounting needed revising and a private equity firm was brought in to shore up its finances. Its stock has underperformed the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index since the deal was unveiled, and is down 10 percent since Signet put a ring on Zales.Then there is the medical device maker Zimmer. The $13.4 billion purchase of its rival Biomet in 2014 is, so far, an example of why not doing deals is often preferable. While Zimmer’s shareholders have watched the value of their stock rise by 12 percent since pouncing on Biomet, its competitor Stryker, which sat out the frenzy, has delivered three times more.Lastly, consider Tyson Foods. Since successfully bidding for the sausage maker Hillshire Brands in May 2014, its equity value has expanded by less than the $7.7 billion it handed to Hillshire’s owners. Tyson recently warned that earnings would not meet expectations and parted ways with its chief executive.Signet, Zimmer and Tyson could yet live up to their commitments. In the meantime, expect other big acquirers to join them in failing to make good on their corporate finance calculus.Advertisement