AdvertisementSupported bySuperReturn InternationalBy Chad BrayBERLIN — As a former aide to President Jimmy Carter, David M. Rubenstein, the co-founder of the Carlyle Group, is often asked about his views on this year’s presidential race in the United States.Speaking on Wednesday at SuperReturn International, an investors’ conference here, Mr. Rubenstein posed a very different question to an audience of industry executives, investors and service providers: Among the remaining Democratic and Republican presidential hopefuls, to whom would you entrust your investments?The response from the audience was not encouraging.“You guys don’t like these people as investors,” Mr. Rubenstein said, as only a few hands in the audience went up to show support for any of the candidates.As far as who he thinks will win each party’s nomination, Mr. Rubenstein said that superdelegates in the Democratic Party would most likely give the nomination to Hillary Clinton.Among the Republicans, Mr. Rubenstein said, Donald J. Trump appeared to have the edge over the next two closest candidates, Senators Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas.“At this point, it’s hard to see which states, where Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz are actually going to beat Donald Trump,” he said.Referring to Mr. Trump’s public attacks on Pope Francis and former President George W. Bush, he added, “If you can get in a dispute with the pope, if you can get in a dispute with the former president of the United States and still win very handily in South Carolina, it’s hard to see what can stop Donald Trump right now.”So that non-Americans in the audience did not feel left out, Mr. Rubenstein also put up a selection of other world leaders and asked if those in attendance would entrust their money to any of them: Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, President Xi Jinping of China, President François Hollande of France and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.None of the leaders received overwhelming support.“I know, the answer is that this person is who you will give your money to,” Mr. Rubenstein said, before showing a photograph of Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, and exiting the stage to laughter.Advertisement