By MIKE McPHATEJAN. 28, 2016
Craig Moon, a former president and publisher of USA Today, has been named as the new publisher of The Las Vegas Review-Journal, the newspaper announced on Thursday.Mr. Moon served for a time as the executive vice president of Gannett Newspapers, and led its flagship newspaper, USA Today, from 2003 to 2009. Since then, he has worked as an industry consultant, The Review-Journal said.He described his new role at the biggest newspaper in Nevada in a statement on Thursday as an “an exciting opportunity.”He continued, “I look forward to working with everyone at The R-J to deliver first-class news and information that matches the interests, needs and values of our readership.”AdvertisementMr. Moon replaces Jason Taylor, who has served as the publisher since July. It wasn’t immediately clear what prompted the change in leadership.AdvertisementIn the statement, Mr. Moon touched on the recent turmoil at the newspaper related to its sale to the family of Sheldon Adelson, the billionaire casino mogul and Republican Party benefactor, for about $140 million.“I understand that ownership transitions can create questions among staff and readers alike,” Mr. Moon said. “I intend to answer these questions with my actions — actions that will demonstrate my commitment to The R-J, to the people who work here, and to the community we all serve.”Since the transition of ownership in December, which was initially cloaked in mystery, reporters and editors at the newspaper have been grappling with heightened worries over the potential for editorial meddling by Mr. Adelson.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The anxieties only deepened when less than two weeks after the sale, Michael Hengel, the newspaper’s top editor, accepted what was described as a voluntary buyout. At the time, Mr. Hengel told The Times that concerns about the new owners played a role in his decision.Glenn Cook, an editorial writer at the newspaper, has served as interim editor while management seeks a replacement for Mr. Hengel.Mr. Moon’s deep background in the news business — he has also served stints as publisher at The Tennessean, The Arkansas Gazette and The News-Press in Fort Myers, Fla. — could help mollify concerns over the leadership of the newsroom.He enjoys a solid reputation in the industry, said Rick Edmonds, media business analyst at the Poynter Institute.“Reading between the lines, which I guess is about all we can do at this stage, I’d say he was chosen as someone who is very seasoned and respected, sort of a steady hand at the wheel,” Mr. Edmonds said.Mr. Moon spoke briefly to the newsroom staff on Thursday, The Review-Journal reported.
            Review-Journal names former USA Today head as publisher https://t.co/jBN8LgHcp6 via @reviewjournal #rjnow #vegas pic.twitter.com/r4DNNb3o94 The rank-and-file was still digesting the news, an editor told The Times. He asked for anonymity because he was not authorized to speak.Advertisement“Seventh publisher in six years,” the editor said. “We’re kind of getting used to it.”A version of this article appears in print on January 29, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; New Publisher Named at Las Vegas Newspaper.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.