
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

FEB. 23, 2016
As growth slows at home, more and more Chinese companies are looking to do deals in the United States. And they are increasingly running smack into the American national security apparatus.Such scrutiny will have implications for United States and China relations, as well as for mergers and acquisitions more broadly.The latest Chinese deal to feel the chill from Washington was a planned $3.78 billion investment by the Tsinghua Unisplendour Corporation of China in the American hard disk drive maker Western Digital. On Tuesday, Tsinghua said it was abandoning the purchase of a 15 percent stake in Western Digital, citing a decision by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States to review the deal.What is this government body that holds such power?The committee, better known by the acronym Cfius, has a long history, going back to the Exon-Florio amendment of 1988. At that time, there were concerns about Japanese acquisitions in the United States, a fear whose legacy is several mediocre movies like “Rising Sun,” a tale about Japanese corporate corruption, and the comedy “Gung Ho,” which starred Michael Keaton as an executive at a car plant struggling under Japanese ownership.AdvertisementSince then, Cfius has grown increasingly powerful. In 2006, an uproar erupted over DP World of Dubai’s acquisition of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, a British company that owned ports in the United States. Washington lawmakers from both parties attacked the deal, choosing to ignore that the United Arab Emirates is an ally of the United States. Congress again acted to give Cfius even broader reach. DP World soon sold the American P.&O. ports.AdvertisementLast week, Cfius issued its annual report for actions in 2014. The interagency body — it includes representatives from the Treasury, Justice and Defense Departments — is a bit secretive. All its filings are confidential, it doesn’t have a building in Washington and it lags an entire year in reporting figures.Potential foreign acquirers make a filing for a national security review. In 2014, there was a record high of 147 filings, up from 97 in 2013. The increase in 2014 was mainly a result of acquisitions in manufacturing, primarily technology. The most filings were by China with 24. Next was Britain with 21, and after that was Canada with 15. (Yes, even our closest allies are subject to Cfius review.)Once a filing is made, the committee can decide to do nothing or investigate to see if the transaction poses a national security problem. In 2014, there was a record high of 51 investigations, fully a third of all filings.After an investigation, if Cfius finds that the transaction has a national security issue, it will make a recommendation to the president, who can then decide to block the deal.But Cfius rarely gets that far. There has been only one presidential action to block a transaction in the last five years. That was the 2012 acquisition of a wind farm by a Chinese company. Why would a wind farm implicate national security? Well, it was too close to a military base. Instead, what typically happens is that Cfius signals to the acquirer that it will recommend against the transaction. In that case the acquirer will withdraw the transaction to avoid the public stain of a full presidential action.This is what happened in the case of Western Digital. Similarly, Cfius has acted to block an acquisition of a gold mine by a Chinese company because it also was too close to a military base. Philips withdrew the sale of its lighting subsidiary last year under similar concerns.Some pending deals are coming into Cfius’s cross hairs. The biggest is the China National Chemical Corporation’s $43 billion acquisition of Syngenta, a Swiss giant in farm chemicals and seeds with big operations in the United States.AdvertisementIt may seem odd that an agriculture company would become a matter for national security, but this is all about food technology. The market is betting that Cfius is almost certainly going to require divestitures or restrictions on access of the Chinese company to Syngenta’s American operations and technology.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it is not just food technology. The Chongqing Casin Enterprise Group’s agreement to acquire the Chicago Stock Exchange has been met with heated protest. Forty-five members of Congress have sent a letter to Cfius asking the committee to block the deal on “transparency” concerns, namely that the Chinese economy and buyer are opaque and that providing access to American market and trading technology might harm the United States.Expect tensions to get worse. Chinese companies are desperate to get dollars out of China in anticipation of a further slide in its currency. Foreign acquisitions are an easy solution, since they are encouraged by the Chinese government. And American sellers are willing to take the risk. Indeed, pending now is Tianjin Tianhai’s $6 billion deal for the technology distributor Ingram Micro, which would be the largest Chinese acquisition of an American technology company.To be sure, Cfius actually approves most acquisitions, even the Chinese ones. For example, it approved the acquisition of Smithfield Foods and the battery maker A123 despite some protest.These types of national security reviews also occur in other countries, including China, and can sometimes take on an absurdist flavor. France famously stated that it would not allow the acquisition of Danone, since the yogurt maker was a national champion.But we are entering into a new phase with Chinese acquisitions. The United States’ national security service, never considered a transparent process, is going to have to grapple with how far it can allow these Chinese companies to go. When is food technology important? Is a stock market really something that needs protection, particularly one that is dying?If you want to know how heated these debates can become, think about what is going on with Apple now and the controversy over whether it should be forced to unlock an iPhone. Then imagine a foreign company is substituted for Apple.Would it be better to let the money in, as we did with the Japanese, and watch them overspend and mismanage? After all, even in the best of times foreign acquisitions are difficult. And it may just be that this money and new viewpoint will make American companies better.And ultimately, there is the issue of xenophobia and commerce. These acquisitions create value for the United States. Is blocking them based on rationality, or simply on fear?Deal-making, particularly cross-border deal-making, is always hard, but it is about to get much harder over the next few years as the United States decides how vigorous its national security review process will be. This will be a debate that will primarily be about China.The Deal Professor column on Wednesday, about federal scrutiny on national security grounds of Chinese bids for American companies, misstated the reason Canada reviewed Burger King’s acquisition of the coffeehouse chain Tim Hortons. It was reviewed to determine the impact on the country’s economy, not for national security reasons.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on February 24, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Deals Feel the Chill From Washington.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »