AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonWilliam J. Pulte, the founder of the homebuilder Pulte Group and its largest shareholder, is locked in a messy public battle with current management. Yet Mr. Pulte’s interests are divided, as he has hedged his own stock holdings in the company and borrowed heavily against them, leaving one to wonder whether he is acting more in his own interests than the company’s.The battle over Pulte Homes erupted in March, when the 83-year-old Mr. Pulte called a meeting with the company’s chief executive, Richard J. Dugas Jr. Other attendees included Mr. Pulte’s grandson and James J. Grosfeld, a former chief executive of Pulte and a director appointed to the board in December at the behest of Mr. Pulte. At this March 21 meeting, Mr. Pulte demanded that Mr. Dugas immediately announce plans to retire or “there would be war,” according to a letter to shareholders.Mr. Pulte criticized the company’s poor stock price performance over the last 13 years and its move to Atlanta from Michigan in 2014, which he claimed had needlessly cost the company tens of millions of dollars.The power play was not entirely successful. Mr. Dugas indeed resigned; however, he made his resignation effective a year from now, a timetable endorsed by Pulte’s independent directors. And these directors decided not to nominate Mr. Grosfeld, Mr. Pulte’s handpicked representative, for election at the 2016 annual shareholder meeting.The Pulte board said Mr. Grosfeld had acted behind its back to support Mr. Pulte’s attempt to replace Mr. Dugas and called his behavior “inexcusable.”We’ve seen this playground fight before. A founder trying to take back a company is nothing new. And when a board digs in to defend a chief executive who is leaving under less than ideal circumstances, it never ends well.But there is something off about this fight.Mr. Pulte owns 8.9 percent of Pulte even long after giving up a managerial role. But this large personal stake is not what it appears. Through hedging and borrowing against the shares, Mr. Pulte has given away economic interest in them while retaining voting rights and the rights to receive dividends.In 2014, after he left the board, Mr. Pulte borrowed about $249 million from an unidentified bank using 18 million shares as collateral (this number corresponds to about 5.2 percent of Pulte). This type of borrowing is not uncommon, though it is increasingly frowned on for company executives and board members, because it reduces their effective economic stake in the company.Mr. Pulte further hedged these shares using derivatives after taking out the loan. He entered two “put” and “call” arrangements with the bank. According to the terms of the contracts, below roughly $16 a share, Mr. Pulte can “put” 7,200,000 million shares to the bank, meaning he can force the bank to buy them and lock in the $16 price for himself. And if Pulte’s stock drops in the $12 range, he can force the bank to buy another roughly 10.8 million shares. This effectively means that Mr. Pulte will not suffer any losses if Pulte’s stock goes below these prices. He will simply allow the bank to foreclose on his stock instead of paying back the loan since the stock is worth less.Mr. Pulte also capped his upside with a “call” option. Above either $25 or $30 a share, the bank can buy Mr. Pulte’s shares and pocket the difference.The net result is that Mr. Pulte has limited his downside and upside exposure to Pulte Homes. It does not matter if the stock goes below the put threshold or above the call price. Mr. Pulte gains or loses money only between those levels.The loan goes through 2017, when the put and call options expire.Mr. Pulte probably entered into this type of transaction for tax planning purposes. He can get the money for his shares now while deferring the need to pay capital gains taxes for selling them. But the trade-off is that he also has given up some of the economic interest in his shares.This was not Mr. Pulte’s only loan. He used another five million shares, about 1.4 percent of Pulte, as collateral for another loan. The exact terms of this loan were not disclosed, so it is unclear whether Mr. Pulte is personally responsible for the loan or whether the shares are the only collateral.Still, the arrangements apply to about 75 percent of Mr. Pulte’s shares. This leaves him with 7.7 million shares that are unencumbered, or 2.2 percent of Pulte, a not insignificant amount but a level that makes him only the ninth-largest shareholder of Pulte.Mr. Pulte can still vote all his shares, however, and claim ownership.It is hard to know what to make of this. Despite technically being Pulte’s largest shareholder, Mr. Pulte’s economic incentives are not fully aligned with the company’s. His upside is limited in some circumstances, as is his downside.In a note to clients, the Susquehanna Financial Group called Mr. Pulte’s actions puzzling, but it attributed them to a need to push up the stock price before the hedges and loans expired in 2017. Because Mr. Pulte may use Pulte stock to satisfy the loans when they expire, the higher Pulte’s stock price by then, the less stock Mr. Pulte has to deliver to satisfy the loan (because the stock is worth more).Mr. Pulte’s fight with management might have merit. Pulte Homes stock has not performed well recently, even compared with other homebuilders in a poorly performing industry. Shares of Pulte are down 23 percent from where they traded in May 2013. Management is relying improving the financial performance of the company through cost reductions and paying out more profits in the form of dividends to shareholders. Since 2010, Susquehanna notes, Pulte has outperformed five out of nine other homebuilders.In the end, though, Mr. Pulte’s actions show that he is acting more like an aggrieved founder than a typical activist shareholder. The question is whether caring about the company as its long-term founder is enough when there are different economic interests at stake. His hedges mean he has every incentive to push up Pulte’s stock price in the short term.Mr. Pulte wants to hedge his shares while at the same time voting them fully. If a shareholder activist hedge fund had this type of arrangement, it would not pass the smell test. And indeed, Mr. Pulte is not even a great activist.His opposition to Mr. Dugas came after the deadline for nominating Pulte directors, and so Mr. Pulte cannot run against them this year.The result is that Pulte’s board unseated his chosen nominee, while Mr. Pulte is forced to rage against them.A representative of Mr. Pulte declined to comment.When a founder goes ballistic on his own company, the turmoil consumes all. And in this case, Mr. Pulte’s interests may be a bit divorced from the shareholders’.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.Advertisement