By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 28, 2017
When the parent of Snapchat went public in March, investors flocked to the social media upstart’s offering, eagerly pushing the money-losing company’s valuation to $34 billion.Nearly four months later, investors in initial public offerings are more cautious — and Blue Apron, the biggest consumer start-up to seek the public markets since, is paying the price.The meal delivery service reduced the expected price of its initial public offering to about $10 per share on Wednesday afternoon. That was well below a price range of $15 to $17 the company disclosed just last week, a few days after Amazon unveiled a deal to buy Whole Foods Market.At the new price, Blue Apron would be valued at about $1.9 billion, below the $2 billion valuation it earned in its last private fund-raising round. And it would raise about $300 million — a third less than it hoped to raise last week — when it begins trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday, under the ticker symbol “APRN.”AdvertisementThe deflated pricing signals a new sense of caution that has pervaded the market for initial offerings. The big institutions that buy shares in market debutantes have pushed back against ambitious price and valuation targets in recent months, leading to fewer first-day stock-price pops — but also fewer subsequent drops.Advertisement“It’s been very good for investors but very challenging for issuers,” said Kathleen Smith, a principal at Renaissance Capital, which tracks initial public offerings. “Many I.P.O.s are not coming out at the premium valuations that issuers might have hoped for, since investors are concerned about pricing.”In pursuing an offering, Blue Apron is moving to the public markets at a time when others have been fleeing them. The number of publicly listed companies in the United States last year was down 50 percent from 20 years ago, according to data from the investment firm Pantheon.The shift is in part because money from private investors — venture capital firms, giant mutual funds and the like — has been plentiful enough that start-ups have not needed to go public to raise money.This year has reflected a rebound. The number of companies seeking offerings has risen from last year, which had the fewest number of initial public offerings since 2009, according to Renaissance.The number of offerings in the United States alone tripled, to 25, in the first quarter of this year from the same time last year, according to Renaissance.And money raised from initial public offerings this year has totaled $19.9 billion, already outpacing all of last year, thanks largely to offerings like that of Snap, Snapchat’s parent company.Yet companies have already shown signs of pricing more conservatively. Of the 72 initial offerings worldwide this year, 25 percent ultimately fell below their initial pricing range, according to Renaissance. That compares with 32 percent last year and 33.5 percent in 2015.AdvertisementBy Ms. Smith’s reckoning, that shows that companies seeking to go public are becoming more cautious.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For prospective investors, there have been numerous causes for concern with Blue Apron.The company unveiled its original price range only days after Amazon announced its $13.4 billion deal for Whole Foods, a transaction that promises to upend the retail industry. Shares in other grocery chains dropped the day that deal was announced.Amazon’s dominance in e-commerce has stoked worries among retailers that its planned takeover of Whole Foods could create an enormous and incredibly savvy rival almost overnight.Then there are questions about Blue Apron itself.The five-year-old company is perhaps the most prominent of the meal-kit providers, which send customers ingredients to prepare specific meals. The service caters to customers who want to cook at home without making a trip to the grocery store and with simpler choices on what to make.It is a business model that, in Blue Apron’s case, has had substantial growth. Sales rose tenfold from 2014 to 2016, to $795.4 million. From 2015 to 2016 alone, revenue more than doubled.But Blue Apron has never been profitable, and its losses have swollen over the past three years, to $54.9 million last year.Much of the losses stem from the marketing expenses the company has racked up as it has bought ads on podcasts and a welter of other media. Marketing costs leapt tenfold from 2014 to 2016, to $144.1 million, and now equal about a quarter of the company’s sales.Another notable expense has been the purchase of one of the company’s main beef suppliers, a move meant in part to eliminate middlemen and cut costs.Moreover, Blue Apron faces questions over customer abandonment. Some 60 percent of new subscribers quit after six months, according to estimates from S3 Partners, a research firm.AdvertisementCompetition is growing from all sides, even leaving aside any service Amazon might roll out in the future. Blue Apron already faces rivals in the meal-kit space, including HelloFresh, Sun Basket and the vegetarian-themed Purple Carrot. Grocery store chains like Publix and Kroger have rolled out their own meal kits.Challenging rivals in the meal delivery business has proved difficult. A number of competitors trying out different models — including the food delivery services Maple and Sprig and the meal-kit provider Din — have shut their doors.But Blue Apron is betting that it will survive, in part because of its lofty aims. In its prospectus, the company did not limit expectations, writing: “Our vision for the future is ambitious: to build a better food system. We are transforming the way that food is produced, distributed and consumed.”A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Apron Slashes Price  For Its I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.