
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

DEC. 20, 2017
The tax bill passed by Congress on Wednesday is effectively a giant bet that benefits given to companies and the wealthy will help average workers. That makes them a big risk for the Republicans who control Congress. Here are five factors to measure the policy’s success.Inequality: Republicans have done a bad job selling their plan to the public, with 55 percent of Americans opposing it, according to a CNN poll. The top 5 percent of income earners would see the biggest cuts, the Tax Policy Center said. Republicans risk the biggest backlash on this front, with reductions in tax breaks like state and local deductions hitting average Americans. Any sign that the tax bill has worsened rather than eased inequity will hand Democrats a stick to thwack Republicans in midterm elections next year.Wages: Pay increases have been disappointing given the low 4.1 percent level of unemployment. The White House’s Council of Economic Advisers said a corporate tax rate of 20 percent — just below the 21 percent on which Congress settled — would result in an average annual income increase of at least $4,000 at the end of 10 years. A visible rise in wages would be a positive effect of the tax bill. Yet it’s also one of the most dubious projections because companies will be under pressure to share earnings gains with shareholders, too.
            DOW RISES 5000 POINTS ON THE YEAR FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER - MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!        Stock market: One of President Trump’s most common brags is on the rise of markets. On Tuesday, Mr. Trump tweeted “DOW RISES 5000 POINTS ON THE YEAR FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER.” Tax cuts will probably send markets even higher — and are most likely one reason valuations are already so lofty — but because it suggests investors think higher earnings will flow to the bottom line rather than being paid out to workers, it’s perhaps not such an encouraging sign.Capital investment: Nonresidential business investment has improved after being sluggish or negative over the last two years. Spending on equipment rose 10.4 percent in the third quarter, the fastest pace in three years. But the type of investment is important. An increase will only matter if it helps bolster sluggish productivity.G.D.P. growth: Mr. Trump predicted tax cuts would turbocharge the economy to a 6 percent growth rate, compared with the 3.3 percent annualized expansion in the third quarter. The nonpartisan congressional Joint Committee on Taxation estimated an earlier Senate tax plan would add 0.8 percent to G.D.P. over a decade. Trump’s estimate is unrealistic but a modest lift is expected. Still, the tax plan will not pay for itself, as the White House contends, and may add $1.5 trillion to the deficit over 10 years. That trade-off may be this tax bill’s biggest legacy.Gina Chon is Washington columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »