By LESLIE PICKER and PETER EAVISMAY 2, 2016
Jacques Brand, the chief executive of Deutsche Bank’s operations in North America, will leave the German bank, one of the highest-ranking executives to do so during the firm’s overhaul.Deutsche Bank will announce Mr. Brand’s successor in “due course,” said John Cryan and Jürgen Fitschen, the co-chief executives of Deutsche Bank, in a note posted on the company’s website on Monday.Mr. Brand is headed to PJT Partners, said two people briefed on his plans, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because that part of the announcement is not public.His departure comes at a crucial time in the bank’s evolving relationship with United States bank regulators. The Federal Reserve requires that large foreign banks soon place their United States operations into new holding companies that will then be subject to stricter regulation than foreign banks had been subject to in the past.AdvertisementMr. Brand was to become chairman of Deutsche Bank’s new United States holding company. The bank announced internally in March that Bill Woodley, who is currently the deputy chief executive of Deutsche Bank in North America, will serve as chief executive of the new holding company.AdvertisementThe stakes are high for Deutsche Bank in this transition because its American operations have fallen well short of the Fed’s expectations in recent years. Last year, for instance, one of Deutsche Bank’s American entities failed the Fed’s annual tests that are meant to assess whether a bank has the wherewithal to make it through stressful economic and market conditions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Brand began working at Bankers Trust about 26 years ago and moved to Deutsche Bank when it bought Bankers Trust in 1999. He rose through the ranks to become chief executive of North America. The region he oversaw included about 10,000 employees. As a deal maker, he is known for his real estate expertise, notably for helping advise Blackstone in its $26 billion acquisition of Hilton Hotels.Deutsche Bank has advised Marriott International on its acquisition of Starwood Hotels & Resorts, and last year it advised Blackstone on its purchase of Strategic Hotels & Resorts.Last year, the firm ranked eighth in advising on global mergers and acquisitions and 11th in advising on mergers in the United States, according to rankings provided by Thomson Reuters.Mr. Brand is the latest banker to leave a large firm in favor of a newer and smaller shop focused on mergers and acquisitions. Paul J. Taubman, a former investment banker at Morgan Stanley, left in late 2012 to start his own firm, which soon merged with a unit of Blackstone.Last year, that entity, which is now known as PJT, offered stock through an initial public offering. Since then, the firm has advised on key deals, including Yahoo, which is considering selling itself.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Executive at Deutsche Is Leaving the Bank.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.