
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 2, 2016
The blowup of the merger between Halliburton and Baker Hughes will reverberate beyond the energy industry.The promised combination of two of the world’s top oil-services companies is the latest deal foiled by regulatory pressure this year, after Pfizer’s $160 billion bid for Allergan. Baker Hughes pockets a $3.5 billion breakup fee for its efforts, at Halliburton’s expense. Punishing Halliburton’s boss and board would yield a more enduring lesson in merger-and-acquisition hubris.Investors were already pricing in failure for the deal, valued at $35 billion when it was struck in November 2014. Baker Hughes shares finished last week trading 26 percent below Halliburton’s cash-and-shares offer. Even the thwarted acquirer’s shares held up despite the colossal breakup fee, reflecting the market’s anticipation of failure all along.
                Over the last two and a half years, the oil industry experienced its deepest downturn since at least the 1990s.            That does not mean there should not be a reckoning. Baker Hughes’s chief executive, Martin Craighead, ought to emerge unscathed. The saga wasted management time, but playing hard to get when Halliburton came courting has proved wise. Baker Hughes plans to buy back stock and pay down debt, thanks to negotiating the largest cash breakup fee ever. That will go some way toward numbing the pain of the $980 million net loss that the company suffered in the first quarter as the slump in oil-drilling activity worsened.Halliburton’s chairman and chief executive, David J. Lesar, on the other hand, emerges a loser for his poor reading of the antitrust climate in Washington. The promise of $2 billion of annual cost savings might have made the huge breakup fee seem worth the risk at the time. Yet having agreed to pay away most of the present value of those savings to Baker Hughes shareholders to clinch the deal, he is now handing over cash worth more than the next three years of Halliburton’s expected net profit to a leading competitor.Mr. Lesar already gave up his 2015 bonus because of Halliburton’s poor financial performance. Another zero this year might start to restore some lost credibility — and might make other empire-building leaders think twice before getting caught up in merger mania. Stricter penalties, including a rethinking of Mr. Lesar’s job, would more effectively reinforce the point.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »