By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 19, 2016
WASHINGTON — Consumer prices in the United States were unchanged in January as the rising costs of housing and health care were largely offset by cheaper oil.But the annual pace of inflation showed signs of acceleration. The Labor Department said Friday that prices rose 1.4 percent over the last 12 months, compared with a year ago, when annual inflation was close to zero. Consumer prices climbed at the fastest annual rate since October 2014.Core inflation, which excludes the volatile energy and food costs, rose 0.3 percent in January. Over the last 12 months, this category, which is closely watched by the Federal Reserve, has climbed 2.2 percent.The rising tempo for inflation follows a Fed decision in December to raise a crucial short-term interest rate for the first time in nearly a decade. But the turmoil in the stock and bond markets after the rate increase suggested to many investors that inflation might barely budge in a slowing global economy.AdvertisementJennifer Lee, a senior economist at BMO Capital Markets, said January’s report on consumer prices affirmed the Fed’s decision and raised the potential for further rate increases this year.Advertisement“In a way, this justifies the December rate hike and keeps the Fed at the rate hike table,” Ms. Lee said.
            Percent change, month to month, seasonally adjusted.        NOV.+0.1% DEC.–0.1%JAN.Unch.+0.4%+0.200–0.2–0.4–0.6–0.8’14’15U.S. and majormetropolitan areasPercent changefrom previous:Not seasonallyadjustedMONTHYEARUnited States+0.2%+1.4%New YorkLos AngelesChicagoBoston*   Dallas*  Detroit*(Dec.)     Houston*(Dec.)   Phil.*(Dec.) San Fran.*(Dec.)Washington*    +0.2+0.7+0.8–0.5  Unch.+1.2–0.8–0.6–0.3–0.2+0.8+3.1+0.9+1.0+1.1–0.1+0.4–0.2+3.2+1.4  *Two-month change, calculated bimonthly, through Jan., except as noted.   FEB. 19, 2016
The combination of a strong dollar and cheaper oil has suppressed inflation across much of the economy.Gasoline prices at the pump have dropped 24 percent over the last year to a national average of $1.72 a gallon. At the same time, economic growth struggles worldwide have pushed up the value of the dollar, making imports cheaper. But the rate at which gasoline prices were declining slowed in January.Housing expenses — which account for a third of the Consumer Price Index — have risen 3.2 percent from a year ago. Medical services are up 3.3 percent.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In January, prices also rose on a monthly basis for airfare, clothing and autos, while food expenses were flat.The Fed is closely following inflation, looking for assurance that it will accelerate to 2 percent in its preferred measure. That particular measure of personal consumption places less emphasis on housing. It posted a modest annual increase of 0.6 percent in December.Policy makers at the Fed have concerns about threats to American economic growth coming from lower oil prices and slowing growth in China and other emerging markets, according to the minutes of their January meeting released Wednesday.The officials said these global pressures made it harder to forecast growth and inflation, two crucial factors for deciding the pace of additional rate increases."Most participants indicated that it was difficult to judge at this point whether the outlook for inflation and economic growth had changed materially, but they thought that uncertainty surrounding the outlook had increased as a result of recent financial and economic developments,” the minutes said.A version of this list appears in print on February 20, 2016, on Page B2 of the National edition with the headline: Signs of Growing Inflation In Consumer Price Survey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.