By WILLIAM GRIMESFEB. 20, 2016
Renato Bialetti, a businessman who put the Moka Express, an aluminum stovetop coffee maker, into nearly every kitchen in Italy and sold it to tens of millions of customers around the world, died on Feb. 11, in Ascona, Switzerland. He was 93.His death was announced by Bialetti Industries.Mr. Bialetti did not invent the Moka. That honor goes to his father, Alfonso, who in 1933 came up with a coffee maker that would let Italians brew espresso at home. With an octagonal, Art Deco-influenced design, the Moka Express was made in aluminum, because the dictator Benito Mussolini had embargoed imports of stainless steel in favor of “the national metal.”Alfonso Bialetti offered his invention at local markets, and did well enough, selling about 10,000 annually in the years leading up to World War II. But Renato had bigger ideas. Returning from a German prisoner of war camp in 1946, he unpacked his father’s machinery, mothballed during the war, resumed production and advertised the Moka Express nationally on billboards, newspapers, magazines and radio, and eventually on television.The blitz was spectacularly successful. Almost immediately, the Bialetti factory was receiving 1,000 orders a day. After a moving to a new factory in 1956, the company began turning out 18,000 coffee makers every day, or four million a year. Over the next 60 years, according to the company, more than 200 million were sold internationally.AdvertisementIn Italy, a Moka can be found in 90 percent of all kitchens. As a national symbol, the Moka Express ranks on a par with the Fiat 500, the Vespa scooter and Nutella.Renato Bialetti was born in 1923 in Montebuglio, on the Italian side of Lake Maggiore. His father had returned to Italy from a long apprenticeship in the French aluminum industry after World War I and in 1919 founded a factory in nearby Crusinallo to make semifinished aluminum goods and, later, kitchenware.AdvertisementAfter taking over the reins of the company, his son narrowed the product line down to one item, the Moka Express. To sell it, he devised a marketing campaign as modern as the coffee maker itself. At the annual Milan trade fair, Moka billboards took over the city. One year, just outside the fair entrance, Mr. Bialetti put up a giant Moka Express that seemed to be suspended in midair, pouring a stream of black coffee into an oversize cup. The Moka motto, “In casa un espresso come al bar” — “An espresso at home just like the one at a coffee shop” — entered the national lexicon.Most famous of all were the company’s cartoons on “Carosello” (“The Carousel”), a 10-minute advertising program that ran from 1950 to 1977. Thanks to Italian laws requiring that commercials entertain rather than sell, “Carosello” became one of the most popular shows on television, a family ritual that signaled bedtime for children, because it ended at 9 p.m.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Moka Express advertisements featured a caricature of Alfonso Bialetti that, since 1953, had been stamped on every Moka pot to distinguish it from imitations. As he addressed the audience, “the little man with the mustache,” as the logo was known, formed the letters of the alphabet with his mouth.Mr. Bialetti sold his company in 1986 to the Faema group, a producer of espresso machines, which in turn sold it in 1993 to the cookware manufacturer Rondine Italia. In 1998, Bialetti and Rondine merged to become Bialetti Industries, which sells the original Moka in several sizes. In recent years, the company added an electric and a stainless steel version, as well as a version using the Brikka pressure system to produce a frothy layer on top.The Moka Express, whose design was based on a silver coffee service popular in wealthy Italian homes, became an emblem of Italian modernism. It can be found in collections of the Museum of Modern Art; the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum; and the Design Museum in London.Mr. Bialetti is survived by a son, Alfonso, and two daughters, Antonella and Alessandra. They honored his memory by placing his ashes in a large model of the Moka Express that, after being blessed by the parish priest at his funeral on Tuesday, was placed in the family’s tomb in a cemetery in Omegna.A version of this article appears in print on February 21, 2016, on Page A23 of the New York edition with the headline: Renato Bialetti, Italian Marketer, Dies at 93; He Elevated a Coffee Maker to an Emblem.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.