By NOAM SCHEIBERMARCH 6, 2016
A coalition of progressive groups is starting a state-level campaign to close the so-called carried interest loophole, which allows fund managers to pay a substantially reduced federal tax rate on much of their income.Two New York State assemblymen plan to introduce a bill on Monday that would raise taxes on state residents who benefit from the lower rate, to precisely offset the tax savings they receive at the federal level.In addition to correcting what its members see as a glaring inequity in the tax code, the coalition hopes to generate revenue that could be spent on public investments in areas like schools and economic development.“People from Buffalo, when they work, they pay their taxes,” said Assemblyman Sean Ryan, one of the two Democratic legislators who are sponsoring the bill. “We don’t have a lot of hedge funds in Buffalo, but we do have a need for state assistance.”AdvertisementThe bill would make the tax increase contingent on the passage of corresponding legislation in Massachusetts, New Jersey and Connecticut, so that fund managers could not avoid the tax by simply moving to a nearby state. Those who helped draft the bill estimated that it could raise roughly $3.7 billion a year in New York if the tax increase were to go into effect.AdvertisementThe coalition includes groups focused on reducing inequality and challenging the political power of the wealthy, such as the Patriotic Millionaires and Hedge Clippers. Hedge Clippers is backed by the American Federation of Teachers and targets the influence of hedge funds and private equity funds. The coalition plans to push for similar legislation in California, Illinois and Pennsylvania.The name of the so-called loophole refers to a feature of the compensation of many fund managers, who frequently receive a management fee equivalent to 2 percent of their fund’s assets, as well as 20 percent of the fund’s profits (sometimes contingent on reaching a certain profit threshold). The latter is known as “carried interest.”The effort to change the tax treatment of carried interest, long a priority of progressive Democrats in Congress, has attracted support across the political spectrum in recent years. Two Republican presidential candidates, Donald Trump and Jeb Bush,  proposed such a change last year.Despite this growing support, however, Congress has repeatedly declined to make the change.“It is not just ridiculous and unfair, it is the kind of thing that has led to the rise of Donald Trump,” said Whitney Tilson, a hedge fund manager and member of the Patriotic Millionaires, who has long opposed the tax provision despite personally benefiting from it.“When you tell the average person what’s going on here, it makes them so mad they can’t see straight,” he said. “They turn to someone like Trump who confirms to them that the whole system is corrupt.”Some of those involved in this latest effort say it was inspired in part by the campaigns to raise the minimum wage on the state and local level, another step Congress has declined to take on the federal level despite widespread support for the idea among voters.“It’s absolutely modeled on that,” said Michael Kink, a leader of the Hedge Clippers who helped write the legislation that will be introduced in New York. “A lot of people around the country are demanding action, and there’s absolutely no action in Congress.”AdvertisementAs written, the legislation does not include a provision to end the state-level tax if Congress were to change the federal law. But Assemblyman Ryan said he would insist on that being the case, and some of the bill’s supporters said it would be critical.Assemblyman Jeffrion L. Aubry, the lead sponsor of the forthcoming bill in New York, noted that legislators in Albany were engaged in the annual budget process, a time when many of their priorities frequently go by the wayside for lack of revenue. He suggested that the ample revenue the bill would generate could help build support for it.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Still, enacting the tax appears to be a long way off, and supporters concede that the effort is as much about raising public awareness about the issue as it is about changing tax rates.“How many people know what the word ‘carried interest’ is?” asked Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers. “That’s part of why they’re so successful. They create names for things that no one understands.”Under the current law, the federal government treats carried interest as long-term capital gains, which are mostly taxed at a rate of 20 percent for the wealthy, rather than as ordinary income, which would generally be taxed at a rate of 39.6 percent for this group. (An additional tax of 3.8 percent also typically applies to capital gains and to most other forms of income above $200,000 for individuals and $250,000 for couples.)Opponents of this approach say that carried interest is simply compensation for services rendered — in this case, managing other people’s money — not investment gains. That is because the share of profits that fund managers receive through carried interest does not derive from money they have personally invested. As such, opponents say, it should be taxed as ordinary income.“I’m sorry, you’re selling a service; that means it’s labor income,” said Senator Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat from Massachusetts who is a longtime opponent of the current approach.Representatives of industries in which fund managers earn carried interest deny that this tax treatment amounts to a loophole. They say that even if the managers’ share of their funds’ profits is not a return on money they have personally invested, it is compensation for the “sweat equity” they invest in building their businesses.They say their situation is analogous to sales of Facebook stock by the company’s founder, Mark Zuckerberg. He pays the capital gains rate, even though outside investors provided most of the company’s capital. Private equity fund managers should also pay the capital gains rate, they say, on profits from the sale of a portfolio company, even though others provided most of the capital for purchasing it.“Private equity fund managers are more than money managers,” said James Maloney of the Private Equity Growth Capital Council, an industry group. “They hire executives, sit on boards, develop strategic plans.”AdvertisementBut many tax experts say even that logic is a stretch. The argument for taxing Mr. Zuckerberg at a lower rate “is that there’s an undersupply of entrepreneurs, and the world needs more Zuckerbergs,” said Victor Fleischer, a professor at the University of San Diego School of Law, who writes occasionally for The New York Times and has advised the coalition on its revenue estimates. “You can’t make the argument that there’s an undersupply of venture capitalists or private equity fund managers.”A version of this article appears in print on March 7, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: New York Legislators Plan to Introduce Measure on Carried Interest Tax.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.