By JONATHAN SOBLEMAY 18, 2016
Tetsuro Aikawa, the president of Mitsubishi Motors, said Wednesday that he would step down after the company admitted it had used improper methods to test the fuel economy of cars.Suzuki Motor said on Wednesday that it had used improper methods to determine the fuel economy of 16 vehicles it sells in Japan, adding to the list of automakers that have come under scrutiny for how they perform in government tests.Suzuki said that it had not sought to mislead customers, and that its testing had not exaggerated mileage ratings. It said it did not plan to restate any published ratings.Still, the disclosure is likely to add to industrywide doubts over carmakers and the fuel-test results they report to governments around the world.That scrutiny has hit Japan’s auto industry in recent weeks. On Wednesday, Mitsubishi Motors said that Tetsuro Aikawa, its president, would resign after the company’s disclosure that its engineers deliberately used unapproved test procedures that exaggerated fuel performance by as much as 15 percent on some models.AdvertisementMitsubishi’s new partner and financial savior, Nissan Motor, was accused by South Korean environmental regulators this week of cheating on fuel tests. Nissan has disputed the accusation and said it was working with regulators in that country.AdvertisementSuzuki shares fell more than 9 percent in Tokyo on Wednesday after news reports that it would report fuel-test discrepancies and become the latest Japanese automaker to come under scrutiny.Osamu Suzuki, Suzuki’s chairman and chief executive, apologized to customers but said the company had retested its vehicles and found no significant differences between the results and their already-published ratings.The problem centered on the same testing regulations that tripped up Mitsubishi: the way engineers calculate what is known as running resistance, or the effect that tire friction and other factors have on fuel consumption under various driving conditions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Suzuki said mileage tests at Suzuki’s development track in central Japan had produced inconsistent results, which engineers attributed to wind. The track is on high ground near the sea.Instead of running multiple tests to produce an average, Suzuki engineers cut corners by extrapolating running resistance from past tests, the company said. That was a violation of regulations, the company said, but did not distort results “beyond the standard margin of error.” “In effect, we were using a way of measuring that was not approved, and for that I apologize deeply,” Mr. Suzuki said.The problem came to light after Japanese regulators ordered all carmakers to re-examine their testing methods after the revelations at Mitsubishi last month. Mitsubishi acknowledged that it had been cheating on its mileage ratings in Japan for a quarter of a century, and that all models in its domestic lineup were affected.Last week, Nissan agreed to extend Mitsubishi a $2.2 billion lifeline in exchange for about one-third of the company. In a follow-up report to regulators on Wednesday, Mitsubishi said it had used earlier data to extrapolate running resistance for a number of models, instead of performing multiple new tests for each one. The company said it had also misreported test dates and weather conditions in ways that flattered vehicles’ performance.It reiterated its position that top executives were unaware of the cheating. Even so, it said Mr. Aikawa and Ryugo Nakao, the executive vice president, would leave their positions effective June 24.AdvertisementGlobally, carmakers’ reporting of fuel economy and pollution ratings is under especially close scrutiny after Volkswagen of Germany admitted last year that it had installed software in 11 million diesel vehicles to cheat on emissions tests.Hisako Ueno contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 19, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Suzuki Admits Test Flaw, but Denies It Cheated.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.