AdvertisementSupported byBy Binyamin AppelbaumWASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve, determined to move cautiously, said on Wednesday that the American economy still was not ready for higher interest rates.The Fed said that the labor market continued to get stronger, yet it made the widely expected decision not to raise its benchmark interest rate, which remains close to zero, and it offered no suggestion that a rate increase was imminent.In a statement after a two-day meeting of its policy-making committee, the Fed painted a mixed picture of the American economy. “Labor market conditions have improved further even as growth in economic activity appears to have slowed,” the Federal Open Market Committee said. It noted similarly that incomes had climbed while household spending had slowed.The case against higher rates is basically that it makes sense to err on the side of stimulus. By holding borrowing costs at low levels, Fed officials say, it will be relatively easy to respond to stronger inflation by doing less to encourage spending and borrowing. If the Fed raises rates prematurely, however, it will have little room to correct the error by doing more.The central bank left itself room to maneuver, though, and the Fed’s two-handed assessment of economic conditions appeared to confuse financial markets.Investors initially bid up yields on the benchmark 10-year Treasury, suggesting they expected interest rates to rise more quickly than anticipated before the meeting. But then they reversed course and drove yields sharply lower. The 10-year yield ended the trading day down 4 percent at 1.85 percent.Some analysts still think the Fed may raise rates at its next meeting, in June, particularly if other economic indicators show the same strength as job growth. Others, however, said they did not expect a rate increase until later in the year.Over all, investors are betting against June, putting the chance of an increase around 20 percent, and the Fed on Wednesday made little effort to change minds.“There was a distinct absence of teeing up a hike in June,” economists at BNP Paribas wrote in an analysis. “Indeed, it is difficult to see how a hike could be delivered, despite reduced external risks, until the economy takes on a more positive tone.”TD Securities, which had predicted an increase in June, said it now expected none until September.“Relax and enjoy your summer!” said Craig Bishop, lead strategist for the fixed income group at RBC Wealth Management, writing off a rate increase until November.The Fed already had backed away from its December projection that it would raise rates four times this year. Officials in March predicted just two rate increases. But Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, said this month that she did not regard the December increase as a mistake, and she and other officials have continued to suggest that more moves are likely this year.“I said at the time and continue to feel that the economy had made very substantial progress,” Ms. Yellen said at an event in New York.Other officials, too, have cautioned against assuming too much caution.“I do not see that the risks are so elevated, nor the outlook so pessimistic, as to justify the exceptionally shallow interest rate path currently reflected in financial futures markets,” Eric S. Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, said in New Britain, Conn., last week.While the Fed’s latest statement acknowledged the weakness of some recent economic data, it also noted a number of reasons that growth could gain strength.“Much of the weakness in economic activity that manifested in recent data appears to have been downplayed in the statement and is in any case largely in the rear view as far as the committee is concerned,” said Michael Dolega, a senior economist at TD Bank.For example, there is a divide in the recent rounds of government data between the reported strength of job growth and the reported weakness of overall economic activity. The early estimates of job growth are historically more accurate, and the Fed’s choice of language suggested Fed officials think the reported economic weakness may be overstated. The statement described job growth as improved but said economic growth “appears” to have slowed.The Commerce Department is scheduled to report its initial estimate of first-quarter growth in economic activity on Thursday; the number is expected to be modest, perhaps little more than a 1 percent annual pace.The statement also suggested that the Fed’s concerns about global economic weakness had diminished. The Fed’s last statement, in March, described global conditions as a headwind for domestic growth. The April statement said merely that the Fed continued to monitor global economic and financial developments.The change may reflect better news from China, but the Fed still appears to be unusually attentive to global developments. One looming risk is the British referendum in late June on continued membership in the European Union.On inflation, too, the Fed appears to be waiting for expected improvement.Since the financial crisis, the economy has consistently fallen short of the Fed’s annual inflation target of 2 percent. And some officials have expressed concern that recent declines in measures of inflation expectations may reflect a loss of confidence the Fed will hit the target in future years.Some measures of expectations have shown signs of rebounding. One such measure compares two kinds of Treasuries, one of which increases in value to compensate investors for inflation. This comparison shows investors are demanding compensation for annual inflation of about 1.74 percent in five years, up from just 1.47 percent in late February.When government data showed faster inflation at the beginning of 2016, Fed officials raised doubts about the accuracy of the data. They said the numbers reflected temporary distortions rather than a stronger trend. There is some evidence they were right. The most recent government data, through February, showed weaker inflation than the previous report.Another batch of data, through March, is scheduled for publication on Friday. It is expected to show continued weakness. Yet the statement on Wednesday repeated the Fed’s view that inflation will rebound as the effects of low oil prices and a stronger dollar gradually fade.The problem facing the Fed, however, is the same one it has been facing for some time. It continues to predict better times tomorrow. And tomorrow never seems to come.Advertisement