AdvertisementSupported byBy Emily SteelNearly five months after Roger Ailes was ousted from his position as chairman of Fox News Channel, the sexual harassment accusations against him continue.On Tuesday, Lidia Curanaj, a reporter for Fox 5 in New York, filed a 28-page discrimination and hostile work environment suit against the network’s parent company, 21st Century Fox, in which she said Mr. Ailes harassed her when she was applying for a job at Fox News.According to the complaint, Mr. Ailes asked her to stand up and turn around during a one-on-one interview, so that he could “see [her] from behind.”“I like what I see,” Mr. Ailes then said, the suit asserts. Ms. Curanaj, whose legal name is Lidija Ujkic, left the interview thinking she would land a job offer, according to the suit.Mr. Ailes had met Ms. Curanaj at a dinner in February 2011 that she attended with Gregory R. Ball, a New York state senator whom Ms. Curanaj had dated. Mr. Ailes brought her into the network for the interview about three months later.After his private meeting with Ms. Curanaj, Mr. Ailes contacted Mr. Ball and asked him, “How’s the sex?” and whether she “put out” sexually, according to the suit. Mr. Ball described Ms. Curanaj as a “very nice girl,” signaling that she would not provide sexual favors to Mr. Ailes.Shortly after, Ms. Curanaj received a call from Mr. Ailes, who told her that she was not ready for Fox News and that she instead should contact Fox’s local stations, she says in the suit. Ms. Curanaj believed that she did not “receive the position at F.N.C. because Ailes determined that she would not submit to him sexually,” the suit states.A spokesman for 21st Century Fox declined to comment, as did a lawyer for Mr. Ailes. A representative for Fox Television Stations said in a statement: “We do not think the plaintiff’s claims have merit, and we intend to defend vigorously.”The allegations in the suit echo claims by several other current and former Fox News employees suggest sexual harassment was a persistent problem in the workplace. In July, Gretchen Carlson, a former Fox News anchor, filed suit against Mr. Ailes, saying that she was forced out of the network after she refused his sexual advances. A subsequent internal investigation found more than 20 claims of inappropriate behavior involving him, including that he offered to help advance women’s careers in exchange for sexual favors.Mr. Ailes, who has denied the charges of sexual harassment, left the network in July, with a settlement of $40 million, according to people briefed on the matter at the time. Ms. Carlson received about $20 million in a settlement.“The discrimination and harassment described by Ms. Curanaj is exemplary of the conduct of many of Fox’s male managers reported by countless women over the past six months,” said Jeanne M. Christensen, a partner at Wigdor Law, who is representing Ms. Curanaj. “We intend on holding Fox accountable for this conduct, and sending a message to employers everywhere that there are severe consequences to discriminating against female employees.”In the suit, Ms. Curanaj, 38, also claims that she has been subject to persistent discrimination and retaliation during her tenure at Fox 5 because of her age, sex, disability, appearance and nationality. She said she believes her hours were reduced, resulting in less pay, after informing supervisors she was pregnant.Ms. Curanaj started working as a general assignment reporter at WNYW, Fox 5, Fox’s local affiliate in New York in November 2011, months after her interview with Mr. Ailes.Advertisement