
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

DEC. 12, 2016
One of the most powerful tools in the Justice Department’s arsenal is the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, better known as RICO, that can result in long prison sentences for members of criminal organizations. Although the law has rarely been used against corporate executives, an indictment that includes a RICO conspiracy charge last week in a health care fraud case in Boston could signal a more aggressive approach to violations involving senior management.The defendants are six former executives of Insys Therapeutics, an Arizona pharmaceutical company, including Michael L. Babich, who was chief executive from 2011 until November 2015. The company’s primary product is Subsys fentanyl, an opioid painkiller spray used by cancer patients that can cost thousands of dollars a month. The case concerns allegations of bribes and kickbacks paid to physicians across the country to increase prescriptions for Subsys, including a “speakers program” that prosecutors claim was in many instances a sham to funnel cash payments to doctors to entice them to prescribe the drug to patients who did not have a diagnosis of cancer. A former sales representative at the company pleaded guilty in February to making illegal payments to a doctor in Alabama.Last week’s indictment quotes a number of emails that put the defendants, who were senior sales executives working under Mr. Babich, in an especially bad light. One discusses a trip with a doctor to a “club” where they stayed until the early morning so that “he had to have had one of the best nights of his life,” after which he wrote 17 Subsys prescriptions the next week. Another message described targeting a doctor who “runs a very shady pill mill” and is “extremely moody, lazy and inattentive,” yet he was recruited to the speaker series and two years later was averaging over 10 prescriptions per week.Defense lawyers denied that their clients violated the law by paying kickbacks or improperly influencing doctors. One described the indictment as “the government’s unproven factual assertions and legal theories.”AdvertisementWhat takes the case outside the usual allegations of fraud found in any number of health care prosecutions is the RICO conspiracy charge, which accuses the defendants of forming an enterprise to violate federal and state laws over a three-year period to enrich themselves. To prove the crime, prosecutors have to show that the defendants agreed to engage in a “pattern of racketeering activity,” which the indictment lists as violations of the federal mail and wire fraud statutes along with commercial bribery laws in Connecticut, Florida, New Hampshire and Texas.AdvertisementThe benefit of a RICO charge is that it brings together disparate acts by different defendants into a single case, allowing the Justice Department to paint with a broad brush to show that this was not isolated misconduct but part of a widespread effort to violate the law. For example, the prosecution of corruption in global soccer has resulted in a number of defendants spread throughout the Western Hemisphere pleading guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to taking bribes to award contracts related to regional tournaments and the World Cup over the last 20 years.It is not always easy to link crimes together to prove a RICO conspiracy, but if the jury finds the defendants guilty of the charge, then each could be held accountable for the conduct of any other member of the enterprise even if they were not directly involved. A RICO conviction also results in a longer recommended sentence, starting at about three years in prison and quickly stretching to over a decade for multiple violations.Federal prosecutors generally do not file RICO charges in white-collar crime cases. One heavily criticized use of the law back in the 1980s resulted in the conviction of five principals from Princeton/Newport Partners and a former trader at Drexel Burnham Lambert for fraudulent stock deals used to create tax losses, though they received only short sentences.Since that case the Justice Department has restricted the use of RICO by requiring approval from Washington before proceeding with a charge. The United States Attorney’s Manual, which provides internal guidelines for prosecuting federal cases, states that “a RICO count which merely duplicates the elements of proof of traditional Hobbs Act, Travel Act, mail fraud, wire fraud, gambling or controlled substances cases, will not be approved unless it serves some special RICO purpose.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It is not clear what the “special RICO purpose” was in the indictment of the former Insys executives. In a statement accompanying the charges, the United States attorney in Boston, Carmen M. Ortiz, may have hinted at one reason when she said, “I hope that today’s charges send a clear message that we will continue to attack the opioid epidemic from all angles, whether it is corporate greed or street-level dealing.”The Justice Department could be using the case to send a message to pharmaceutical manufacturers that individuals responsible for corporate violations are going to be targeted, and not just the companies, for how they peddle their wares by recruiting doctors to push out more prescriptions, especially for off-label uses of drugs. The demand for greater individual accountability for corporate wrongdoing may be coming to fruition, with the RICO charge against senior managers and the chief executive at Insys a prime example of how far prosecutors are willing to go.Questions have been raised recently about companies raising drug prices, so the government may be signaling that executives had better be careful about how they try to generate increased profitability on the backs of patients and insurance companies. RICO can be a very big stick for the Justice Department to fight back against corporate greed.Will the arrival of a new administration in the Justice Department shift the focus away from individuals involved in corporate violations? The answer appears to be “no” if one takes seriously a statement by Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who is President-elect Donald J. Trump’s nominee for attorney general. Back in 2002 at a hearing, he described the benefits of prosecuting bank officers during the savings-and-loan crisis: “They lost everything they had, their families were embarrassed, and a lot of people started checking to make sure they were doing their banking correctly.”The New York Times pointed out that Mr. Sessions had made it clear during his 20 years in the Senate that he supported mandatory minimum sentences and tough enforcement of federal criminal law. That may portend an even tougher crackdown on executives linked to corporate crimes with the potential for substantial prison terms.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »