
Breakingviews By                     
UNA GALANI

MARCH 20, 2017
Vodafone has its eye trained on the top spot in India.A $23 billion merger of the British telecommunications giant’s Indian operations with Idea Cellular will create India’s top mobile operator amid a bloody price war. The structure is less than ideal, however, because it aims to satisfy both companies and give a big say to an Indian tycoon all at once.The problem was that a simple merger of equals would have left the magnate Kumar Mangalam Birla with just 21 percent of the enlarged entity through his Aditya Birla Group, which owns 42 percent of Idea. Indian rules mean Mr. Birla needed a 26 percent stake to have a big voice in the business. This way, Mr. Birla will be the chairman and his company can appoint half of the nonindependent directors.Vodafone is bending significantly to make the union happen. It is contributing a larger mobile business — with a slower decline in its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda — at an agreed enterprise value of $12.4 billion, compared with just $10.8 billion for Idea.But Vodafone will walk away with just 45.1 percent of the enlarged entity. Vodafone has also agreed to jointly exercise the voting rights it holds in excess of the Aditya Birla Group until the pair find a way to equalize them at some point over the next 10 years.AdvertisementTo compensate Vodafone for the difference, Idea will contribute an additional stake in a telecommunications-towers business, which might be worth $1 billion, and a bit less net debt. Vodafone will also get a 51 percent premium on a 4.9 percent stake, which it will sell to the Aditya Birla Group for $579 million.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The resulting minority shareholding lets Vodafone deconsolidate the unit, taking some $8 billion of debt off its balance sheet.Over all, however the contortions are a high price for operating and capital expenditure synergies, even those with a net present value of at least $10 billion. There is no obvious way for the two sides to resolve future disagreements over strategy, for example.AdvertisementThe bigger worry is that the new combined company, which will remain highly leveraged with net debt of at least three times expected Ebitda, will still not be in a much better position to take on the upstart Reliance Jio. That company, backed by India’s richest man, continues to give away its service free and helped trigger consolidation in the first place.Una Galani is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »