By KATE KELLY and ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 27, 2017
The Stock MarketSince the Election+12%After Donald J. Trump’s surprise win, uncertainty in the stock market turned into exuberance as investors hoped that his campaign promises to spur the economy and cut taxes would bring higher returns.+10+9.4%+8+6But with difficulties passing legislation in Congress, the market has faltered.+4+20ELECTION–2Percentage change inthe S.&P.; 500-stock index since Nov. 8, 2016.–4SONDJFM’16’17+12%The Stock Market Since the Election+10+9.4%After Donald J. Trump’s surprise win, uncertainty in the stock market turned into exuberance as investors hoped that his campaign promises to spur the economy and cut taxes would bring higher returns.+8INAUGURATION+6The market rose even faster amid Mr. Trump’s executive orders and as legislation was introduced. But with difficulties passing legislation in Congress, the market has faltered.+4+20ELECTION–2Percentage change in the S.&P.; 500-stock index since Nov. 8, 2016.–4SEPT.OCT.NOV.DEC.JAN.FEB.MARCH’16’17+12%The Stock Market Since the Election+10After Donald J. Trump’s surprise win, uncertainty in the stock market turned into exuberance as investors hoped that his campaign promises to spur the economy and cut taxes would bring higher returns.+9.4%+8INAUGURATION+6The market rose even faster amid Mr. Trump’s executive orders and as legislation was introduced. But with difficulties passing legislation in Congress, the market has faltered.+4+20ELECTION–2Percentage change in the S.&P.; 500-stock index since Nov. 8, 2016–4SEPT.OCT.NOV.DEC.JAN.FEB.MARCH’16’17+12%The Stock Market Since the Election+10+9.4%After Donald J. Trump’s surprise win, uncertainty in the stock market turned into exuberance as investors hoped that his campaign promises to spur the economy and cut taxes would bring higher returns.+8INAUGURATION+6The market rose even faster amid Mr. Trump’s executive orders and as legislation was introduced. But with difficulties passing legislation in Congress, the market has faltered.+4+20ELECTION–2Percentage change in the S.&P.; 500-stock index since Nov. 8, 2016–4SEPT.OCT.NOV.DEC.JAN.FEB.MARCH’16’17+12%The Stock Market Since the Election+10+9.4%+8INAUGURATIONAfter Donald J. Trump’s surprise win, uncertainty in the stock market turned into exuberance as investors hoped that his campaign promises to spur the economy and cut taxes would bring higher returns.+6The market rose even faster amid Mr. Trump’s executive orders and as legislation was introduced. But with difficulties passing legislation in Congress, the market has faltered.+4+20ELECTION–2Percentage change in the S.&P.; 500-stock index since Nov. 8, 2016–4SEPT.OCT.NOV.DEC.JAN.FEB.MARCH’16’17MARCH 27, 2017
For a time on Monday, one question appeared to haunt stock market investors from Tokyo to Manhattan: Will President Trump be able to live up to his promises to reduce taxes and cut regulation?Belief in such business-friendly, pro-growth measures has been driving a rally in stocks since the November election. But a weekend’s worth of second-guessing over Washington’s failure to move forward on health care legislation has injected some skepticism into the market.“Friday’s health care outcome was a reality check for investors,” Rebecca Patterson, chief investment officer at the Bessemer Trust, a $63 billion private investment company, said in an email.The market had seemed almost immune to political turmoil. For months, declines of 1 percent or more were unknown. Stocks sagged last week, however, amid signs of political obstacles to the replacement of the Affordable Care Act, and they opened sharply lower on Monday. The market recovered to end the day little changed.AdvertisementThe health care legislation by itself had not been seen as of huge significance to the markets. But traders and longer-term investors said Monday that the bill’s failure was worrisome. Corporate and individual tax changes, a $1 trillion infrastructure investment and other items on the Trump agenda that have goosed the markets may now prove illusory, they added.Advertisement“The inability for him to pass health care reform casts doubt upon his ability to get large-scale tax reform passed,” said Erin Browne, head of macro-investing for the O’Connor hedge fund division of the Swiss bank UBS.Because the health care legislation was needed to help make tax cuts work within the current budget, the market is “now looking at either a much more modest tax reform or at tax cuts, which are certainly not going to be as economically beneficial,” Ms. Browne said.Other markets suggested that many were unsettled by Mr. Trump’s crash course in political science.The United States dollar, as measured by a Bloomberg index that tracks it against other major world currencies, fell to a level unseen since days after the president’s upset victory in the election. And the yield on the 10-year Treasury note — which falls when more people buy the notes, often as they gravitate toward lower-risk investments — sank to its lowest levels in a month.The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, which fell as much as 1 percent on Monday, ended the day down just 0.1 percent. Since Election Day, the S.&P. 500 is up more than 9 percent.The narrower Dow Jones industrial average closed 0.2 percent lower for its first eight-session losing streak since 2011 and only the third such streak since 1990, the Bespoke Investment Group said.The Nasdaq composite index closed up 0.2 percent.Overseas markets were generally lower, with Tokyo down 1.4 percent and London off 0.6 percent.Volatility also reared its head for a while on Monday as the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index, or VIX, known as Wall Street’s fear gauge, rose before retreating later in the day.AdvertisementThe truth, Ms. Patterson of Bessemer said in her email, is that “legislation is a tricky, messy process.”In some corners of the market, that acknowledgment has had a particularly sobering effect. Certain sectors that had reached stratospheric levels of late on hopes of promised regulatory rollbacks and other propulsive policy measures are now tumbling to earth.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Shares of Wall Street banks and other financial companies, which have benefited from Mr. Trump’s executive order to reconsider the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act and are now down sharply since early March, are one example. Energy stocks, which have been harmed by the lack of detail on Mr. Trump’s infrastructure plans and by falling oil prices, have also slid.One beneficiary of the failed health care bill? Hospital operators like HCA. Its shares surged more than 5 percent Monday.Some investors, of course, have simply decided to pocket the gains they have already earned in stocks. Others are liquidating positions to diminish their exposure to risk during a period many expect will remain volatile.Ms. Browne, for one, said she had sold out of certain positions in the last week and would keep the proceeds out of the markets for now.“Over the shorter term, I’m more cautious because I think the market needs to adjust to a potentially lower speed of the economy,” she said.She added, however, that it was important not to overstate the meaning of the recent policy hiccups, saying, “The outlook over the medium to longer term is still quite strong.”The postelection rise in stock prices itself may have been the outlier event — not the recent retreat.AdvertisementMany traders have spent recent weeks watching for signs of market weakness, waiting for a trigger event that would cause an expected downturn of 1 to 2 percent. Some placed wagers in the market intended to pay off if stocks began a substantial slide. To them, the question was when, not if.Jason Ader, the chief executive and chief investment officer of the activist stock investment firm Spring Owl Asset Management, is taking the last week in stride.This pullback “is warranted, healthy and normal,” Mr. Ader said by email.“If the Trump administration’s pro-business, pro-growth agenda hits a bump, the alternative isn’t so bad,” he added, given that the stock market has also been “favorably disposed” at times of political gridlock as long as interest rates remain relatively low.Even with more interest rate increases expected this year, the cost of borrowing remains within a historically low range. Corporate earnings have been solid. Growth indicators in Asia and Europe, and in the United States, have been encouraging, all of which argues for continued optimism in the market.It may even be a good window in which to buy.“As long as the broader economic trends are intact, which we think they are, these sell-offs are usually a great opportunity for investors looking to put cash to work,” Ms. Patterson said.An earlier version of a graphic with this article misstated the years represented. They are 2016 and 2017, not 2006 and 2007.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Doubt After Health Care Defeat Briefly Sends Stocks Tumbling.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.