By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINAUG. 10, 2016
The world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, said it had resolved a harassment claim filed against it by an employee who recently left the firm.Christopher Tarui, 34, who worked as an adviser to several large institutional investors in Bridgewater, filed his harassment complaint in January and had been on paid leave since the beginning of the year. He took a job this week as a director with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, the large private equity firm, a move it confirmed on Wednesday.Mr. Tarui also is dropping any claims he has against Bridgewater, and the hedge fund agreed to waive his employment restrictions, allowing him to move to his new job, a Bridgewater spokesman said on Wednesday.Bridgewater, like many financial services firms, includes noncompete clauses in some of its employment contracts.AdvertisementThe spokesman for Bridgewater added that Mr. Tarui “did not receive any payment of compensation in connection with his decision to withdraw his claims.”AdvertisementDouglas Wigdor, a lawyer for Mr. Tarui, declined to comment. It is not clear what Mr. Tarui’s new job at K.K.R. will entail.The resolution of Mr. Tarui’s claims was first reported by Business Insider.In early January, Mr. Tarui filed a sexual harassment complaint with the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities, in which he claimed his male supervisor had repeatedly propositioned him for sex.Mr. Tarui also had claimed that Bridgewater officials tried to persuade him to retract his allegations after he raised them with the hedge fund’s human resources department and other top managers.The harassment complaint, first reported by The New York Times, painted an unflattering portrait of life at Bridgewater, a Westport, Conn., company founded by the billionaire investor Ray Dalio that operates as one of the more secretive firms in the $3 trillion hedge fund industry.The complaint described the working environment at Bridgewater as a “caldron of fear and intimidation,” noting that all meetings are recorded and security guards patrol the facilities. Mr. Tarui said in his complaint that the firm’s policy of recording meetings and its surveillance culture had led him to delay reporting the harassment because he was concerned the matter would not stay private.Mr. Dalio responded angrily to The Times’s characterization of the firm and its reporting on Mr. Tarui’s allegation in a lengthy letter posted on LinkedIn. Mr. Dalio said the article was a “distortion” of life at Bridgewater and “intentionally strung together a series of misleading ‘facts’” in order to “create the most sensationalistic story.”In March, Mr. Tarui and Bridgewater jointly asked the Connecticut human rights commission to halt its investigation, and his complaint was withdrawn. It is believed Mr. Tarui agreed to pursue his claims through arbitration. Bridgewater’s employment agreements require employees to submit disputes to binding arbitration.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Bridgewater spokesman would not comment on whether the claims it said Mr. Tarui had withdrawn this week were related to an arbitration proceeding.AdvertisementThe spokesman also declined to comment on a related complaint filed by the National Labor Relations Board that contends the hedge fund “has been interfering with, restraining and coercing” employees like Mr. Tarui from exercising their rights — one of which is the ability to file a complaint or give testimony to the federal labor board.Michael Cass, a supervising lawyer with the federal labor board, said in an emailed statement “there are ongoing settlement discussions” with Bridgewater “but nothing has been finalized.”The N.L.R.B. has scheduled an Oct. 4 hearing on its claims before an administrative law judge in Hartford.The publicity over the sexual harassment complaint and the focus on Bridgewater’s unusual culture comes during a difficult time for the firm, which has long ranked as one of the world’s most successful hedge funds.Over the last two years, Bridgewater, which draws in money from many public pension funds and sovereign wealth funds, has posted mixed returns in its two main portfolios. The firm’s assets under management have declined to about $150 billion from $169 billion over that time — in part a result of the firm’s uneven investment performance.The firm’s two main investment portfolios are Pure Alpha II and All Weather II. The Pure Alpha fund is down 11.6 percent for the year through July, while the All Weather portfolio is up a little over 13 percent over the same period.This summer Bridgewater, which employs about 1,500 people, began slowing its hiring, canceling numerous interviews it had scheduled by outside recruitment firms.A version of this article appears in print on August 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Fund Settles Harassment Claim That Described a ‘Caldron of Fear’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.