By AMIE TSANGAUG. 3, 2016
Profit at HSBC Plummets The turmoil surrounding the vote by Britain to leave the European Union has left one of its banks reeling. HSBC said that its profit dropped 40 percent in the second quarter and announced that it would follow up the sale of its Brazilian business last month with a share buyback of $2.5 billion.The quarterly results — which included a gain on the sale of its holdings in Visa Europe, charges related to the overhaul of its business and provisions for legal matters — showed a profit of $2.61 billion, compared with $4.36 billion the year before.Douglas Flint, the bank’s chairman, said that the need to reposition HSBC’s European business—after there is a decision on whether banks will be able to continue serving clients in the European Union from London— would “add to the very heavy workload already in place to address the regulatory and technological changes that are reshaping our industry.”Bitcoin Plunges After Exchange Is Hacked Another theft of Bitcoin has raised questions about the security of the digital currency and sent the money plummeting about 20 percent early on Wednesday morning in Hong Kong, where the exchange, Bitfinex, is based.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.About 120,000 Bitcoins were stolen, worth about $65 million even after the value of the currency dropped. The episode comes shortly after a hacker stole more than $50 million of Ether, another digital currency.AdvertisementViacom and Pandora’s Box The trust that controls Viacom and CBS had been shrouded in mystery for years, but now legal proceedings promise years of wrangling over the estate. It is hard to see a path to victory for Philippe P. Dauman, once a longtime confidant of Sumner M. Redstone, Steven Davidoff Solomon writes. The litigation should be settled with some face-saving measures for Mr. Dauman and George Abrams, another director.AdvertisementMr. Dauman has already held talks about leaving Viacom and settling litigation with National Amusements, according to Bloomberg, which cites a person with knowledge of the matter. The report also says that Mr. Abrams does not want to settle.In the meantime, Mr. Redstone’s grandaughter, Keryn Redstone, has also jumped into the legal fray. She claims that she has been disinherited of $6 million and potentially $1 billion more and has joined the lawsuit challenging Mr. Redstone’s legal competence.Sign up here for more DealBook emails and alerts.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.