
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

DEC. 12, 2016
The Redstones do like to keep everyone on their toes. The family that controls the media firms CBS and Viacom on Monday vetoed their proposal for the companies to merge. The Murdochs’ bid for Sky and AT&T’s deal for Time Warner have ignited the industry’s animal spirits. That has raised the prospect that reuniting with Viacom would rob CBS of a better offer.It was only three months ago that National Amusements — the investment vehicle for Sumner Redstone and his daughter, Shari — suggested that CBS and Viacom should consider getting back together again after 10 years apart.
                War has spread across the empire of Sumner Redstone, one of the entertainment industry’s most tenacious titans. At stake are the fortunes of his family and confidants, as well as the fate of Viacom and CBS.            Of the two, Viacom, the MTV operator, is on far shakier ground, having stumbled with a series of buybacks and a creative dry spell. Conversely, the broadcaster CBS has flourished under its chief executive, Leslie Moonves. It is now, at $30 billion, worth twice as much as Viacom and trades at about 14 times next year’s estimated earnings. Viacom trades around 10 times the earnings forecast for the next 12 months, Thomson Reuters estimates.Rejoining the two could be a land mine: CBS would risk angering shareholders if it offered too much of a premium for the lagging Viacom, while the latter’s investors would be upset if they did not get much more than its market value.There is another wrinkle, too: Industry merger activity has gone on a tear since the Redstones made their CBS-Viacom pitch in September. AT&T’s surprise $85 billion October offer for Time Warner came with a rich 36 percent premium. And on Friday, 21st Century Fox suggested paying two-fifths more than the current share price for the 61 percent of the European pay-TV operator Sky that it does not already own.Now free to pursue their separate paths, the Redstones’ two companies will probably look for other ways to scale up. CBS could attract rivals hoping to replicate AT&T’s plan of combining content with distribution. Verizon, the $209 billion telecom giant, would be one contender. Viacom may fit with other cable networks, including those currently being assembled by Liberty Media’s John Malone.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »