AdvertisementSupported by2016 TV UpfrontsBy Sydney EmberEvery year for decades, advertising executives from across the country have flocked to New York for the feeding frenzy known as the television upfronts. During elaborate presentations at some of the city’s most celebrated locations, TV networks present their slate of programming for the next fall season to advertisers. The goal this year: Attract what could amount to more than $9 billion in advance ad sales.Perhaps those with the most power at this event are ad buyers, who work for agencies on behalf of companies like Coca-Cola and Royal Caribbean. Their decisions help determine which networks win and which lose. For them, the week doesn’t just mean presentations. It also means lunches (sometimes two in one day), drinks with clients, fancy dinners and plenty of schmoozing.Carrie Drinkwater, director of investment activation for the agency MullenLowe Mediahub, has been attending the upfronts for two decades. For her, Monday was a day spent running all over town, some of the time with a New York Times reporter in tow.10:45 a.m., NBCUniversal Upfront at Radio City Music HallMs. Drinkwater arrives at the 50th Street entrance to Radio City after taking a 5:20 a.m. train from Boston, where she works. As she enters the music hall, she says she loves the upfronts because there’s “a lot of energy.” She shows her ticket and begins navigating the way to her seat, stopping to greet people along the way.NBCUniversal has combined its broadcast and cable upfronts this year for the first time, meaning it will showcase shows on NBC alongside those on cable networks like Bravo, Syfy and E!. But it has promised that the presentation will last no more than two hours. Ms. Drinkwater is skeptical. The presentation begins shortly after 11 a.m. “It’s a celebration of TV,” Ms. Drinkwater says about the upfronts as the lights dim. She takes a sip of water. Here we go.Jimmy Fallon begins the show dressed like a character from the Broadway show “Hamilton.” “I love him,” Ms. Drinkwater whispers. The presentation also includes a sizzle reel of NBCUniversal’s new shows, grouped into buckets with titles like “Laugh Out Loud” and “Rule Breakers.” The presentation does indeed last about two hours, apparently much to everyone’s relief. As she makes her way out of Radio City, Ms. Drinkwater says one new show in particular caught her attention: “This Is Us,” starring Mandy Moore and Milo Ventimiglia, about people whose link seems to be that they share a birthday. She will have to think about whether any other shows work for her clients. 1 p.m., lunch at Valbella, a white-tablecloth Italian restaurant in MidtownMs. Drinkwater decides to walk to her lunch with Peter Olsen, the head of ad sales at A&E Networks. The restaurant is quiet and fairly empty when she arrives. She heads to a table in the corner, where Mr. Olsen is sitting with one of Ms. Drinkwater’s colleagues, Dustin Johnson, and Paul Greenberg, general manager of A&E’s FYI network who also oversees A&E’s in-house digital agency 45th & Dean. Conversation turns to different ad formats and the explosion of digital advertising opportunities. As ads evolve, and as spending continues to flow to digital media, Mr. Olsen says, the upfronts have in some ways lost their sense of urgency.“The upfront madness isn’t that mad anymore,” he says.Over pear and endive salad and halibut, Ms. Drinkwater and Mr. Olsen discuss how her clients, which include Scotts Miracle-Gro and Royal Caribbean, could use A&E’s programming and ad offerings. They try to organize drinks with another advertising executive on Wednesday. (“Just email her,” Ms. Drinkwater says.)This is a week for networking. Mr. Olsen mentions that on one day, he has not one, but two client lunches.3:20 p.m., in the back of a taxiFox’s upfront is on the Upper West Side, so Ms. Drinkwater hops in a taxi with Mr. Johnson. NBC is already advertising its new shows on the taxi TV.Since Ms. Drinkwater is an upfront veteran, she is well positioned to opine on the changes. “The biggest evolution over time was the disruption of the space,” she says. People now watch shows, oftentimes without ads, on their computers, smartphones and tablets. Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and Snapchat have prompted advertisers to come up with new ways to promote their products.She predicts that this year, the upfronts will see a 2 percent increase in ad-spending commitments compared with last year, when the total was considered fairly weak.Will the upfronts ever disappear? “I think they will be around for as long as there is demand for the supply,” she says. About television, she adds, “It’s still a mass vehicle.”3:35 p.m., Fox Upfront at the Beacon TheaterThe taxi lets Ms. Drinkwater out a few blocks away from the theater. A crowd has already formed, and Ms. Drinkwater searches for clients from National Geographic. More hugs and handshakes. As she waits for the presentation to begin, she recalls her first — and perhaps most memorable — upfront. She was at Lincoln Center for NBC’s upfront waiting at the open bar. When she got her drink, she turned around, and there was George Clooney.Fox promotes its hit show “Empire,” and a number of new shows, including “Pitch,” about a woman who is a baseball player, and “The Exorcist,” which looks terrifying.“I really think they have a great slate,” Ms. Drinkwater says after reflecting on the presentation. She is also impressed that so many shows have diverse casts. In particular, she says she likes “Pitch” and “Star,” a new drama from Lee Daniels, a creator of “Empire.”6:50 p.m., NBC N.F.L. Dinner at Maloney & Porcelli, a Midtown expense account stalwartBefore heading to dinner, Ms. Drinkwater grabs a drink at Upstairs, a rooftop bar in Midtown, with representatives of Bose, a client. She orders a glass of red wine, but says she “probably had three sips.” The upfronts require pacing. She and her companions discuss who is going to be at the NBC dinner.When they arrive at the dinner, where NBC gives advertising executives a glimpse of the coming football season, cocktail hour is in full swing. Ms. Drinkwater talks to Linda Yaccarino, chairwoman for advertising sales and client partnerships at NBCUniversal, and Seth Winter, executive vice president for ad sales for NBC Sports Group.A platter of shellfish awaits everyone as they take their seats. Ms. Drinkwater sits next to Rodney Harrison, a former football player and NBC football analyst. They discuss their children. She passes on the filet and orders salmon.10:45 p.m., Fox party at Wollman Rink in Central ParkMs. Drinkwater gets in an Uber and makes her way to Fox’s party, which started around 6 p.m. after the network’s upfront ended but is still going strong. Hours earlier, people sipped grapefruit mojitos (one agency executive described it as overly leafy) and munched on sushi, hot dogs, macaroni and cheese, and warm chocolate chip cookies.Ms. Drinkwater finally leaves around midnight. But her upfronts are far from over — there are still three days to go before she heads home to reflect on how her clients should spend their money.Advertisement