By IAN AUSTEN and CHAD BRAYFEB. 3, 2016
Almost four years ago, the home improvement retailer Lowe’s set off a political storm in Quebec with a hostile bid for Rona, a Canadian chain headquartered in that province.On Wednesday, Lowe’s was back again, this time with a friendly deal to acquire Rona for 3.2 billion Canadian dollars, or $2.3 billion, in cash.While the transaction may face some regulatory hurdles, initial indications were that it would not be brought down by political considerations like the Lowe’s hostile $1.8 billion offer in 2012.If so, the acquisition will let Lowe’s overtake the Canadian unit of Home Depot as the dominant home improvement company in the country.Advertisement“One of the big differences between this and last time is obviously this time we have the unanimous approval and support of the board of directors of Rona as well as the management team,” Robert A. Niblock, Lowe’s chairman, president and chief executive, said in an interview. “We’re in a much better place than where we were in 2012.”AdvertisementUnder the terms of the deal, Lowe’s, based in Mooresville, N.C., would pay 24 Canadian dollars a share in cash for each share of Rona’s common stock and 20 Canadian dollars a share for each preferred share of Rona.The latest offer is about double Rona’s closing price on Tuesday. On Wednesday, Rona shares closed up 98 percent, to 23.30 Canadian dollars, roughly matching the bid. Lowe’s latest move to expand in Canada comes shortly after the company abandoned the Australian market, where it had operated a home improvement chain in a joint venture.Mr. Niblock acknowledged on Wednesday that Lowe’s still had not reached its optimum size in Canada since entering the market in 2007. Lowe’s has 42 stores in Canada out of more than 1,845 home improvement and hardware stores in North America, including Mexico.The company is now transforming four locations previously leased by Target, which left Canada last year. The Rona transaction, however, will significantly bolster Lowe’s business throughout Canada and give the company its first locations in Quebec, where Rona is the market leader.Rona operates more than 500 corporate-owned and independent affiliate stores, including many small outlets in rural communities. The combined business would have generated 2015 revenue of about 5.6 billion Canadian dollars. Lowe’s announced several steps to ease political concerns in Quebec.It will continue to operate the stores it is buying under Rona’s brand names. Lowe’s Canadian head office will move to Boucherville, Quebec, Rona’s home, and continue to buy from Canadian suppliers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lowe’s said that it would continue to employ the “vast majority” of Rona’s staff and management. Sylvain Prud’homme, the president of Lowe’s Canada, will continue in that role after the takeover. Since 2012, Rona has changed most of its senior management and closed several stores.In a news conference, Robert Chevrier, the chairman of Rona, said that the political climate in Quebec had also evolved.Advertisement“Why are we selling?” he said. “Let me put it this way: This is a very, very attractive price and a very compelling price.”While politicians from both major political parties opposed the earlier bid by Lowe’s, on Wednesday, Dominique Anglade, Quebec’s minister of the economy, sciences and innovation, said that the Liberal government supported the latest bid.The Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec,the province’s pension and investment fund, which is one of Rona’s largest shareholders, also said it supported the sale.But Pierre Karl Péladeau, the leader of the separatist Parti Québécois, condemned the deal both on social media and in comments to reporters.While the federal government is expected to approve the deal under its foreign investment laws, its competition bureau may require Lowe’s to sell stores in some parts of the country.Mr. Niblock said there were relatively few markets where the two chains overlap.Canada’s economy has become unsettled by the global collapse in prices of commodities, particularly oil. The fall of the value of the Canadian dollar, which stems from that, makes things particularly difficult for retailers. While the weak dollar has pushed up the cost of imported merchandise substantially, competitive pressures make it difficult for retailers to recover the increase fully through higher prices.But Mr. Niblock said that Canada’s high levels of homeownership and its general stable financial situation, even during the 2008 financial crisis, made it an attractive market for Lowe’s.“There are a lot of things that set up very well for our sector of retail,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on February 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Lowe’s and Rona in Deal for $2.3 Billion in Cash.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.