FEB. 14, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Tuesday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.29 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.38 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Pennsylvania, $57.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Albuquerque, $71.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Massachusetts State College Building Authority, $182.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Nevada, $290.8 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementWasatch County, Utah, $57 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.York County, S.C., $109 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementDavis County, Utah, School District, $68.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Frisco, Tex., Independent School District, $110.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $188.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alvin, Tex., Independent School District, $127.5 million of unlimited tax schoolhouse and refunding bonds. Piper Jaffray.Calhoun County, Ala., Board of Education, $52.5 million of special tax school warrants. Raymond James.Colorado, $110 million of general obligation refunding bonds. George K. Baum.Evergreen School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $141.2 million of medical center revenue bonds. Jefferies.Mobile, Ala., Special Care Facilities Financing Authority, $130 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, $500 million of transportation revenue bonds. Ramirez.AdvertisementNorth Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1, $70 million of electric revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Ohio Housing Finance Agency, $109.1 million of residential mortgage revenue bonds. George K. Baum.Oregon Health & Science University, $200 million of university revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Raleigh, N.C., $118.1 million of general obligation bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Texas, $106.6 million of unlimited tax refunding bonds. Estrada Hinojosa.Waller, Tex., Independent School District, $89.3 million of unlimited tax school building and refunding bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Wisconsin Public Finance Authority, $170.5 million of revenue refunding bonds. Morgan Stanley.A version of this schedule appears in print on February 15, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.