By REUTERSAUG. 17, 2016
Cisco Systems, one of the world’s largest makers of networking gear, said on Wednesday that it would cut about 5,500 jobs — or nearly 7 percent of its work force — and post charges of up to $400 million in its first fiscal quarter as it shifts focus away from its legacy hardware toward higher-margin software.The gradual move to fast-growing areas like security, the internet of things and the cloud is a response to sluggish demand for Cisco’s traditional lineup of switches and routers from telecom carriers and enterprise customers, at a time of intense competition from companies like Huawei and Juniper Networks.Revenue at the company’s routers business fell 6 percent in the fourth quarter ended July 30, while switching unit revenue was up 2 percent. Orders from service providers fell 5 percent, and revenue in emerging markets was down 6 percent, Cisco said.Cisco projected flat revenue in the first quarter and gave an earnings forecast that was shy of analysts’ estimates, saying it expected adjusted earnings of 58 to 60 cents per share, versus Wall Street estimates of 60 cents.Advertisement“We’re uncertain how to model any improvement” in those two areas, Cisco’s chief executive, Chuck Robbins, said in a call to analysts, speaking of service providers and emerging markets.Mr. Robbins has been steering Cisco toward more software and subscription-based services. Security, which Mr. Robbins said was the top priority of all its customers, posted a revenue gain of 16 percent in the quarter.Gross and operating margins also improved in the fourth quarter, reflecting cost savings, Cisco said.“It’s part of what we’re driving in our shift to software,” said Kelly A. Kramer, Cisco’s chief financial officer. “Those businesses have great margins, and it’s part of the overall transition.”Cisco, which is also betting on acquisitions to fast-track growth, has made 10 acquisitions since Mr. Robbins began as its chief, according to FactSet StreetAccount data, including the internet of Things start-up Jasper Technologies and the cloud security provider CloudLock.AdvertisementShares of the company were down 1.3 percent in after-hours trading to $30.32.The shares gained 13.2 percent this year through Wednesday’s close, compared with a 6.8 percent increase in the broader Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cisco’s fourth-quarter net profit rose to $2.81 billion, or 56 cents a share, from $2.32 billion, or 45 cents, a year earlier. Excluding items, the company earned 63 cents a share.Revenue fell 1.6 percent to $12.64 billion.Analysts on average expected a profit of 60 cents and revenue of $12.58 billion, according to Thomson Reuters.Cisco, which expects to start laying off employees in the first quarter, said it would take a charge of about $325 million to $400 million in the quarter. On the whole, the company expects a pretax charge of $700 million.The technology news site CRN, citing sources, reported on Tuesday that Cisco planned to lay off about 14,000 employees, or nearly 20 percent of its work force.A version of this article appears in print on August 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Cisco to Cut 5,500 Jobs in Shift Toward Software.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.