By REUTERSFEB. 12, 2016
WASHINGTON — Consumer spending regained momentum in January as households increased purchases of a variety of goods, the Commerce Department said Friday, in a hopeful sign that economic growth was picking up after slowing to a crawl at the end of 2015.But the outlook for consumer spending was tempered by another report on Friday showing that sentiment among households ebbed in early February. Still, the increase in consumer spending last month underscored the economy’s resilience and challenged the view that a recession was looming.“The markets may have decided that the U.S. is headed for recession, but obviously no one told U.S. consumers,” said Paul Ashworth, chief economist at Capital Economics in Toronto.The Commerce Department said retail sales excluding automobiles, gasoline, building materials and food services increased 0.6 percent last month after an unrevised 0.3 percent decline in December.AdvertisementThese so-called core retail sales correspond most closely with the consumer spending component of gross domestic product. Economists had forecast core retail sales increasing 0.3 percent last month.AdvertisementConsumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of American economic activity and is being supported by a tightening labor market, which is starting to lift wages. Savings, which reached a three-year high in 2015, are expected to help future spending.
            Total retail and food services sales, seasonally adjusted.        NOV.+0.3%DEC.+0.2%JAN.+0.2%$460billion420380340’14’15FEB. 12, 2016
Growth in consumer spending moderated in the fourth quarter. That, together with weak export growth because of the strong dollar, efforts by businesses to sell inventory and cuts in capital goods spending by energy companies, restrained G.D.P. growth to a 0.7 percent annual pace.However, weak reports on inventories, factory orders and construction spending suggest the economy grew at about a 0.2 percent rate in the last three months of 2015.A separate report showed that the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index fell to a reading of 90.7 in early February from 92 in January as households worried about the economic outlook.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Consumers, however, remained upbeat about their personal financial situations and anticipated that low inflation would bolster their purchasing power. Consumers expect inflation to average 2.4 percent over the next five years, down from 2.7 percent in the January survey and the lowest reading since the question was added to the monthly survey in 1990.Inflation, which is now running below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target, could remain benign. The Labor Department reported on Friday that import prices dropped 1.1 percent in January after a similar decrease in December. Import prices have declined in 17 of the last 19 months, reflecting the robust dollar and plunging oil prices.While lower oil prices have translated into cheaper gasoline, increasing household discretionary spending, they are also weighing on sales at service stations.In January, a 3.1 percent drop in receipts at service stations restricted the gain in overall retail sales to 0.2 percent. Retail sales for December were revised to show a 0.2 percent rise instead of the previously reported 0.1 percent dip.A version of this list appears in print on February 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Consumer Spending Regaining Momentum  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.