AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad Bray and Michael J. de la MercedUnited Continental settled a fight on Wednesday over its board and named a new chairman, striking a compromise with two significant investors who sought to shake up the embattled airline.In reaching an accord with the two investment firms, PAR Capital Management and Altimeter Capital Management, United will avoid prolonging a potentially distracting fight as it continues to try to revive its fortunes.Under the terms of the agreement announced on Wednesday, PAR and Altimeter will choose two new directors: Barney Harford, formerly of the travel booking company Orbitz, and Edward L. Shapiro, an executive at PAR. The two sides will jointly appoint a third new board member in the coming months.Perhaps more important for the two investors, United will replace its nonexecutive chairman, Henry L. Meyer III, with Robert Milton, a former chief executive of Air Canada.Mr. Meyer and two other directors, John H. Walker and Charles A. Yamarone, agreed to step down come the airline’s next annual shareholder meeting. Oscar Munoz, United’s chief executive, who had been scheduled to become chairman next year, will instead take that post in 2018.The campaign by PAR and Altimeter, who together own just over 7 percent of United’s stock, came as Mr. Munoz planned to return to his post after heart transplant surgery.Behind the push by the hedge funds — the two are longtime investors in travel companies but are not known for shareholder activism — was a belief that the airline’s board was ineffective and entrenched. Last month, PAR and Altimeter unveiled a campaign to take six seats on the company’s board, with candidates including Gordon M. Bethune, a former chief executive of the old Continental.Since the merger of United and Continental in 2010, the combined airline has lagged behind its rivals in the industry. The carrier has been hit by computer and technical problems, and it has the worst operational and on-time performance among big American carriers. Differences in corporate cultures and labor disagreements have thwarted a unified approach in the company’s operations.Though PAR and Altimeter did not claim the total number of board seats that they had sought, they appeared to be satisfied with the change in United’s directors and in the additional airline experience that many of those new directors bring.Three of the directors added before Wednesday, including Mr. Milton, were appointed by United the day before PAR and Altimeter began their campaign.Despite only returning to work weeks ago, Mr. Munoz led the negotiations with PAR and Altimeter, hoping to avert a protracted and potentially bitter public fight.Advertisement