By KATIE ROGERSAPRIL 22, 2016
Jae Rhim Lee wants you to be less squeamish about death, and she thinks a suit lined with flesh-eating mushrooms might do the trick.Wait, don’t click away. Ms. Lee, 40, is an artist and entrepreneur who has long been intrigued by how people relate to their environment. So, to start the process of un-freaking people out, she created what she calls the Infinity Burial Suit. It’s a $1,500 outfit that incorporates mushrooms meant to break down a human corpse, cleanse it of toxins and distribute nutrients back into the soil. No one has been buried in it yet, but she said that a man who suffers from a chronic illness has agreed to be the first.“I want to propose a different way of thinking about death that moves us toward death acceptance,” she said. “I think death acceptance is a critical aspect of protecting our environment.”Ms. Lee is among a growing group of entrepreneurs trying to disrupt death. She offers her mushroom suit as an alternative to what she calls the “death denial” practices of the funeral industry — which is still embalming bodies then putting them in coffins entombed in concrete liners — and the cryonics field, which aims to preserve dead people for later revival.AdvertisementHer pitch: Why not just accept that we’re going to die, and do less harm to the environment in the process? Happy Earth Day!AdvertisementThe Rise of the Green BurialGreen burials were considered a niche alternative as recently as a decade ago, but consumers and funeral professionals are warming to the idea of burying the dead without the use of embalming chemicals, formaldehyde or cremations that release metals and gases back into the environment. According to a 2015 survey by the Funeral and Memorial Information Council, 64 percent of respondents indicated an interest in green funerals, up from 43 percent in 2010.At Western Carolina University, researchers with the Urban Death Project are learning how best to turn corpses into compost. In Los Angeles, Undertaking LA operates a “do-your-own-death” workshop to give people the tools to plan home funerals.Edward Bixby, who operates the Steelmantown Cemetery green burial preserve in Woodbine, N.J., said that the typical motivation of a green burial customer has shifted over the past decade. He says it’s now a 50-50 split between customers who are interested strictly in the environmental benefits and those who simply don’t accept the conventions and costs associated with traditional funerals. In 2014, national median figures put the costs around $8,500 for a funeral with a viewing, burial and vault, and $6,000 for a cremation funeral with a viewing, according to statistics from the National Funeral Directors Association. Eco-friendly burials are not necessarily cheaper, but consumers may save on coffins, grave lining costs and funeral fees.The chance to customize the burial is often more important than the environmental concern, Mr. Bixby said. “It’s cathartic.”When Death Designs Go ViralThe new death start-ups are finding customers through word of mouth. Ms. Lee created an online group of people (most of them still healthy) who were paired off to discuss their personalities, fears and plans for death. David Weaver, an advertising executive who lives in rural Vermont, joined after being inspired by a 2011 TED Talk Ms. Lee gave about her suit. (The talk, in which Ms. Lee wore the death suit and discussed “training” mushrooms to eat her own nail clippings, skin and hair, has been viewed by more than 1.3 million people.)Mr. Weaver bought a death suit for himself and a cotton death pod for his two-year-old wire terrier, Beaker. He’s planning ahead: Both he and his pet are healthy.“We as a society have had a hard time getting over this image of, you’re put in the ground, in a cemetery or in an urn,” Mr. Weaver, 50, said in an interview. “It’s very untraditional, but this is the only thing I’ve been able to see where my values while I was alive can be implemented as I die.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ms. Lee has long been obsessed with how humans relate to their environment. She used her body as a test subject once before, adhering to a strict vegan diet to see if her urine could nourish plants. She grew cabbage that she then made it into kimchi.Advertisement“I started to question why we’re so disgusted with our bodies,” she said, adding, “I want to challenge those taboos where we don’t think that we’re animals.”In Ms. Lee’s TED talk, her suit gives her the appearance of a ninja. But in person, it’s nonthreatening. When I tried it on, the cotton suit, created with a fashion designer, Daniel Silverstein, felt like a heavy pair of pajamas. The jacket has wooden buttons and flaps that cover the face and hands. It is lined with two different types of mushrooms that assist in breaking down human tissue and delivering nutrients back to the soil over a period of months. On the outside, the stitching mimics the dendritic patterns of mushroom mycelium.Design and innovative technology seem to be an important component of these new death products. Roger Moliné, the 24-year-old co-founder of Bios Urn, began a Kickstarter campaign after customers asked for better ways to monitor the health of the trees growing from biodegradable urns. The company raised over $83,000 to design an incubator that, through a sensor embedded in the soil, will send updates to a custom phone app. Around 60,000 urns have been ordered and 200 incubators pre-ordered.
            Bios Incube Afterlife Urn via @fubiz https://t.co/xPl7UuaqsG #DesignYourFriday #KickStarter #Tree pic.twitter.com/prSlkS9Toa Mr. Moliné, who operates the company in Barcelona, estimates that 90 percent of the orders have come from American customers.Adding the sensors has appealed to consumers who want a “more hands-on approach,” he wrote in an email. “We felt that it was O.K. to bring death, and the process of dying, up to speed, and match it to 21st century demands and requests.”The Future of Human Disposal The mushroom suit and the Bios Urn are among the relatively few new products that people can actually order. Some that have caught a lot of attention are not in production. The Capsula Mundi project, created by two Italian artists and first showcased in 2003, has gathered a large online following whose members are interested being buried in egg-shaped pods underground. The ideas and designs have generated countless headlines, but no one has been buried this way, the artists, Anna Citelli and Raoul Bretzel, confirmed in an email message. The first step will be to design an egg-shaped urn, they said.
            Revamping the traditional coffin! We love Capsula Mundi's idea of growing trees to honor the lives of loved ones. pic.twitter.com/ATjxKJAlaH        There’s actually an organization, the Green Burial Council, that certifies whether products like this are earth-friendly. Kate Kalanick, its executive director, said that Ms. Lee’s suit and the Bios Urn have not yet been approved by the council, which lists about 30 products and vendors as certified.The designs may draw people who are curious, and even imaginative, about their deaths, but not everyone is ready to embrace death suits, tree-growing urns or egg-shaped pods. Ms. Lee has even received occasional angry messages. “I hope the mushrooms eat you faster,” a critic wrote in an email.Given her goals, she takes this as a compliment.A version of this article appears in print on April 23, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Eco-Minded Innovators Disrupt the Rituals of Death.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.