AdvertisementSupported byBy Sei ChongIn the month since Donald J. Trump won the presidential election, much of the global financial markets have been on a tear, as this graphic by The Financial Times shows.Among the rising asset classes is the dollar.In fact, it is doing so well that its strength is worrisome, said Hyun Song Shin, the head of research at the Bank of International Settlements, a forum for global central banks.“It is the ubiquitous nature of the dollar and its role in the global banking system,” said Mr. Shin, who wrote a paper on the issue last month. “When the dollar goes up, it directly impairs the risk-taking capacities of banks and investors alike.”Emerging economies in particular are feeling the strain of a strong dollar — Turkey, for example, has high levels of dollar-denominated debt and relies on volatile capital flows for its financing needs.But it’s not just emerging economies that Mr. Shin is worried about.He is concerned the dollar’s rise will worsen what he refers to as an emerging dearth of dollars, which could bring back memories of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. Back then, a global rush into dollars caused short-term borrowing rates to skyrocket, forcing hedge funds to shut down and banks to fail.Since the election, the cost of borrowing dollars short term in the yen, euro and Swiss franc has risen markedly.Paul Christopher, an investment strategist at Wells Fargo Advisors, said this will be a concern for Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman. “In the type of global economy we live in, she has to be careful about the dollar increasing too much, creating dollar shortages and liquidity problems as a result,” he said.Fighting against gun violence has often been a lonely task for activists, who on their own were dwarfed by the size of the gun lobby.But now, gun control advocates have found new allies in corporate law firms, including Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison; Covington & Burling; and Arnold & Porter.Together, big firms are committing tens of millions of dollars in free legal services from top corporate lawyers. Until now, there has not been a coordinated effort across law firms to lobby for stricter gun control.The coalition’s legal strategies include:• Seeking to overturn state laws that have gone largely unchallenged, including new policies that force businesses to allow guns to be carried on their property• Mounting the first formal challenges to congressional restrictions on publishing government data on gun violenceBrad D. Brian, co-managing partner at Munger, Tolles & Olson, said advocates don’t take issue with responsible gun owners. But he added, “There is an epidemic of gun violence in this country, and the law can save innocent lives without infringing constitutional rights.”Plenty of software programs can help you with your finances, but the start-up Digit and its competitors are aiming for something more comprehensive: a full-service financial assistant.When he founded Digit, Ethan Bloch had in mind the “Ender’s Game” character Jane, who uses her artificial intelligence to prepare taxes for the hero Ender and ends up taking over his financial life.For companies like Digit, Credit Karma and Mint, the goal is to create an assistant that will use machine learning and artificial intelligence to provide proactive analysis and advice.• The European Central Bank’s Governing Council holds a scheduled meeting on monetary policy. It is expected to say that it will continue buying government bonds and other assets until September 2017, six months longer than previously planned. Mario Draghi, the bank’s president, will hold a news conference at 2:30 p.m. in Frankfurt (8:30 a.m., Eastern Standard Time).Advertisement