
Workspace As told to                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

DEC. 9, 2016
Tucker Fallon, a yacht broker, keeps pieces of nautical history in his office, which is on a houseboat in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. On the water Our office building, a two-story custom houseboat, sits on a steel barge in the Bradford Marine shipyard on the New River in Fort Lauderdale. The employees of Bradford Marine, our parent company, built it about eight years ago after an earlier one was destroyed in a hurricane. The houseboat rises and falls with the tide every day, and when it’s windy it moves a bit.Ocean décorThere are 15 offices, two conference rooms, a reception area and a back porch where we might watch the occasional thunderstorm. One of the conference room walls is covered with mother-of-pearl seashells, and the floors in the hallways are designed to look like the teak and holly floors on yachts. At the helmMy office, a light sky blue with curved windows and white plantation shutters, is on the second floor. For 30 years, besides working in yacht sales, I’ve captained yachts and commercial vessels involved in everything from oil exploration to whale watches. I have boating memorabilia all around, which seems to draw customers’ interest.AdvertisementNautical to-do’sI keep Post-its up to remind me about what’s happening with boats I’ve sold. One has the name of a boat that was picked up here by a crane and loaded onto another ship for delivery to Alaska. The ship was traveling to Ensenada, Mexico, and then Victoria, British Columbia, where it was unloaded. From there it traveled under its own power, operated by the new owner’s captain. I went online and tracked the speed and course of the ship it was on and sent frequent updates to the new owner.AdvertisementMaritime news I found about 15 old boating magazines at an antique store, bought them all and had two framed — the whole magazines, not just the covers. Our customers all read boating magazines, and a few will look at these and say “1945!” or “1941 — look at this!” They cost 35 cents each back then.From times past I got my first United States Coast Guard captain’s license in 1973, an old merchant marine style with a sketch of a steamship. It’s been replaced by a red passport type. The older ones look nicer, but the newer one is more practical. What’s in a name In the 1970s, I was first mate on the Columbia, a 110-foot yacht built in 1931 for Helen Hay, the wife of Payne Whitney, a member of the prominent Whitney family. She was the daughter of John Hay, the United States’ 37th secretary of state. The name board with the red navigation light was located on the forward left side of the boat. In the 1980s, the boat sank in New York Harbor, and when it was raised the owner at the time gave me the board as a souvenir.Boating nostalgia When I was working on the Columbia, I took a photo of it from another boat when it was anchored in the Florida Keys. My ex-wife, who served as a stewardess on the yacht once in a while, is standing next to the pilot house, or wheelhouse, waving at me.Sign of the tidesI work brokers’ hours, which means mostly nights and weekends. I can always tell whether it’s high or low tide when I arrive according to whether I have to walk up the ramp or not. Very special deliveryMy yacht broker certificate hangs above my desk. I go out on boats all the time, for sea trials or test rides, and to give new buyers lessons on how to operate their boat. Last year I sold a boat from Lake Erie to a Florida resident, and he wanted to know how it would get here. I told him we would bring it. We took a 23-day trip through the Great Lakes, the Erie Canal and the Hudson River, and then we motored down the East Coast. It was after-the-sale customer service.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.A version of this article appears in print on December 11, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Selling Yachts in an Office That Rises and Falls With the Tides.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »