By MICHAEL CORKERYFEB. 12, 2016
Bank of America gave its chief executive, Brian T. Moynihan, a pay package last year that was 23 percent larger than in 2014, as the big bank generated higher profits and put its mortgage problems squarely behind it.Mr. Moynihan’s $16 million pay package includes a $1.5 million cash salary and $14.5 million in restricted stock awards tied to certain performance goals. The package does not include a cash bonus.In 2014, a year in which the bank, based in Charlotte, N.C., paid billions of dollars to settle investigations into its sale of faulty mortgage securities, Mr. Moynihan received a $13 million pay package.The Bank of America board’s decision to increase Mr. Moynihan’s pay package reflects the bank’s improved performance in 2015, as it increased its capital levels and generated $16 billion in profit compared with $4.8 billion in 2014.AdvertisementLast year, Mr. Moynihan also survived a campaign by some shareholders to strip him of his title of bank chairman.Advertisement“Bank of America in 2015 demonstrated continued progress as a result of its strategy of simplifying the company,” the company said in a securities filing late Friday that detailed Mr. Moynihan’s compensation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But for all the progress Bank of America has made in recovering from the losses of the financial crisis, investors have been punishing the bank’s shares. During a wider decline in the market, Bank of America’s shares have dropped 29 percent since the start of the year. The shares of large banks have dropped more sharply than the broader stock market.Even with his pay raise, Mr. Moynihan remains on the lower end of the compensation scale among Wall Street chief executives.JPMorgan Chase increased Jamie Dimon’s pay package 35 percent to $27 million last year.Lloyd C. Blankfein, chief of Goldman Sachs, saw his pay package reduced for the first time since 2011. Last year, his pay was $23 million, $1 million less than he made in 2014.At Morgan Stanley, James P. Gorman’s compensation as chief decreased to $21 million, from $22.5 million.A version of this article appears in print on February 13, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Bank of America Raises Chief’s Pay 23%.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.