By CARLOS TEJADADEC. 4, 2016
HONG KONG — A Hong Kong billionaire is making another attempt to buy big-money assets in Australia despite rising skepticism about foreign investors there, particularly those from China.An investment vehicle controlled by Li Ka-shing, one of Asia’s richest men, has offered to acquire the Australian pipeline and electricity company Duet Group for roughly $5.4 billion, Duet said in a news release dated Sunday. The news sent its shares up about 14 percent in midmorning trading in Australia on Monday.Duet said it was evaluating the offer. Mr. Li’s company, Cheung Kong Infrastructure, based in Hong Kong, did not answer phone calls.The offer represents the second time this year that Mr. Li has tried to acquire Australian infrastructure assets. Earlier, he had bid for Ausgrid, a major electricity distributor. State Grid Corporation of China, a Chinese state owned power company, also bid for Ausgrid.AdvertisementBut those offers fell victim to rising worries in Australia about foreign investment. In August, the Australian government rejected the deal on national security grounds, citing the services that Ausgrid provides to local businesses and governments.AdvertisementAustralian officials said the nationality of the bidders was not a factor. Still, Chinese investment has come under a microscope in Australia. The country is a major source of the natural resources China needs to feed its fast-growing economy, and Chinese money has become an important part of Australian economic life.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chinese money has fueled surging home prices and deals for assets such as food companies and ranch land. But that has provoked a backlash in some Australian quarters and calls from lawmakers to limit deals.Chinese involvement became an issue in a high-profile bidding fight this year involving huge tracts of Australian cattle land, though a buyer that included a Chinese minority investor eventually prevailed.Mr. Li is a longtime buyer of global infrastructure assets and does not typically team up with Chinese government-connected companies.Two years ago he clinched a deal to acquire an Australian natural gas distributor, Envestra, now known as Australian Gas Networks.Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 31 about bids for land in Australia characterized incorrectly efforts by a Chinese and a Hong Kong company to purchase Ausgrid, an Australian electricity company. The companies bid separately to buy Ausgrid, not jointly. (The error was repeated in an article on Tuesday.)A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: China Investor Tries Again to Buy Australia Company.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.