
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

FEB. 11, 2016
Becoming a whistle-blower by reporting wrongdoing on Wall Street or in a federal agency that regulates Wall Street takes lots of guts. And a strong argument can be made that whistle-blowers should be celebrated and rewarded for their courage.Incredibly, though, all too often the opposite occurs, and Wall Street whistle-blowers are shunned, ostracized and ignored. Often, they are fired from their jobs and blackballed from the industry.The wrongdoing they witnessed and reported gets covered up. This is a typical outcome, despite the promises from such prominent Wall Street regulators as Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in the Southern District of New York, and William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who have encouraged whistle-blowers to come forward and report wrongdoing, both because it is the right thing to do and because it will enable regulators to root out the bad behavior and prosecute those responsible for it.But the real world of Wall Street does not work that way.Take the much-discussed case of Alayne Fleischmann, a former associate at JPMorgan Chase who, as I have written before, was one of the people responsible in the years leading up to the financial crisis for making sure that the mortgages that the bank was buying from third parties — and then packaging into securities and selling off as investments around the world – met the bank’s credit standards.AdvertisementIn late 2006 and early 2007, she told her bosses that the bank was manufacturing and selling mortgage-backed securities that did not meet its own credit requirements, but she was ignored. Then, in February 2008, she was fired, and effectively blackballed from the industry.AdvertisementAppalled by her experience, she turned over information about what she had witnessed to the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department. In March 2013, Ms. Fleischmann gave a deposition to Richard Elias, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of California, in which she laid out all the wrongdoing she had witnessed at JPMorgan Chase. Her information was pivotal in the $13 billion settlement that the bank reached with the government later that year.The bank’s settlement with the Justice Department also resulted in an anodyne “statement of facts” that essentially glossed over the precise details of what JPMorgan Chase had done wrong and what Ms. Fleischmann had told the department. A complaint prepared by the United States attorney for the Eastern District of California, whose team had been investigating the wrongdoing at JPMorgan Chase, was used to get the bank to agree to the $13 billion settlement, but it has never been filed and remains a much-sought but publicly unavailable document. For her part, Ms. Fleischmann has moved back to her native British Columbia and, since November 2015, has been counsel to the British Columbia Investment Management Corporation.Now, four former whistle-blowers who have suffered fates similar to Ms. Fleischmann’s – all fired and blackballed after reporting wrongdoing — have banded together to form Bank Whistleblowers United, an advocacy group that aims to improve the status of Wall Street whistle-blowers and change the way Wall Street is regulated. Among its goals is to try to force the presidential candidates to agree that they will not take donations from any financial firm (or more than than $250 from any of its officers) that has been charged with committing “legal elements of fraud,” in other words, virtually all of them.The group’s manifesto, released Jan. 29, pledges to hold “the elite financial leaders who led the fraud epidemics that caused the financial crisis and the Great Recession personally accountable” and to help “to implement the urgent changes necessary to prevent or at least reduce the frequency and harm of future crises.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The whistle-blowers behind the new group are not unknown.One is Richard M. Bowen III, a former senior executive at Citigroup, who like Ms. Fleischmann saw that his bank was packaging shoddy mortgages and selling them as securities. He took his concerns to the highest levels of Citigroup, including to Robert E. Rubin, the former Treasury Secretary who was then chairman of the bank’s executive committee. Mr. Bowen was fired.Another is Gary J. Aguirre, a former S.E.C. lawyer who was fired from the agency after he refused his supervisor’s demand that he give preferential treatment to a Wall Street banker that the S.E.C. was investigating.There’s also Michael Winston, a former managing director at Countrywide Financial, the originator of billions of dollars of home mortgages that should never have been issued, who saw wrongdoing and tried to do something about it. But instead of being rewarded, he was “punished, isolated, tormented, financially harmed and ultimately dismissed,” he has said.Then there is William K. Black, an associate professor of economics and law at the University of Missouri, Kansas City, who describes himself as “a serial whistle-blower” when he was a federal regulator during the savings-and-loan crisis of the 1980s. Charles H. Keating Jr., the infamous owner of Lincoln Savings & Loan Association, once wrote a memo, metaphorically, of course, that his “HIGHEST PRIORITY” was to “GET BLACK…KILL HIM DEAD.”AdvertisementIn addition to encouraging presidential candidates to reject donations from big banks, the four whistle-blowers have created what they called a “60-day plan” that would allow President Obama, or his successor, to “restore the rule of law” in the banking sector and end the era of financial institutions that are “too big to fail” without requiring new legislation.Among their proposals are ending the “revolving door” that exists between Washington and Wall Street and that often curbs regulators’ willingness to prosecute the powerful law firms or Wall Street banks they hope to return to when their government service ends. In addition, the group seeks to stop the use of “deferred prosecution agreements” for “elite” white-collar criminals and to get 500 F.B.I. agents reassigned to investigate white-collar crimes. It is also asking Congress to allocate money to hire 3,000 new F.B.I. agents, 250 Justice Department lawyers and 250 S.E.C. investigators and enforcers.It’s an ambitious plan and one worth paying close attention to, especially if there is to be any hope of returning Wall Street to a place that works for the benefit of the American people and not just the people who work there. “It is our firm belief that, if these actions are not taken,” Mr. Bowen said to me in an email, “our country will experience another financial crisis again caused by the same misbehavior we have witnessed in the past.”William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »