By CONRAD DE AENLLEMARCH 4, 2016
The hard work and long hours you have put in for your employer may have earned you a decent pension. But it may not be your employer who owes you the money.Companies eager to limit risk and administrative headaches are turning increasingly to a strategy called a pension buyout that involves outsourcing the job of paying out pensions to an insurance companies. The employer pays an amount that represents the pool of money set aside for pension liabilities, and a fee to the insurer for managing the money and taking on the risk of meeting obligations to the retirees. Some of them, anyway. Companies usually maintain plans for current employees and only dispose of liabilities to former or soon-to-be-former employees.Once they retire, they get what is due them, and the insurer bears the burden of paying them, but makes a profit on the deal if the money the employer pays to assume the liabilities produces greater income than the insurer has to disburse over time. The employer, in turn, no longer has to be concerned with more fragile financial markets and more robust former employees who collect benefits for longer than expected.When a company decides to unburden itself of pension liabilities, it creates a need for employees in or near retirement to make a decision of their own: whether to accept the regular payments to which they are entitled or to opt out of the plan and take a lump sum. They often make the wrong choice, said Christopher Cordaro, chief investment officer of RegentAtlantic Capital, a financial planning firm in Morristown, N.J.Advertisement“What I’ve seen is that lump-sum offers aren’t that favorable right now because interest rates are so low,” he said.AdvertisementA retiree is often seduced by the lump-sum figure, not realizing that it could result in lower income through the years, Mr. Cordaro said. He noted that whether an individual should take a pension monthly or all at once depended on several factors, including the anticipated life span and the most likely performance of whatever investments the retiree would put a lump sum into. That, in turn, depends on his or her risk appetite.“A lot of people take the lump sum because they’re not equipped to make the calculation,” he said. “If the portfolio does very well, they’re better off taking the lump sum. If they live a long time, an annuity is better. If they eat too much bacon” — die early — “a lump sum is better for their heirs.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If the arithmetic appears to make a lump sum the better option, or at least no worse, there is another reason that it might be the way to go, said Steven Bogner, managing director of HighTower Treasury Partners, part of a nationwide firm of financial advisers. Lump sums can go toward buying monthly payments somewhere else.“In most cases, whenever you have an opportunity in retirement to take control over your money, do it,” Mr. Bogner said. “You can always buy a similar product in the marketplace. You can find alternatives to what you’re being offered.” With interest rates so low, making every extra bit of income more valuable, he added, the alternatives should be considered “now more than ever.”Whatever decision retirees make, more of them have to make it. After averaging $1 billion to $2 billion a year through the 1990s and 2000s, pension buyouts worth $34.6 billion were executed in 2012, according to Limra, a life insurance trade group. Buyouts totaled $8 billion in the first nine months of 2015.Companies that have sold pension liabilities include household names like General Motors, Verizon, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Kimberly-Clark.“The important thing to recognize is there’s no change to what a retiree is getting paid” after a buyout, said Ari Jacobs, global retirement solutions leader at the benefits consultant firm Aon Hewitt. “Instead of $1,000 a month from company XYZ, it’s now insurance company ABC. They’re just changing the watermark on the check.”A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page F7 of the New York edition with the headline: Retirees, Who’s  on the Hook  for Your Pension?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.