By CHAD BRAYAUG. 5, 2016
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Friday that it posted a large loss in the second quarter on ballooning litigation costs, as it grappled with restructuring to shift away from being a lender with global ambitions.The lender, which is 73 percent owned by the British government after a bailout during the financial crisis, announced plans last year to dismantle its global investment bank. It also wants to reduce the number of countries in which it operates, to focus on retail and corporate banking in Britain and Ireland. But it has struggled to rid itself of part of its branch network, and litigation costs have risen sharply.For the three months ended June 30, R.B.S. reported a loss of 1.08 billion pounds, or $1.43 billion, compared with a profit of £280 million in the second quarter of 2015.On an operating basis, the bank said that it posted a pretax loss of £695 million in the second quarter.AdvertisementR.B.S., based in Edinburgh, said that its costs for litigation and potential settlements rose to £1.28 billion in the quarter. By comparison, the bank had litigation costs of £459 million in the second quarter of 2015.Advertisement“Putting these issues behind us is a priority,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said on a conference call with journalists on Friday.It took a provision in the quarter related to shareholder litigation over its rights issue before its near collapse in 2008, one related to an industrywide examination of tracker mortgages and another for payment protection insurance, a product that has costs banks billions of pounds for customer redress.The bank also said that it would abandon plans to spin off its Williams & Glyn branch network, saying the business needed greater scale to be profitable, as interest rates seem likely to remain low after Britain’s vote to leave the European Union. R.B.S. said it would instead focus on a possible sale of Williams & Glyn.In the quarter, the bank had restructuring costs of £392 million, including £187 million for its efforts to divest Williams & Glyn. R.B.S. has spent more than £1 billion to create a separate technology system for Williams & Glyn.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank is required by European regulators to divest Williams & Glyn by the end of 2017, as a condition of its bailout, and it had previously warned there was “significant risk” it might not meet that deadline.R.B.S. said that it has had “positive discussions with a number of interested parties” concerning a possible sale of the business, although it did not identify any possible buyers.“These discussions are at a preliminary stage and may or may not lead to a viable transaction,” it added.Recent news reports said that Banco Santander of Spain had offered to buy Williams & Glyn, after plans for such a deal in 2012 fell through.AdvertisementR.B.S. said that net interest income, the measure of what a bank earns on its lending after deducting what it pays out on deposits on other liabilities, fell 2 percent to £2.18 billion in the quarter.Over all, revenue fell 20 percent to £3 billion in the second quarter, and operating expenses were down 6 percent to £3.5 billion, from £3.71 billion in the second quarter of 2015.Shares of R.B.S. fell nearly 4 percent in early trading in London on Friday.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on August 6, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hurt by Litigation Costs, R.B.S. Loses $1.43 Billion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.