By CHAD BRAYJULY 29, 2016
LONDON — Barclays, the British bank, said on Friday that its profit had fallen 41 percent as it accelerated its plans to sell or close businesses and assets that it no longer considered crucial to its strategy.James E. Staley, the Barclays chief executive, has said that disposing of those noncore businesses was a key to unlocking the earnings potential of the bank.Since joining the bank in December, Mr. Staley has sped up those moves and has been focusing the bank’s strategy on two divisions: the British consumer bank and the corporate and investment bank.For the three months that ended June 30, Barclays reported a pretax profit of 677 million pounds, or about $892 million. That compared with a profit of £1.15 billion in the second quarter of 2015.Advertisement“The strategy remains the right one, in our view,” Mr. Staley said during a conference call with journalists. “Our strategy is anchored on the belief that you want to be a large diversified financial institution because we’re not going to escape the volatility that you have in economic cycles. That is particularly noteworthy as we came out of the ‘Brexit’ vote.“AdvertisementMr. Staley said the bank saw “no reason” to adjust its strategy or change the pace of its delivery, in light of the outcome of the June 23 referendum to leave the European Union, a departure known as Brexit.Uncertainty about the economic effect of Britain’s decision to leave the bloc has roiled the financial markets and hit bank stocks particularly hard across Europe.Barclays shares fell almost 22 percent in London between the vote and Thursday’s close. But its shares were up 6 percent, at 155.35 pence, in morning trading in London on Friday.Since the British vote, the Bank of England has strongly signaled that economic pressures could prompt it to cut interest rates as soon as next month.And, Lloyds Banking Group, a British banking rival, said on Thursday that it would cut an additional 3,000 jobs and close an additional 200 branches by the end of next year, and it warned that “a deceleration of growth seems likely” in the British economy following the vote.Barclays said that its operating income, which is similar to revenue in the United States, declined 10 percent, to £5.48 billion, in the second quarter, from £6.07 billion in the period last year. Operating expenses were down 14 percent in the quarter, to £3.87 billion.Barclays’ noncore businesses reported a loss of £887 million in the second quarter, compared with a loss of £324 million a year earlier.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During the quarter, Barclays took a one-time loss of £182 million with the restructuring of a portfolio of loans made to the local authorities in Britain.AdvertisementBarclays also recognized an impairment of £372 million related to its consumer banking, life-insurance and wealth and investment management operations in France.The bank said in April that it was in exclusive discussions with the private equity firm AnaCap Financial Partners about the potential sale of those businesses. The discussions do not include its corporate and investment banking operations in France, which it would continue to operate.A sale would complete Barclays’ exit from retail banking in continental Europe. It has sold operations in Italy, Portugal and Spain in the past year.Mr. Staley said on Friday that the bank expected the drag of the noncore business on its expenses to fall significantly in 2017 as it continued to sell and close operations.Mr. Staley added that he expected expenses from its noncore business to be in the range of £400 million to £500 million in 2017. By comparison, the estimated expense cost from the noncore division this year is £1.6 billion, he said.Barclays also is in the process of reducing its majority stake in the Barclays Africa Group to free itself from regulatory and capital requirements that have dragged on its balance sheet.In May, Barclays sold a 12.2 percent stake in the Barclays Africa Group.“Given the strong level of interest in the asset, we have increased confidence in our ability to deconsolidate Africa,” Mr. Staley said.In its corporate and investment bank, profit declined 15 percent, to £1.17 billion, in the second quarter, from £1.38 billion in the period last year.The British consumer bank reported a profit of £141 million in the quarter, compared with a loss of £174 million in the second quarter of 2015.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @ChadbrayWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.