By LIZ MOYERMARCH 2, 2016
With a bankruptcy filing on Wednesday, the sporting goods retailer Sports Authority can add itself to the pile of losers from the precrisis leveraged buyout boom.The private equity firm Leonard Green & Partners in Los Angeles bought Sports Authority in 2006 for $1.3 billion, which would make it 188 out of the top 200 deals from that era, according to Thomson Reuters. In that year and the year after, a large wave of deals took companies private, including nine of the 10 largest on record.Many of those companies languished in the portfolios of private equity firms while the markets tried to recover from the 2008 financial crisis. Ten of the 20 largest were eventually freed through initial public offerings of stock after 2010, according to Thomson Reuters.But some of those companies are struggling. The biggest deal that went bust was the $44.3 billion purchase of the Dallas-based TXU Corporation by the Texas Pacific Group, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Goldman Sachs in 2007. The company has since changed its name to Energy Future Holdings, and it filed for bankruptcy in 2014 with nearly $50 billion in debt.AdvertisementTexas regulators are supposed to decide this month whether to allow Energy Future Holdings to sell its Oncor Electric Delivery Company utility to an investor group, a plan it says is vital to emerging from bankruptcy.AdvertisementIn another example, the casino and hotel operator Harrah’s Entertainment, now Caesar’s Entertainment, was acquired in 2006 by Apollo Global Management and TPG Capital for $27.4 billion. It had an initial public offering in 2012, but the company has since been engaged in a fierce courtroom battle with some of its bondholders, who say it guaranteed debt issued by its bankrupt operating unit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last week, a bankruptcy judge stayed the bondholder lawsuit until May while an examiner prepares a report about deals that bondholders say stripped the operating company of its best assets. That report is expected out in a week.Hilton Hotels, which was acquired by Blackstone in 2007 for $26 billion, has also floundered since its 2013 initial public offering. Shares are down 20 percent since then, and 26 percent in the last year.Hilton confirmed last month that it would spin off hotels into a real estate investment trust, a move that became so popular with companies looking to slim down and recognize the value of real estate holdings that Congress moved to shut it down. (Not without grandfathering certain deals, however.)Sports Authority said in a statement on Wednesday that it would close or sell 140 stores over the next three months as part of its financial restructuring plan. Leonard Green also owns the retailers BJ’s Wholesale Club, the Container Store and J. Crew.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.