
In Debt By                     
STEPHEN J. LUBBEN

DEC. 6, 2016
The Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments in Czyzewski v. Jevic Holding Corp. on Wednesday. At issue is whether a bankruptcy court can approve a settlement that distributes the debtor’s remaining assets in a way that could not be done under a Chapter 11 plan, at least not without the agreement of all creditors. In this case, some of the parties agreed to settle the case and to pay out the debtor’s cash to some of the creditors, but they intentionally skipped a class of creditors who were entitled to priority payment under the bankruptcy code.This order of payment in bankruptcy is often referred to as the absolute priority rule, though the term does not appear in the bankruptcy code itself. The basic idea is that secured creditors get paid before the unsecured, who in turn get paid before the shareholders. The application of the rule to bankruptcy liquidations has a long history.But its use in a corporate reorganization is a bit more confused. The notion that the rule might even apply in this context is something that Justice William O. Douglas essentially pulled out of thin air in  Case v. Los Angeles Lumber Products Company. That 1939 case is partly reflected in the current bankruptcy code and Chapter 11, which says that if a class of creditors objects, a reorganization plan has to comply with the absolute priority rule.But the code says nothing about distributions of the debtor’s assets before there is a reorganization plan. A strict constructionist might say that is the end of the story: Absolute priority applies only when there is a settlement plan in place.AdvertisementSo far none of the parties to the case have taken that approach to heart. One group of law professors — lead by Professors Melissa Jacoby and Jonathan Lipson — argues that settlements should comply with absolute priority. They harken back to Justice Douglas’s probable reason: A hard and fast rule prevents the big players from squeezing out the little players.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But another, smaller group of law professors argues that Chapter 11 thrives on flexibility, and that courts should retain discretion to approve settlements and distributions that they view as fundamentally fair. They also argue that the absolute priority rule is poorly named, in that it is not an actual rule and has never played a central role in American corporate restructuring. For the latter point, they cite an article I wrote last year, among others.AdvertisementAnd while the last point endears me to the second group of professors, I admit to being conflicted over what the right result is here. There is a real risk that dissenters are getting squeezed out by modern Chapter 11 practice — which is becoming even more transactional and deal-driven. But a poorly written Supreme Court decision on this point could simply flip the switch and create a tyranny of the minority. Many of the virtues of Chapter 11 would be lost.I think I ultimately come down on the side of affirming the appellate court decision. That court said that the bankruptcy court could approve a settlement like the one at issue in the Jevic case, but such approvals should be rare. If the Supreme Court simply underlined that last point in a short opinion, the bankruptcy community would be well served.I should note that there is also some risk that the Supreme Court will never provide a clear answer on these issues. While the case was originally taken to decide the absolute priority rule issue, the dissenting creditors have tried to recast the case as focusing on whether a bankruptcy court can dictate terms when a case is dismissed before there is a plan. The fight over whether that change of direction is proper could well divert the court from the issue originally at stake.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »