By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 1, 2016
LONDON — Home Retail Group said on Friday that its board of directors would recommend that shareholders accept a takeover offer from J Sainsbury, one of Britain’s largest grocery store chains.The cash-and-stock deal values Home Retail at 1.4 billion pounds, or about $2 billion. As part of the deal, shareholders would receive about £200 million from the previously approved sale of Homebase, a British home improvement chain, to Wesfarmers Limited of Australia.The announcement came about two weeks after Steinhoff International Holdings dropped its pursuit of Home Retail as a potentially lengthy bidding war loomed between it and J Sainsbury. Home Retail is the British owner of Argos, which sells electronics, housewares and other products through its online operations and retail stores in Britain and Ireland.“We are very pleased the board of Home Retail Group P.L.C. has recommended our offer for the acquisition of its business to its shareholders,” David Tyler, the J Sainsbury chairman, said in a news release. “The combined business will offer a multiproduct, multichannel proposition, with fast delivery networks, which we believe will be very attractive to customers and which will create value to both sets of shareholders.”AdvertisementUnder the terms of the offer, Home Retail shareholders would receive 0.321 of a share in the combined company for each Home retail share, as well as 55 pence in cash. They would also receive 25 pence a share, reflecting the capital return from the Homebase sale, and 2.8 pence a share in lieu of a final dividend.AdvertisementHome Retail shareholders would own about 12 percent of the combined company.J Sainsbury expects to achieve at least £160 million in cost savings in the third year after the deal closes.The agreement brings an end to what could have been a drawn-out process for the takeover.On Feb. 2, J Sainsbury said that it had agreed on the terms of a bid to buy Home Retail in a cash-and-stock deal that valued the target company at £1.3 billion. The agreement came after Home Retail rejected an approach J Sainsbury made in November.A few weeks later, Home Retail said Steinhoff had approached it with a possible all-cash takeover offer that would value the company at about £1.4 billion, setting up a potential bidding war.British takeover regulators set a deadline of March 18 for a formal offer for Home Retail, saying the competing bidder would be granted an automatic 53-day extension to respond if an offer was made.Last month, Steinhoff said it would “not announce an offer” for Home Retail and had instead agreed to acquire Darty, the French electronics and appliance retailer, for £673 million. Steinhoff said it would seek to combine Darty with Conforama, a French household goods retailer it bought five years ago.Morgan Stanley and UBS advised J Sainsbury, while Bank of America Merrill Lynch advised Home Retail.A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Home Retail’s Board Endorses J Sainsbury Bid.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.