By CHAD BRAYDEC. 5, 2016
LONDON — The Royal Bank of Scotland said on Monday that it had reached an agreement to settle a majority of shareholder claims over a rights issue by the lender before its near collapse in 2008.The litigation was related to the bank’s raising of 12 billion pounds, or about $15 billion at current exchange rates, weeks before it was rescued by the British government. R.B.S., which remains 73 percent owned by the British government, received a £45 billion bailout that year.The shareholder litigation is one of several legal issues confronting the bank, which has not reported a full-year profit since 2007. It said last week that it would further bolster its capital position after failing regulatory stress tests by the Bank of England that measured the ability of large banks to weather a financial crisis.On Monday, the lender said that it was willing to pay up to £800 million to settle all claims related to the litigation, and that it had reached a “full and final settlement” with three of five shareholder groups representing 77 percent of the claims against it, based on value of the claims.Advertisement“We have been very clear that we wanted to deal with as many of our legacy litigation issues as possible during 2015 and 2016,” Ross McEwan, the R.B.S. chief executive, said in a news release. “We are pleased to have reached this agreement and hope that it will be accepted by the remaining claimant group(s) so that this long course of complex and costly litigation can now be concluded.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank, which is based in Edinburgh, said it agreed to settle the claims without any admission of liability and that the settlement would be covered by existing provisions.AdvertisementR.B.S. said that it would try to reach a final agreement with the remaining shareholder groups, but that any claims not settled would be “vigorously defended.” Those claims, if not settled, are set to go to trial in March.The agreement came after prosecutors in Scotland said in May that there was “insufficient evidence” to bring criminal charges against R.B.S.’s former directors and senior management over the rights issue.The lender is restructuring as it sells businesses and dismantles its global investment bank to focus on retail and corporate banking in Britain and Ireland.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on December 6, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: R.B.S. Reaches Agreement  on Rights Issue Litigation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.