AdvertisementSupported byBy Daniel E. SlotnikArnold H. Lubasch, who covered crime and the courts for The New York Times for more than 30 years and later wrote a biography of the actor and civil rights activist Paul Robeson, died on Friday in Scottsdale, Ariz. He was 83.The cause was a ruptured spleen, his nephew David Markson said. At the hospital where he had been taken for abdominal pain, Mr. Lubasch learned he also had leukemia, Mr. Markson said.Mr. Lubasch, who started at The Times in 1956, covered a wide array of federal trials. In the mid-1980s he wrote about a “commission” of Mafia leaders who were convicted on racketeering and other charges. In the early 1990s he covered the murder and racketeering trial of the Gambino family boss John Gotti.His article on the sentencing began: “Still defiant, John Gotti stood up and smiled, saying nothing, as he was sentenced yesterday to spend the rest of his life in prison.”He also helped cover the $50 million libel suit brought by Ariel Sharon against Time magazine over a 1983 cover article suggesting that as the architect of Israel’s war in Lebanon he had condoned, and possibly encouraged, a massacre of Palestinian refugees. (The magazine was cleared.)Mr. Lubasch covered crime in New York as a police and general assignment reporter, in one instance writing about the Young Lords, a Puerto Rican militant group that had seized an East Harlem church in 1969.That same year, he drew on his own life when he interviewed fellow alumni of Weequahic High School in Newark about their reactions to Philip Roth’s “Portnoy’s Complaint,” the ballyhooed, sexually explicit comic novel about Jewish middle-class life in which the school — Mr. Roth was also an alumnus — figures prominently.Mr. Lubasch interviewed, among others, Mr. Roth’s parents as well as two psychiatrists — the novel takes the form of a monologue addressed to a psychiatrist — but did not break from his third-person narrative to reveal his own alumni status.Mr. Lubasch retired from The Times in 1994. His book “Robeson: An American Ballad,” which drew on his personal encounters with Mr. Robeson, was published in 2012.He was born in Brooklyn on May 28, 1932, and his family soon moved to Newark. In 1954 he graduated from the College of William and Mary in Virginia, where he was sports editor and then the editor in chief of the college newspaper. While a student he was a copy boy for The New York Herald Tribune and worked for The Richmond Times-Dispatch and The Richmond News Leader.He served in the Army in Europe before he started at The Times and married Helga Froede in 1963. His wife, with whom he lived in Scottsdale, Ariz., is his only immediate survivor.Advertisement