By PAUL MOZURMAY 5, 2016
HONG KONG — The Alibaba Group, which owns China’s biggest online marketplaces, is squeezing more money out of slowing growth.The Chinese e-commerce giant, which lists shares on the New York Stock Exchange, reported on Thursday a surge in profit and revenue in the first three months of the year compared with the same period last year. The company made more money by charging retailers to use its platforms, which connect vendors small and large with China’s growing ranks of connected consumers.But the figures, covering the fourth quarter of the company’s fiscal year, also showed stalling growth in the volume of sales over its platforms. Gross merchandise volume, a closely watched measure of the transactions on the company’s websites, grew 24 percent compared with the same period a year earlier, about the same pace in the prior quarter.Still, investors bid Alibaba’s shares up on Thursday. In a blog post released with the earnings report, Alibaba’s executive vice president, Joseph C. Tsai, said the company was able to buck the trend of broader global economic troubles because of the resilience of Chinese consumers, which economists say must make up for China’s weakening manufacturing and construction sectors.Advertisement“Chinese consumers, with their healthy balance sheets and ability to spend, will propel China’s shift from an export- and investment-led economy to a consumption-driven economy,” Mr. Tsai said.AdvertisementFor American investors, Alibaba has become a proxy for the Chinese economy. Though a sizable portion of China’s retail sales take place on Alibaba’s marketplace websites — Chinese consumers spent almost $500 billion on Alibaba last year — the company’s sales growth outperformed the rise in transactions on its site.The results also showed the growing toll that Alibaba’s forays into hypercompetitive areas outside its core business are taking on its finances. It said that its Koubei business, which allows Chinese consumers to order food and other items and services on their smartphones, had generated $135 million in losses for its parent company in the quarter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his post, Mr. Tsai pointed to the patience involved in creating the company’s Taobao marketplace, now the major sales driver of the company. He said the company would take a similar long-term view and continue spending on new businesses it thinks can help it grow.When Alibaba was listed in late 2014, the hype the company had built up helped it raise more than $20 billion, the largest public listing in United States history. Since then, a sagging Chinese economy and a slowdown in spending growth on Alibaba’s platforms have meant that despite solid results, the company’s share price has not returned to the level it reached on the first day of trading.Still, Alibaba has made progress making more money from its main business.Unlike Amazon.com in the United States, which keeps its own inventory and sells directly to customers, Alibaba serves as a middleman and makes money from getting vendors on its services to buy advertising and other services. Although the amount spent on Alibaba’s marketplaces has grown about 20 percent this quarter and last, its revenue from ads and commissions on those sites has grown 30 percent or more. In the longer term, investors expect those numbers to align more closely, meaning slower sales growth.Spending growth on Alibaba’s e-commerce sites will most likely continue to moderate. The company also faces rising competition from JD.com, which operates a business model similar to Amazon’s, as well as continued expenses from some of its strategic investments and acquisitions.Still, Chi Tsang, an HSBC analyst in Hong Kong, pointed to its continued strong cash position and dominance in online shopping as advantages. “People don’t think about how much cash this company generates,” he said.Alibaba said on Thursday that sales rose 39 percent in the fourth quarter, to $3.75 billion. Gross merchandise volume rose 24 percent, to $115 billion. Its profit rose more than 80 percent, to $832 million. Minus one-time items, the company posted a profit of 3.02 renminbi, or 46 cents, a share, lower than the 3.60 renminbi a share that analysts had expected.Follow Paul Mozur on Twitter @paulmozur. A version of this article appears in print on May 6, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Chinese Consumers Spend Freely, and Alibaba Posts Big Gains on Sales and Profit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.