AdvertisementSupported byBy William GrimesFred Hayman, whose luxury boutique, Giorgio Beverly Hills, led the way in transforming Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills into a shopping destination for the rich and famous, died on Thursday at his home in Malibu, Calif. He was 90.His death was announced by a spokeswoman, Katy Sweet.Mr. Hayman was the banquet and catering manager at the Beverly Hilton in 1961 when he invested several thousand dollars to become the silent partner in Giorgio, a struggling women’s clothing store off Rodeo Drive named after its owner, George Grant.The location was nothing special. Nearby were a gas station, a grocery store and a hardware store. But in the mid-1960s, after buying out his partner, Mr. Hayman and his wife at the time, the former Gale Gardner, began acquiring nearby properties along Rodeo Drive and consolidating them.They envisioned the store, renamed Giorgio Beverly Hills, at 273 Rodeo Drive, as a retail jewel. They saw the street, in their dreams, as a rival to Bond Street in London or Fifth Avenue in New York.Mr. Hayman showcased top designers new to the West Coast, like Halston, Diane von Furstenberg, Chloé and Zandra Rhodes. He created a sunny, eye-catching exterior with awnings in bright yellow and white and a clubby interior with a pool table and an oak bar, with free drinks, so men could relax while their wives or girlfriends shopped.Drawing on his hotel experience, he lavished the attentions of a concierge on his customers. He sent handwritten thank-you notes, set up a valet parking service and delivered packages to his best customers in a 1952 Rolls-Royce.By the mid-1970s the A-list clients were pouring in: Natalie Wood, Princess Grace, Elizabeth Taylor, Barbra Streisand. Texas oilmen and Arab sheikhs made shopping raids that passed into legend, spending tens of thousands of dollars in one go. Some patrons arrived with an extra limousine to haul away their purchases.In 1981 the store introduced a signature fragrance, Giorgio. One of the first to be advertised in magazines with scent strips, and initially sold only in the store, it became one of the great perfume success stories of the decade.“It was incredible how the money just flowed in,” Mr. Hayman told The New York Times in 1991. “You really didn’t have to sell. You’d just stand there and the customer would say, ‘I’ll have that and that and that and that.’”When the call girl played by Julia Roberts in “Pretty Woman” headed out on a shopping spree, with Richard Gere’s credit card in hand, she made a beeline for Giorgio. The pampered Valley girl played by Alicia Silverstone in “Clueless” toted a striped Giorgio shopping bag.“Fred was one of the first to make shopping sexy, to make it fun,” Judith Krantz told The Times in 1991. “He had the lights, the action, the glamour and all the stars.” His store was the model for the boutique at the center of Ms. Krantz’s first novel, “Scruples.”Fred Jules Pollag was born on May 29, 1925, in St. Gallen, Switzerland. His father, Richard, died when he was a boy, and after his mother, the former Irma Levy, married Julius Haymann, he took his stepfather’s surname, later dropping one of the n’s.The family immigrated to New York in 1941, and Mr. Hayman, his sights set on becoming a chef, found work as an assistant in the kitchens of the Waldorf Astoria hotel.In 1943, he enlisted in the Navy, which trained him as a dentist. On being discharged in 1946, he studied in Paris and Mexico City on the G.I. Bill, then returned to the Waldorf Astoria, where he became a banquet manager.In 1955, Conrad Hilton took Mr. Hayman to Los Angeles to serve as banquet and catering director of the new Beverly Hilton hotel. Friction with a rival manager led to his ouster in 1965, and he took a position as vice president and manager of the Ambassador Hotel.He dabbled in several restaurant ventures, without success. For a time he ran Fred Hayman’s Downtown. With several partners, he created Hamburger Tavern, a chain that featured hamburgers in 33 different styles. After marrying Ms. Gardner in 1966, however, he threw himself wholeheartedly into Giorgio Beverly Hills.Mr. Hayman promoted both the store and the street. In 1972 he founded the Rodeo Drive Association, a consortium of store owners determined to put the street on the map. Their efforts bore fruit, as plush retailers like Gucci and Tiffany, one by one, planted their flags.“Once Armani started, it was a given,” Mr. Hayman said at a ceremony in 2011 inducting him into the Rodeo Drive Walk of Style. “Then Hermès, and I knew it was going to be the street.”The perfume, which his wife was instrumental in developing, became a golden goose. Its provocative floral scent — gardenia, tuberose, rose and jasmine were the dominant notes — made it a favorite with celebrities like Farrah Fawcett, Jacqueline Bisset and Michael Jackson.“She wanted something that was assertive,” Mr. Hayman told The Times in 1985, pointing toward his wife, who said: “I wanted something that was noticeable, but not vulgar. When you’re paying $150 an ounce, it shouldn’t just disappear after an hour.”In 1982, Bloomingdale’s secured the rights to sell Giorgio in its New York store, and two years later J. W. Robinson, in California, followed suit.In 1987, Avon bought Giorgio perfume and the rights to the Giorgio Beverly Hills name for $145 million. Mr. Hayman renamed the store Fred Hayman Beverly Hills and put out solid yellow awnings.In 1990, he assumed the new post of fashion coordinator for the Academy Awards ceremony, a job he held for the next decade and to which he brought his usual promotional flair. Before the awards he staged a fashion show, sending an invitation to each nominee and presenter offering assistance in helping to choose an outfit for the great night.“It was a bright idea, because the stars dressed poorly, many of them,” he told The Los Angeles Times. “In those days the stars dressed themselves or didn’t pay much attention. Today, of course, the Academy Awards are the greatest fashion show.”Mr. Hayman’s first three marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, Betty Endo; two sons, Charles and Robert; a daughter, Nicole Hayman; and 10 grandchildren.His life was recounted in “Fred Hayman, the Extraordinary Difference: The Story of Rodeo Drive, Hollywood Glamour and the Showman Who Sold It All,” by the fashion writer Rose Apodaca, which was published in 2011.Mr. Hayman ended his career as a retailer in 1998 after leasing his building to Louis Vuitton.“His departure symbolizes the end of the era when brash, ambitious entrepreneurs muscled onto Rodeo and turned it into a street of dreams,” The Los Angeles Times wrote. “There is no longer room for him in the wonderland he created; Vuitton’s move signals the dominance of the international retailer. Success in the 1970s was about designer exclusives and the personal touch; in the 1990s, it’s about the global luxury broker and a Rodeo Drive website.”Advertisement