
Breakingviews By                     
DOMINIC ELLIOTT

FEB. 4, 2016
Credit Suisse’s turnaround is proving more painful than it could have been.The Swiss bank’s fourth-quarter results were riddled with the kind of exceptional items and restructuring costs that were par for the course for a European investment bank rethinking its strategy. But even after stripping these out, and ignoring the bits that Credit Suisse is winding down, the bank would have failed to turn a profit.Asia-Pacific was the only one of Credit Suisse’s newly created divisions that increased its fourth-quarter revenue. Pretax profit would have risen by more than a quarter from last year if adjusted for good-will write-downs. Tidjane Thiam, the bank’s chief executive, looks on track to hit his target for the segment to deliver 2.1 billion Swiss francs of pretax profit by 2018. But that depends partly on China, and Mr. Thiam is wary over that market’s near-term prospects.If that’s the good, then double-digit declines in fourth-quarter revenue in private banking in Switzerland and regions other than Asia look downright bad. Net asset declines in these regions will not help Mr. Thiam hit targets that are frankly ambitious.The ugliest aspects of the results concerned Credit Suisse’s capital position and markets trading performance, however. In trading, fourth-quarter fixed-income revenue fell a staggering 61 percent year-on-year – far worse than for peers.The balance sheet looks parlous, too. Despite a hefty cash call as part of the October strategic overhaul, Credit Suisse’s common equity Tier 1 ratio of 11.4 percent at the end of December was well below the 12 percent-plus average for Europe’s banks. Listing Credit Suisse’s Swiss unit is part of the plan, and it will raise capital. But proposing no dividend might have been smart. That’s what Deutsche Bank did.The parallels with Deutsche do not end there. Shares in both Credit Suisse and its rival now trade close to record lows. Mr. Thiam wants to continue cost-cutting and is slashing bonuses, as well as reducing the deferred portion of these to bring down fixed costs. That will help to some extent, and these are early days. But so far, Credit Suisse is not making much out of its overhaul.Dominic Elliott is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »