By ELIZABETH OLSONJUNE 23, 2017
Being the longtime lawyer to the man who is president of the United States can have an unexpected dividend, according to a newly released ranking of the nation’s law firms.Kasowitz Benson Torres, the law firm founded by Marc E. Kasowitz, President Trump’s personal lawyer, cracked Vault’s list of the nation’s top 100 prestigious firms this year, coming in at No. 99.The rankings are drawn from a survey of 18,000 associates who rate firms other than their own according to how prestigious the firms are in the legal industry. Prestige is not defined, according to Matt Moody, Vault’s senior editor who oversees the survey.“Firms that are in the news or have big deals or big cases often move up the list,” he said.The survey, however, was taken in the spring, he said — before Mr. Kasowitz was named as the president’s personal lawyer. Mr. Kasowitz has previously represented Mr. Trump on business matters for some 15 years.AdvertisementIn one of the most prestige-obsessed industries, the title of the No. 1 firm went — for the second year in a row — to Cravath, Swaine & Moore. The venerable firm had knocked its rival Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz off the top perch to No. 2.AdvertisementCravath may be basking in the good graces of associate lawyers after it raised associate salaries to $180,000 from $160,000 last year, the first increase in nearly a decade for such beginning lawyers.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A separate part of the survey, where associates describe and rate their own firms, listed Cravath as the “leader of the pack” and the “great American law firm against which all others should be judged.”One survey respondent left this comment: “Thank God for the Cravath pay scale!”Following the two legal titans atop the list were Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom in third place and Sullivan & Cromwell in fourth. Davis Polk & Wardwell and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett were fifth and sixth. Closing out the top 10 were Latham & Watkins at No. 7, followed by Kirkland & Ellis, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher and Weil, Gotshal & Manges. The bottom end of the top ranks had some changes from last year because Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton fell to No. 12 from No. 9, making way for another law firm to occupy a higher slot.A clearer view of what associates like — and dislike — about their own firms comes next week with the release of the second part of the survey. In a preview, associates at the Kasowitz firm gave the firm thumbs up for “compensation,” “prestige” and “open and friendly” people.The downsides, they said, were “lack of transparency,” “high billable hour” and “Trump.”A version of this article appears in print on June 24, 2017, on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Bump for Firm Of President’s Lawyer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.