AdvertisementSupported byCommon SenseBy James B. StewartOne of the last big profit centers for Detroit’s automakers, the sport utility vehicle, is under siege.An onslaught of competitive new S.U.V.s, especially in the most profitable high-end segment, is in the development pipeline or already showing up in dealer showrooms.At this year’s New York International Auto Show, the star attractions weren’t the usual sleek sports and muscle cars, but new luxury S.U.V.s from Jaguar, Maserati (where a line formed for a chance to be enveloped in the wood-and leather-lined interior) and even Bentley, which had its new Bentayga safely cordoned off behind velvet ropes.No wonder, with a starting price of $229,000.There’s intense competition even at that stratospheric level. A Mercedes G65 AMG can easily cost more than $220,000. Range Rover, which has long dominated the S.U.V. market at the very top, has introduced a model in collaboration with Holland & Holland, the London manufacturer of sporting guns, which sells for about $245,000. (The price includes a built-in gun storage compartment, but no actual guns.)New S.U.V.s are on their way from Rolls-Royce, Lamborghini and even Aston Martin, the famed sports-car maker that put its toe in the water with a Lagonda S.U.V. at the Geneva International Motor Show. (Even James Bond, the quintessential Aston Martin driver, may have an S.U.V. in his future.)“It’s an arms race at the moment,” said Ian Fletcher, an automotive analyst for IHS who previously worked at Jaguar and Bentley. “Carmakers are making ever bigger vehicles.”And for the comparatively few S.U.V. customers who seem to care about fuel efficiency and the environment, this week Tesla updated its S.U.V. line with the all-electric Model X 75D, which starts at $83,000 and features sexy gullwing doors reminiscent of a vintage Mercedes sports car or DeLorean.With so much at stake, General Motors and Ford, the last American-based global automakers, are not taking the competition lightly. Each had record pretax profits for 2015 of $10.8 billion , almost entirely because of sales of trucks, S.U.V.s, and S.U.V.-like crossovers.Last year, traditional passenger car sales declined slightly in the United States, while sales of S.U.V.s and crossovers lept 16 percent. They accounted for 35 percent of all vehicle sales last year. The trend has continued this year. Through March, S.U.V. and crossover sales surged 9.3 percent from a year ago, while car sales dropped nearly 5 percent.Some of this may be because of collapsing fuel prices, but perhaps not all that much. Carmakers have narrowed the fuel-efficiency gap between traditional cars and S.U.V.s, and in any event, at the high end, the price of gas seems to have minimal impact on purchase decisions.At G.M.’s flagship Cadillac brand, sales of its Escalade S.U.V. advanced nearly 25 percent last year, and its SRX crossover jumped over 13 percent. The Escalade starts at $74,000 and a Platinum edition can easily hit six figures. There has been minimal discounting, which has buoyed G.M.’s profit margins. Indeed, Cadillac said sales were constrained because production couldn’t keep up with demand.“The Escalade saved the Cadillac brand,” Mr. Fletcher said.In China, now the world’s largest car market and the ultimate battleground for automotive brand dominance, S.U.V.s already account for a third of the market. “The Chinese are going massively for these,” Mr. Fletcher said. “The traditional sedan market has been weak recently, but S.U.V.s and crossovers are booming for the same reasons as they are everywhere else: The roads are crowded and there are lots of crazy drivers on them.”In developing countries where the highway infrastructure is still primitive, safety concerns are paramount and status matters, S.U.V. sales are also surging. Last year’s wealth report from the global real estate consultants Knight Frank even targeted Africa as a potential growth market: “Although wealth in Africa is extremely concentrated in certain countries, we see growing potential for luxury brands, including high-end auto marques.”The venerable Ford Explorer and Fiat Chrysler’s Jeep Cherokee still dominate the middle market. Ford and G.M. featured new luxury S.U.V.s or crossovers at this year’s auto shows, with more models on the way.Ford’s Lincoln brand has been drawing big crowds to its new Navigator S.U.V. concept vehicle, which, like the Tesla, features gullwing doors. Its redesigned front grille looks a lot like the Jaguar and Bentley.The exotic doors will not survive when the production model goes on sale next year, but the luxurious interior probably will. It looks a little like a first-class airline cabin, featuring video screens at every seat and an intercom connecting the first and third rows of seats.Cadillac unveiled its new XT5 crossover, which replaces the popular SRX, and has said it has more S.U.V.s in the development pipeline. Still, both American makers are far behind BMW, which offers at least seven models of S.U.V.s and what it calls S.A.V.s, for Sports Activity Vehicle.Not that today’s S.U.V. has much to do with sports, utility or any activity likely to work up much of a sweat. “If you’ve got two kids and all their equipment and still want comfort and luxury, these models are appealing,” Mr. Fletcher said. “They’re not a station wagon or minivan. There’s a ‘cool’ factor. You sit up high, you’ve got a good view of the road, and you feel safe. Once people experience this, it’s hard to go back.”Automotive purists and driving enthusiasts may sniff at the bulky profile and trucklike handling of the traditional models (Ferrari insists it won’t make an S.U.V.), but automakers are following demand and looking for growth by appealing to the world’s most affluent consumers. And some of the new models, like the Maserati, manage to disguise their bulk with sleek curves and distinctive styling.Many of these factors were in evidence at this spring’s New York auto show. Mike Fedorenko of Westfield, N.J., told me he was trading up from a Ford Explorer to one of the new luxury S.U.V.s after recently inheriting some money. He admired the red and black leather seats in the Jaguar F-Pace and the reasonable price (starting at $42,000) but otherwise dismissed the interior appointments as “cheesy.” (It probably didn’t help the Jaguar that the Bentley’s burled walnut and quilted leather was in our peripheral vision.) He said he was leaning toward the new Maserati Levante or a Porsche Cayenne.Mr. Fedorenko said fuel efficiency wasn’t a concern. “I’m sure the world would be a better place if we all drove Minis,” he said. “But with so many crazy drivers on the road, I want the biggest vehicle I can get.”Advertisement