By SYDNEY EMBERAUG. 3, 2016
Tronc, formerly known as Tribune Publishing, raised its guidance for the year on Wednesday, a move that implied confidence in the company’s stand-alone strategy as it fends off a takeover attempt from the Gannett Company.After its first full quarter since Gannett announced its initial takeover bid in April, the company, whose newspapers include The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times, said it was raising its full-year revenue guidance into the range of $1.61 billion to $1.63 billion. The company reported second-quarter revenue that was down 2 percent compared with the same quarter last year. The company’s ad revenue was down 4 percent.This was also Tronc’s first full quarter under Michael W. Ferro Jr., a Chicago entrepreneur who became its chairman after taking a $44 million stake in February. Since then, he has replaced the chief executive with a close business associate and installed a new board.Mr. Ferro has pushed an approach to journalism at the company that involves concepts like artificial intelligence and machine learning. The company announced in June that it was changing its name to Tronc, which stands for Tribune online content. It also switched to the Nasdaq exchange.AdvertisementDuring Wednesday’s earnings call, there was no mention of Gannett, the owner of USA Today. Instead, Justin C. Dearborn, Tronc’s chief executive, was optimistic about its future. “We are in the midst of an ongoing process to reorient the company with a more digital focus,” he said.Advertisement“We are confident that we have the right strategy in place and are taking the necessary steps to transform our business,” he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He highlighted a focus on video, a strategy that many others are adopting. “Not only does our audience increasingly prefer video, but the monetization opportunity for a story with video is also significantly higher,” he said.In April, seeing an opportunity to gain publications in Los Angeles, Chicago and other markets including Baltimore, Hartford, and Orlando, Fla., Gannett went public with its first offer of $12.25 a share, which was rejected. Gannett increased its bid in May to $15 a share, representing a 99 percent premium to the closing price on the last day of trading before Gannett’s initial bid was made public.The two companies engaged in a heated exchange of letters and statements. After a fight over Mr. Ferro’s nominees to Tronc’s board, Gannett said on June 7 that it would keep its offer in place while it evaluated developments, including Tronc’s earnings. What Gannett decides will help determine the fate of some of the most iconic newspapers in the country, which like other publications have faced declining advertising dollars and falling circulation.“Gannett is standing by its June 7th statement,” a Gannett spokesman said.For the second quarter, Tronc reported net income of $4 million, $1 million more than the same quarter last year. Advertising revenue for the publishing businesses was $170 million, down 7 percent. Advertising revenue for the company’s digital divisions was $52 million, up 7 percent compared with the same quarter last year.Leslie Picker contributed reporting.Leslie Picker contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Tronc Raises Guidance Despite Quarterly Drop.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.