By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMFEB. 5, 2016
WASHINGTON — The contrast between the improving health of the labor market and the weakness of other economic indicators poses a challenging quandary for the Federal Reserve.Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, and other officials have said the Fed must raise its benchmark interest rate as job growth continues to prevent higher inflation down the road. The strength of the January jobs report — including faster wage growth — suggests the Fed’s policy-making committee still could raise rates as soon at its next meeting in March.But the Fed would be betting on a theory. Inflation remains low, growth has slowed and the impact of global economic problems and financial market volatility is unclear. If the Fed presses ahead, it could undermine the economy just as things are getting good for the vast majority of Americans.“My message to the Fed regarding this recent, long-awaited acceleration in wages is ‘Love it and leave it alone,’  ” said Jared Bernstein, an economist at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities who previously served as the chief economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “If we want working people to benefit from the expansion, the last thing you’d want to do is tap the brakes — especially given the absence of inflationary pressures.”AdvertisementThe Fed raised its benchmark rate in December for the first time since the financial crisis. It had held rates near zero for seven years to encourage borrowing and risk-taking. Ms. Yellen, speaking after the announcement, said the Fed planned to raise rates gradually, reducing those incentives because the economy no longer needed quite as much help.AdvertisementShe will speak publicly for the first time since then on Wednesday when she testifies before the House Financial Services Committee. In the intervening two months, the economic outlook has deteriorated. Financial conditions have tightened and the dollar has gained strength, weighing on American exporters and delaying any rebound in inflation.The January jobs report, however, reflects considerable strength in other parts of the economy. Stronger wage growth is particularly likely to grab the Fed’s attention, suggesting that employers are finally being forced to compete for workers by raising pay. In a high-profile example, Walmart, the nation’s largest private employer, has said that it plans to increase hourly pay rates for most of its employees later this month.The Fed is less likely to worry about the slower pace of job creation in January, as officials have predicted that slower population growth would weigh on job creation. In keeping with those expectations, the unemployment rate still fell to 4.9 percent.One reason the Fed is focused on job growth is that it may be a more accurate reflection of the strength of the underlying economy. In the fourth quarter of 2015, for example, the government estimated the economy added 279,000 jobs a month, but that output increased at a rate of just 0.7 percent.Jason Furman, chairman of the president’s Council of Economic Advisers, wrote in an analysis on Friday that the output figures probably reflected some measurement error. “This illustrates the importance of focusing on a wide range of indicators — especially labor market data, which tend to be less noisy — in assessing the health of the economy,” he said.One wing of the Fed sees an undiminished case for raising rates.Esther L. George, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and one of the 10 Fed officials voting on the direction of policy this year, said this week that the Fed “should continue the gradual adjustment of moving rates higher to keep them aligned with economic activity and inflation.”She also played down concerns about the economic impact of recent market volatility. “While taking a signal from such volatility is warranted,” she said, “monetary policy cannot respond to every blip in financial markets.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Loretta J. Mester, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and another voter, said on Thursday in New York that it was “premature” to change her economic outlook.Advertisement“At this point, solid labor market indicators, including strong payroll growth, and healthy growth in real disposable income, suggest that underlying U.S. economic fundamentals remain sound,” Ms. Mester said. “Until we see further evidence to the contrary, my expectation is that the U.S. economy will work through the latest episode of market turbulence and soft patch to regain its footing for moderate growth.”Other Fed officials, however, say the volatility has given them pause.William C. Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a close adviser to Ms. Yellen, said in an interview with Market News International this week that he was worried about the economic impact of jittery markets.“If those financial conditions were to remain in place by the time we get to the March meeting, we would have to take that into consideration in terms of that monetary policy decision,” Mr. Dudley said.And Lael Brainard, a Fed governor who has been particularly outspoken in warning that global pressures will weigh on domestic growth, told The Wall Street Journal this week that “recent developments reinforce the case for watchful waiting.”Investors, oddly, have walked away from this debate feeling confident that the Fed will not raise rates in March. Indeed, asset prices tied to expectations about the future level of short-term interest imply only about a 50 percent chance of any rate increase this year.That contrasts sharply with the Fed’s own prediction in December that it planned to raise rates by about one percentage point in 2016, most likely in four discrete steps.Many analysts have taken a more measured position, predicting that the Fed is less likely to move in March, but that it will still raise rates two or three times this year.Michael Gapen, chief United States economist at Barclays, said on Friday he now expected the Fed to raise rates twice, instead of three times, and to start in June, instead of March.Michael Feroli, chief United States economist at JPMorgan Chase, said the continuation of low inflation probably meant Fed policy makers would hesitate at their next session.Advertisement“Were the meeting held tomorrow, we still think the Fed would stay on hold — primarily because of concerns about inflation and inflation expectations,” he said. “But it would be an uncomfortable hold.”Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.A version of this news analysis appears in print on February 6, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Conflicting Economic Indicators Challenge Fed’s Policy Makers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.