By EMILY STEEL and NOAH SMITHAPRIL 14, 2016
The ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone will not be required to sit for a deposition in the legal battle over his mental competency, a California judge ruled during a brief hearing on Thursday.Whether or not Mr. Redstone, 92, is competent is the subject of a lawsuit filed in November by Manuela Herzer, his former companion and onetime romantic partner, who challenged his mental capacity. A trial is scheduled for May 6.The effort to get Mr. Redstone to sit for a deposition could have been considered a negotiation tactic by Ms. Herzer to pressure him into a settlement. A lawyer for Ms. Herzer said during the hearing that the basis for the request was the newly stated prospect of Mr. Redstone’s testifying during the trial.The two sides were engaged in negotiations during the last two weeks over a settlement that would include detailed plans for Mr. Redstone’s health care as well as a payment for Ms. Herzer that could reach into the tens of millions of dollars, according to two people with knowledge of the discussions.AdvertisementBut those negotiations hit a roadblock earlier this week, prompting litigation to resume.On Thursday, Judge David J. Cowan of the Los Angeles County Superior Court said that his earlier ruling would stand, as Mr. Redstone’s legal team confirmed at the hearing they would not be calling him as a witness but reserved the right to submit a declaration on his behalf during the trial.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Already, the judge has declined several requests to order the deposition of Mr. Redstone, saying that taking the testimony from him would be unproductive because he has a speech impediment. Judge Cowan has also said it would be an invasion of privacy and “inconsistent with what a person his age and condition should have to undergo.”AdvertisementMs. Herzer filed suit in November, claiming that Mr. Redstone was not mentally competent when he removed her from a directive that would have put her in charge of his health care.Ms. Herzer has said that she is concerned about Mr. Redstone’s health, while lawyers for Mr. Redstone say that she is after his money. On the same day that Mr. Redstone changed his health care plan, he removed Ms. Herzer from his personal estate plan.The case could have implications for CBS and Viacom, the two media companies that Mr. Redstone controls. While the suit concerns his personal life, it has set off questions about succession issues and the fate of the two companies.A version of this article appears in print on April 15, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Sumner Redstone Won’t Have to Give Deposition in Lawsuit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.