By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONSEPT. 27, 2017
HONG KONG — During his presidential campaign, Donald J. Trump talked tough on China, accusing the world’s second-largest economy of stealing jobs from Americans. On Wednesday, Wilbur Ross, his commerce secretary, echoed that sentiment, calling for a dramatic shift in the countries’ trade relationship.Mr. Ross was speaking after a visit to Beijing, where he met with Premier Li Keqiang and other finance and economic officials, as part of an effort to lay the diplomatic foundations for Mr. Trump’s visit to China this year.“We do need major change, and I hope and I believe that we’ve made that clear to the Chinese government, because the relationship is too lopsided at present,” Mr. Ross said in a media briefing.Tension between the United States and China has mounted in recent months. In a rare move, the Trump administration this month blocked a China-backed investor from buying Lattice Semiconductor, an American company, citing national security concerns. And Mr. Trump has criticized China, one of North Korea’s main economic partners, for failing to do more to restrain North Korea’s nuclear ambitions.AdvertisementDuring his meetings with officials in Beijing, Mr. Ross said he raised concerns about the imbalance of trade and investment relations, the need to protect intellectual property and lower tariffs.Advertisement“The most important thing is better market access both for companies operating there physically and for companies exporting there,” Mr. Ross said on Wednesday. He added that the Trump administration wanted to see less protectionist behavior, calling China “one of the most protectionist” countries in the world.Western businesses have raised concerns about a $300 billion plan by China to become self-sufficient by 2025 in high-tech industries, including computer chips and electric cars, that they argue may hurt foreign companies. The policy, known as Made in China 2025, is part of China’s ambition for certain industries to be global leaders with the help of state money.“We can understand that they would desire self-sufficiency and if the way they get there is through a free and open level playing field, and it’s a fair match, we’re fine with that,” Mr. Ross said on Wednesday. But, he added, the Trump administration would object to American companies’ being forced to transfer technological know-how in exchange for market access.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In closed-door conversations with United States officials, the Chinese have expressed concerns over a broad inquiry by the Trump administration into China trade practices that has focused on potential violations of intellectual policy. Officials have also complained about the United States’ export controls.On Wednesday, Mr. Ross blamed China for contributing to the United States trade deficit, saying it was “by far our largest single deficit.” He said he planned to help narrow the gap between the two countries by increasing exports of American goods and services to China. The Commerce Department is leading a trade mission to China in November as part of that initiative.This year, the United States signed a deal with China to give American companies greater access to the Chinese market in several areas, including agriculture, banking and finance. Mr. Ross referred to the deal as “relatively low-hanging fruit.”“Now we’re moving into harder things, bigger things, more serious things, and hopefully the good will that’s been built up between President Xi and President Trump will help to change the atmosphere,” Mr. Ross, referring to Xi Jinping, told an audience at a Forbes conference in Hong Kong on Tuesday evening.But tensions remain between the two leaders. Last week, Mr. Trump signed an executive order to strengthen sanctions against North Korea; the new measures named Chinese entities.On Wednesday, Mr. Ross said that although the executive order “did name some Chinese individuals, it was not particularly aimed at China,” adding that other nations have also done business with North Korea. He also praised China’s central bank for directing its banking institutions not to facilitate trade with North Korea, saying it was “an important step.”AdvertisementHe also struck a cautious note in ending his meeting with reporters on Wednesday. “I don’t want to give the impression that we made any concessions on the trip,” he said. “We did not, nor did the Chinese side.”Follow Alexandra Stevenson on Twitter @jotted.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.