By TIFFANY HSUSEPT. 21, 2017
Katherine M. Bonniwell, a former publisher of Life magazine who was widely considered a role model for female magazine managers, died on Aug. 31 at her home in Manhattan. She was 70.The cause was lung cancer, her husband, William Leibovitz, said.Ms. Bonniwell was an “early glass ceiling breaker” who led a “groundswell of very talented women” into top positions at Time Inc., Life’s parent company, said Chris Meigher, who was president of the organization during her time there.“She was strong and stalwart and could stand toe to toe with anybody,” Mr. Meigher said.Life, best known for its photo essays, was published weekly until 1972 and then monthly from 1978 until 2000. It now exists as a depository of 20 million photos and images on the Time website.Ms. Bonniwell was publisher from 1988 to 1991, a period marked by high magazine readership but also by advertising downturns and shifts in consumer interest. During her tenure, the magazine increased its circulation to 1.4 million from 1.2 million and won two National Magazine Awards.AdvertisementMs. Bonniwell, known for her innovative solutions to complicated problems, was the second woman to serve as publisher of Life; the first was her immediate predecessor, Lisa Valk. She also served as worldwide director of circulation at Time Inc. and business manager for People magazine.AdvertisementMr. Leibovitz recalled that once, seeing that Time Inc.’s Money magazine was performing poorly, Ms. Bonniwell proposed a new content strategy. Instead of publishing a mix of miscellaneous articles, she suggested that each issue of the magazine focus on a different theme. Her suggestion was adopted, and readership soared.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Bonniwell’s efforts to put Life back on a weekly publication schedule for the first time in a decade were driven by “amazing intellectual and political brilliance on her part,” said Jim Gaines, who was managing editor of the magazine at the time and later succeeded Ms. Bonniwell as publisher.She made a compelling business case for producing more issues and very likely would have succeeded, Mr. Gaines said, if not for external market pressures and concerns that a weekly Life could cannibalize readership from other Time publications.Katherine Marbury Bonniwell was born in Manhattan on May 29, 1947, to Lucy and John Bonniwell. Her family was descended from British colonists who arrived in North America in 1670. Her middle name was a tribute to her ancestor William Marbury, of the landmark Marbury v. Madison Supreme Court decision, which helped establish the doctrine of judicial review.Ms. Bonniwell earned a bachelor’s degree in 1969 from Vassar College, where she studied art. She briefly worked at the Sotheby’s auction house before returning to school for a master’s from the Stanford Graduate School of Business in 1976.Besides her husband, she is survived by her son, Alexander; a sister, Anne Gale; a brother, Charles Bonniwell; and a stepdaughter, Lynn Leibovitz.A version of this article appears in print on September 22, 2017, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: Katherine M. Bonniwell, 70, Publisher.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.