By BARRY MEIERFEB. 5, 2016
The plaintiffs’ lawyers suing General Motors over its faulty ignition switch have been fighting to hold the carmaker accountable for the defect. But those lawyers are now fighting among themselves, threatening to throw the litigation against G.M. into disarray.First, the lawyer who exposed the deadly defect urged a judge to remove the three plaintiffs’ lawyers leading the litigation, accusing them of conflicts of interest and bungling a key trial against G.M. The three lawyers have fired back, claiming that the charges are false and that their accuser has ignored the case.The plaintiffs’ lawyers suffered an embarrassing setback last month in the first federal case brought against G.M., a trial meant to determine the strength of their claims and G.M.’s potential financial liability. The plaintiff in the case agreed to dismiss his lawsuit midtrial after lawyers for the carmaker showed that he might have given misleading testimony.Last week, Lance Cooper, a plaintiffs’ lawyer in Marietta, Ga., who helped uncover the switch problem, filed a motion that sharply criticized the three lawyers appointed to lead the multidistrict litigation against G.M., a collection of hundreds of cases consolidated in Federal District Court in Manhattan.Advertisement“If there had been adequate preparation, this case would never have been tried,” Mr. Cooper said in a telephone interview this week. “It was a disaster.”AdvertisementThe three lawyers — Robert Hilliard of Corpus Christi, Tex.; Steve W. Berman of Seattle; and Elizabeth J. Cabraser of San Francisco — disputed Mr. Cooper’s accusations in a court filing on Monday and said he had not taken part in the case’s management for months.“He has been missing in action,” the filing said.Separately on Monday, G.M. asked Jesse M. Furman, the federal judge presiding over the litigation, to reject a separate request from Mr. Cooper to undo a $275 million settlement struck last fall between G.M. and Mr. Hilliard. The deal covered about 1,400 lawsuits, or about 60 percent of those pending against the carmaker.In that filing, G.M. accused Mr. Cooper of manufacturing unsubstantiated “claims of secrecy and concealment” to try to upend the agreement.To help streamline mass lawsuits involving cars, drugs and other products, such cases are often consolidated into a so-called multidistrict litigation, and assigned to a single federal court where a judge will select a small group of lawyers to steer the litigation. Several legal scholars have been critical of the process, saying that a cadre of plaintiffs’ lawyers dominate it and, at times, put their own interests ahead of other lawyers involved in a case.Elizabeth Burch, a professor at the University of Georgia School of Law, said while lawyers might fight about fee allocations once a case was over, it was unusual to see such public recriminations and finger-pointing while litigation is underway.“I haven’t seen it happen midstream,” Ms. Burch said.G.M.’s is not the only prominent multidistrict litigation involving an automaker. In December, hundreds of lawsuits against Volkswagen related to cheating on emissions tests were consolidated in a federal court in San Francisco; Ms. Cabraser was selected to head the plaintiffs’ lawyers panel in that case, too.In the G.M. case, the automaker has recalled 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Saturn Ions and other small cars since early 2014 because of a defect that allowed a vehicle’s ignition switch to shut off if jostled, cutting off engine power and steering and disabling airbags. For more than a decade, the carmaker failed to report the flaw to regulators. Through a compensation program, the company has acknowledged the defect’s likely role in at least 124 deaths.In their joint motion on Monday, the three lawyers leading the case argued that Mr. Cooper was the only lawyer involved in the litigation to complain about them.AdvertisementMr. Cooper is hardly a newcomer to the G.M. ignition issue, having spent years uncovering the defect. He is especially upset over the case that ended abruptly when G.M. challenged the plaintiff, Robert Scheuer. In filings and an interview, Mr. Cooper charged that Mr. Hilliard chose the case — the first of six cases scheduled to go to trial — because Mr. Scheuer was one of his clients and added that Mr. Berman and Ms. Cabraser failed to properly vet Mr. Scheuer to uncover the inconsistencies in his story that came out at trial.Mr. Hilliard said he had thoroughly investigated Mr. Scheuer. But Mr. Cooper said he had warned Mr. Hilliard and others not to use the case as a bellwether because of Mr. Scheuer’s medical history and past use of painkilling drugs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“If that kind of case came in my door, I’d tell the person, ‘I’m sorry about your injuries, but I can’t help you,’” Mr. Cooper said.The dispute has also brought to light an earlier episode of lawyer infighting over which case to try first.Mr. Cooper charged in his filing that the lead plaintiffs’ lawyers had wanted to try a potentially stronger lawsuit first, but changed course after Mr. Hilliard sought to play a bigger role in it and was rebuffed.That lawsuit involved the death of James E. Yingling III, who was killed in the crash of a Chevy Ion. His family’s lawyer, Victor Pribanic of Pittsburgh, said in an interview that Mr. Hilliard contacted him last summer and suggested they try the case together.After he rejected the proposal, Mr. Pribanic said the case’s lead plaintiffs’ lawyers notified him that they had dropped his lawsuit back to the fifth of six bellwether trials. (In the G.M. litigation, plaintiffs’ and defense lawyers each got to choose three of the six test cases, and the trials alternate.)Mr. Pribanic drafted a motion to Judge Furman protesting the move and sent it to Mr. Hilliard and his colleagues. They then agreed to make his case the next lawsuit selected by plaintiffs for trial, he said.AdvertisementHe said the lead lawyers explained that they had moved his case back because they believed that Judge Furman would most likely insist that one of them play a role in the first trial. Mr. Hilliard said on Monday, however, that he was concerned that Mr. Pribanic would find it hard to prevail against G.M. on his own.“Regardless of the quality of that gentleman, I thought it was unlikely he could do it,” Mr. Hilliard said.Mr. Hilliard also insisted that while Mr. Scheuer’s case had been rejected by G.M.’s out-of-court compensation program for payment, so had a claim filed on behalf of Mr. Yingling’s estate. But Mr. Pribanic said he never made such a filing.In a separate motion, Mr. Cooper asked Judge Furman to reject the settlement reached last year between Mr. Hilliard and G.M., saying that Mr. Hilliard had put other lawyers at a disadvantage because he did not notify them that talks were underway.Mr. Hilliard noted that he issued a news release when the agreement was reached, adding that nothing about his agreement prevented other lawyers from striking deals with G.M. Judge Furman is expected to rule on Mr. Cooper’s motions or order a hearing on the issues this month.A version of this article appears in print on February 6, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Lawyers  Suing G.M.  Now Fight Each Other.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.