By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 4, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO —  Fresh off finally completing the sale of a major division to a private equity firm, Symantec is moving forward — with the help of another big financial investor.Symantec announced Thursday that it had taken a $500 million investment from the investment firm Silver Lake Partners, as the company moves to focus on its core security software and services.The company also disclosed that it would use both the proceeds from the Silver Lake investment and the cash that it received from selling its Veritas data storage unit for $7.4 billion to return money to shareholders. That will include both share buybacks and a special dividend of $4 a share.Bringing in Silver Lake, which will gain a seat on Symantec’s board, is meant to help support the company as it focuses on its historical strength in security offerings. That effort will include both building out its software and services products and trimming some $400 million in costs.AdvertisementThe investment — known as a private investment in public equity, or PIPE — is the latest by Silver Lake, one of the most prominent technology-focused investment firms. Silver Lake has struck similar deals with Avago, a chip maker that recently merged with Broadcom, and with Motorola Solutions.Advertisement“It’s a significant capital investment for us,” Michael A. Brown, Symantec’s chief executive, said in a telephone interview. “We welcome all interested shareholders, but especially ones who bring in additional expertise.”Under the terms of the deal, Silver Lake will buy $500 million worth of convertible debt that carries a 2.5 percent coupon and can be exchanged for equity at $21 a share. That is about 10 percent higher than Symantec’s stock price as of late Thursday afternoon.In after-hours trading, shares of Symantec surged.Ken Hao, the Silver Lake managing partner who led the investment, is also joining Symantec’s board.Both Symantec and Silver Lake have known each other for some time, with the private equity firm having approached Symantec over the years with offers to become partners.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.As Symantec moved to sell its Veritas unit to focus on security — the division was eventually sold to the Carlyle Group — Silver Lake raised the possibility of a PIPE. A deal came about after several weeks of talks, according to Mr. Brown.“Symantec has become now a pure-play security software and services company,” Mr. Hao said in an interview. “This is one of the most important markets in the world. We have an opportunity to partner with management and the board and participate in the transformation of the company.”Such an investment, at least to Symantec, validates the company’s belief that it is a leader in security, a field that has only grown in prominence as hackers escalate their attacks.“We have the largest footprint and scale of any vendor,” Mr. Brown said. “We have more information about the threat landscape than anyone else in the industry.”AdvertisementSilver Lake’s history of PIPEs shows that the firm has used such deals to support deal-making by the companies in which it has invested. The firm supported Avago as it gobbled up other chip makers, culminating in the company’s $37 billion deal for Broadcom last spring.The firm considers future acquisitions as a possibility for Symantec, according to people briefed on the firm’s thinking.But at least for now, Symantec is focused on both returning money to its shareholders and on trimming costs.“We do not view ourselves as a roll-up opportunity,” Mr. Brown said. “We’re interested in being a lot more focused.”A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Symantec Takes a $500 Million Investment and Will Return Cash to Stockholders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.