
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

AUG. 16, 2016
The activist investor ValueAct Capital Management has paired its new $1 billion-plus stake in Morgan Stanley with support for the bank’s chief executive, James P. Gorman. But ValueAct’s logic for investing in the Wall Street bank goes only so far.Jeffrey W. Ubben, the ValueAct chief executive, thinks shareholders just do not get Morgan Stanley, which now collects 80 percent of its net income from wealth management, investment management and merger advisory services, compared with just 30 percent around a decade ago. Mr. Ubben says other highly regulated businesses hog too much attention.It is not that simple. Trading absorbs most of the $43 billion in capital at Morgan Stanley’s investment bank – almost two-thirds of the company’s total. Performance in fixed-income trading is volatile and subpar. Other businesses deserve credit, but shareholders fully grasp that. The roughly 82 percent of book value at which the company trades is on the nail for a company that managed an annualized return on equity last quarter of only 8.3 percent. If the businesses Mr. Ubben likes are really better, it is not showing yet.Mr. Gorman is only part of the way through cutting $1 billion of costs, and he is saving $175 million a year buying back expensive trust-preferred securities. These tactics could eventually take the return on equity above 10 percent and warrant the company trading at book value – a 43 percent improvement from where Mr. Ubben jumped in, bagging his fund around $500 million.AdvertisementEven so, an activist hoping to really shake up Morgan Stanley would agitate for a breakup. A stand-alone wealth- and asset-management unit would probably be worth $50 billion. That assumes the business is worth 20 times its potential $2.5 billion of net income this year, a higher rating than the 16 times that Raymond James commands.The bank’s mergers and acquisitions franchise could fetch more than $5 billion, assuming a 25 percent pretax margin and Greenhill’s valuation multiple of 15 times earnings. Add the two, and the total is not far from Morgan Stanley’s current $59 billion market cap – and underwriting and trading are still unaccounted for.AdvertisementSelling those units might not be easy, but shutting them down could unlock tens of billions of dollars in capital, a potential bonanza for shareholder returns. Mr. Ubben is not asking for that, but it is a prospect that should keep Mr. Gorman focused on delivering his improvements before someone else does.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »