By EMILY STEELAPRIL 12, 2016
Settlement negotiations have hit a snag in the lawsuit challenging the mental competence of the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone, reviving the possibility that the case could proceed to a messy public trial.The development comes after a framework of a settlement was reached last week in the suit filed by Manuela Herzer, a former companion and romantic partner of Mr. Redstone.Terms of that agreement included detailed plans for Mr. Redstone’s health care as well as a payment for Ms. Herzer that could reach into the tens of millions of dollars, according to two people with knowledge of the discussions. Any agreement requires the approval from a judge.It also included a provision stipulating that Mr. Redstone, 92, was currently making his own health care decisions. At the point he is no longer able to do so, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari, would take over supervision of his health care.AdvertisementPierce O’Donnell, the lawyer representing Ms. Herzer, said the dispute was not over money but rather about issues related to the health care of Mr. Redstone, among other concerns.AdvertisementHe said that he remained hopeful that the two sides would resolve their differences but that he was prepared to go to trial.“A settlement is in everyone’s best interests,” Mr. O’Donnell said in a statement. “But if we have to go to trial, we look forward to it.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Asked what the chances were that the case goes to trial, Mr. O’Donnell said in an interview, “Right now, they are 100 percent.” He quickly added, “I honestly don’t know. That is just speculation on my part.”Lawyers for Mr. Redstone could not immediately be reached for comment.While the suit concerned Mr. Redstone’s personal life, it also drew renewed scrutiny to his role at Viacom and CBS and the fate of those two companies. Mr. Redstone controls the media companies through National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by his father.In the suit, Ms. Herzer asserted that Mr. Redstone was not mentally competent in October when he removed her from a directive that would have given her supervision of his health care. On the same day, Ms. Herzer also was removed from his estate plan, which included plans to leave her $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion.Lawyers for Mr. Redstone called the suit meritless and said that Ms. Herzer was seeking money she was not entitled to. Ms. Herzer said she was concerned about Mr. Redstone’s well-being. A trial is scheduled for May 6.Mr. O’Donnell said he was working on finalizing schedules for the depositions of Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, and Shari Redstone. Those depositions were suspended last week amid the settlement talks. Mr. O’Donnell said he expected to depose Ms. Redstone next week and Mr. Dauman the week after.A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Trial Still Possible as Deal Teeters in Redstone Suit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.