
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

MAY 18, 2016
Wall Street is putting its old Washington ways on ice.Big banks are infamous for lobbying against financial reform. Lately, though, they have cut back. Now they are pushing Representative Jeb Hensarling, a prominent congressional Republican, to drop a bill to repeal the Dodd-Frank Act.The latest efforts to upend the 2010 law ought to appeal to the likes of JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Goldman Sachs. They have, after all, complained about things as diverse as capital charges, mortgage reform and how watchdogs handle annual stress tests.Mr. Hensarling, the chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, plans to introduce a bill that would undermine many of those measures. Wall Street lobbyists, though, are not offering support.It’s not because President Obama has threatened to veto similar bills. Financial firms have in recent years backed such efforts, hoping that a push for broad changes might yield smaller concessions.They won, for example, exemptions for certain matters under the so-called Volcker rule that bans proprietary trading. In December 2014, they persuaded Congress not to force them to move certain derivatives operations out of units with federally insured deposits, arguing that it would create more risk by moving the activity to unregulated entities.AdvertisementThat, though, came at a heavy price. Initial supporters of the watered-down measure turned against the industry, worried that being seen as too soft on Wall Street would alienate voters.AdvertisementThe banks understand the changing mood. Bosses like JPMorgan’s Jamie Dimon have been less overt in their criticism of regulations in the past few years. Spending on lobbying by the securities and investment industry fell 8 percent, to $97 million, between 2011 and 2015, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.Political attacks against banks have become sharper during the American presidential campaign. Also, Congress has diverted dividends the Federal Reserve pays to banks to help fund a highway bill. As a result, banks are playing defense.That may change if Donald J. Trump wins the White House. He told Reuters on Tuesday that he would overturn much of Dodd-Frank if he became president. For now, though, Wall Street is one of the biggest defenders of post-crisis reform.Gina Chon is Washington columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »