
Retiring By                     
TOM VERDE

MARCH 24, 2017
Living a long life is its own reward. But when you invest in a tontine, there’s an added benefit: You collect money that would have gone to people who have died.That is part of the macabre appeal of the tontine, a 350-year-old investment vehicle that fell into disfavor more than a century ago but is now getting fresh consideration as a way to help people receive steady income in retirement.Tontines became popular in 17th-century Europe, largely to help governments raise money to fight wars. A group of people would invest equal amounts in a fund run by the government, and in turn would draw an annuity — an annual payment — until they died. The annual payments of surviving members increased as others died, and the last one standing wound up with the entire dividend. Upon that last investor’s death, the arrangement terminated.They were once common in the United States, too, but fell into obscurity after an embezzlement scandal early in the 20th century.Advertisement“Few people know what they are, and the word ‘tontine’ is usually the answer to a crossword puzzle,” said Moshe Milevsky, an associate professor of finance at York University’s Schulich School of Business in Toronto.AdvertisementNow some financial advisers and academics like Professor Milevsky hope to revive tontines, making use of current technologies and management skills to help fill a yawning gap in retirement financing.Traditional, company-sponsored pension plans have all but disappeared, and nearly half of American families have no retirement savings, according to a 2016 Economic Policy Institute report. People who favor tontines say they could be a boon for older Americans if they are structured, operated and regulated properly.For an investor, a tontine resembles a simple low-fee annuity, with regular lifetime payments. Yet unlike an annuity, the longer you outlive others in the pool, the more you collect, Professor Milevsky said.He added that a tontine can pay a higher yield than an annuity because of its relative simplicity of structure: “I think that the yield element is an important component of why we would like to bring them back.”Professor Milevsky is in the vanguard of what could be called a backward-looking cabal of financial specialists who suggest that this antiquated investment model may address modern challenges. Longevity risk — the danger of outliving one’s money — is near the top of their list.“Longevity risk in society is a big threat, and tontines could be part of the solution,” said Bruno Caron, an actuary at A. M. Best, an insurance rating company based in Oldwick, N.J. With a tontine, after all, if you live longer than everybody else, you collect more money.Before joining A. M. Best last year, Mr. Caron tried to start a venture called Survival Sharing to offer a tontine-inspired investment that pooled people with similar age, gender and health status. But the atypical product never made it past the planning stages.AdvertisementIt was “difficult to navigate through the different mazes of various financial institutions, even when we dealt with members of top management,” Mr. Caron said.Tontines were once quite common. The investment takes its name from Lorenzo de Tonti, an exiled Neapolitan banker living in France, who in 1653 conceived a plan to replenish the royal treasury, depleted by the Thirty Years’ War.His proposal fell flat, largely because the notion of gambling on human life rubbed religious-minded French parliamentarians the wrong way. He ended up in the Bastille after publicly criticizing the government’s decision, and died around 1684.But he was vindicated: Five years later, the government changed its mind and issued the first French national tontine, an investment fund that followed his principles, according to a 2009 study in the Fordham Journal of Corporate & Financial Law.Before long, tontines caught on across Europe, prompting the English mathematician Edmund Halley (of comet fame) to draw up actuarial tables in 1693 to help potential investors assess the wisdom of buying into tontines. And tontines earned high marks in Adam Smith’s “The Wealth of Nations.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Over in America, Alexander Hamilton proposed a Congressional tontine to pay off Revolutionary War debts in 1790. (Thomas Jefferson squelched the plan.) And in 1793, the founders of the New York Stock Exchange settled into their brand-new digs on the northwest corner of Wall and Water Streets: the Tontine Coffee House, named for the business deal that paid for the structure’s handsome bricks and mortar.In early tontines, it was perfectly legal for an adult to name a child as beneficiary of the tontine dividends. And because children may outlive adults, this may have seemed like a smart strategy. But child mortality was high back then, and, according to Professor Milevsky’s research, there were instances of young nominees dying only to have annuitants falsely identify another child in their place.“The administration of tontines was a headache in a quill-and-paper environment,” said Kent McKeever, director of the library at Columbia Law School, who has written about the history of tontines.Nonetheless, by the turn of the last century, nearly half of American households were saving for retirement via “tontine insurance,” a riff on the original tontine, introduced by Equitable Life (now AXA) in 1868. The product split premiums between traditional life insurance policies and an investment pool with deferred dividends paid out to survivors after 20 years.AdvertisementMany American insurance companies got on board. By 1905, the aggregated cash reserves of tontine insurance were more than $6 billion, representing over 7.5 percent of the nation’s wealth. Tempted by such immense amounts of ready cash, insurance moguls took to embezzling, a New York State Legislative Committee found. Tontine insurance policies were soon banned in several states.Popular culture embellished the tontine’s nefarious reputation. Works by Agatha Christie, Robert Louis Stevenson and P. G. Wodehouse all featured tontine members plotting to kill one another in hope of a big payoff.Lingering legal questions need to be resolved, according to today’s tontine enthusiasts. “I do believe it’s going to take regulatory approvals to make it happen,” said Jonathan B. Forman, a tax law professor at the University of Oklahoma. He envisions 10-year tontines that he calls “Survivor Funds,” but said that squaring such a product with existing regulations would require time and effort.“State insurance laws could be a problem, state gambling laws could be a problem, and you probably want a lot more certainty about the federal tax laws as well,” Professor Forman said.Richard Brownstein, chief executive of FHC Wealth Advisors in Fairfield, N.J., which specializes in retirement planning for people in arts and entertainment, envisions tontines layered with blockchain and smart contract technology. Mr. Brownstein said the technology could help track whether tontine members were actually alive or dead, and could also verify that the investment pools were being properly managed.“In essence, the blockchain is helping to keep both parties honest through transparency,” he said by email.Mr. McKeever, who will turn 65 in September, said he would prefer a simple investment like a tontine to an annuity, which can be quite complicated.“You get thrown 30-, 40-, 50-page documents explaining some kind of annuity using this particular background, and 12 different kinds of investments that feed into it, and your eyes gloss,” he said. By comparison, he added, “the tontine is unbelievably simple — you can explain it in two pages.”AdvertisementWhile the financial services industry has not embraced tontines, some of Mr. Caron’s colleagues at the Society of Actuaries in Schaumburg, Ill., have begun warming to them, according to Dale Hall, the group’s managing director of research.The group’s pension section “is currently researching the mechanics and feasibility of introducing tontines into today’s market,” Mr. Hall said by email, adding that “an understanding of tontines” is pertinent for today’s actuaries.Among those who would welcome a tontine revival is Elliott Weir, owner of III Financial, a boutique financial planning business in Austin, Tex., that primarily serves widows and women who have been divorced.“Women live longer than men,” Mr. Weir said, “so some line of product like the tontine could give them a chance for current income, with the potential for greater income down the road.”A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2017, on Page BU5 of the New York edition with the headline: When Others Die, Tontine Investors Win.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »