By MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMARCH 23, 2017
A well-known money manager is shutting down his firm after a year of disappointing results — the latest sign of turmoil in the $3 trillion hedge fund industry.Eric Mindich, 49, was once a Wall Street wunderkind, becoming the youngest ever partner at Goldman Sachs more than 20 years ago. He launched Eton Park Capital Management in 2004, expanding it to manage as much as $14 billion.But on Thursday he said he was throwing in the towel. In a letter to investors reviewed by The New York Times, Mr. Mindich said a mix of challenging market conditions and Eton Park’s poor performance had led to the decision. The firm’s assets under management have fallen by half since 2011.“A combination of industry headwinds, a difficult market environment and, importantly, our own disappointing 2016 results have challenged our ability to continue to maintain the scale and scope we believe necessary to pursue our investment program,” Mr. Mindich wrote.AdvertisementEton Park is the first big hedge fund to shut down this year. But the closure comes as other well-known money managers are struggling to post the kind of double-digit returns that their investors have come to expect, and that justify their firms’ hefty fees.AdvertisementWilliam A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management, for instance, is still reeling from its $4 billion losing bet on shares of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, the embattled drug company that has seen its stock plunge over concern about its accounting practices.And John Paulson, who made billions betting on the collapse of the housing market during the financial crisis, has struggled to find a consistent winning formula since that time.At the same time, state pension funds led by the California Public Employees’ Retirement System are dumping their hedge fund portfolios, contending many strategies are too complex and costly — especially at a time when many firms are underperforming.Eton Park, based in Manhattan, will begin returning its roughly $7 billion in capital to investors, and anticipates returning about 40 percent of its outside money by the end of April.The decision by Mr. Mindich to close the firm comes after a tough year in 2016, when Eton Park’s returns were down about 9.4 percent. So far this year, the fund’s performance has been flat.The firm sent out the letter on Thursday after notifying its roughly 120 employees of the decision to close.Over all, 2016 was one of the worst years for hedge fund closures since the financial crisis, with hundreds of smaller funds closing because of poor performance, investor redemptions and complaints about high fees.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In all, 1,057 hedge funds closed or were liquidated in 2016, compared with 729 openings, according to Hedge Fund Research Inc. The number of active hedge funds is at its lowest level since 2012.AdvertisementIn a sign of the industry’s continuing struggles, the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite Index — a broad measure of hedge fund performance — was up just 2.23 percent for the year at the end of February, compared with a roughly 5 percent gain for the Standard & Poor’s 500 during that time.One of the larger hedge funds to shut down last year was Perry Capital, the firm founded by Richard C. Perry, another Goldman alumnus. And one of the notable small hedge fund closures was Eaglevale Partners, a firm co-founded by Marc Mezvinsky, the son-in-law of former President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.“Eton Park is in good company,” said Erik Gordon, a professor at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business. “Over 1,000 funds returned their investors’ money over the last year, including star-power funds.”Mr. Mindich and his wife, Stacey, a theater producer, are prominent philanthropists. In 2015, the couple made a $15 million gift to fund public service initiatives at Harvard. They have also donated to Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York to support children’s health research.Mr. Mindich made his name as a fast-rising star on Wall Street, heading up Goldman’s arbitrage desk at the age of 25. In 1994, at 27, he became Goldman’s youngest partner ever and was a leader of the firm’s equities arbitrage business.The arbitrage desk at Goldman, under the tutelage of Robert Rubin, who would leave Goldman to become Treasury secretary in 1995, spawned a number of hedge fund managers, including Mr. Mindich, Mr. Perry and Daniel Och, founder of Och-Ziff Capital Management.Mr. Mindich was seen as a Wall Street wunderkind when he started Eton Park. The firm started with about $3.5 billion in capital and at the time was among the biggest and splashiest hedge fund launches.And for many years, the firm posted solid returns, investing heavily in stocks, bonds and derivatives. One of the hedge fund’s best years came in 2013, when it returned 22 percent. In 2008, one of the worst years for hedge funds, Eton Park lost 10 percent, but that was far better than most other firms fared.The firm grew to manage about $14 billion, and opened offices in London and Hong Kong. But a week ago, Eton Park quietly closed its London office, a sign of the trouble to come.Advertisement“As responsible stewards of your capital, we have been unwilling to compromise on the business model and investment program in which you invested or the way in which we have pursued it,” Mr. Mindich wrote in the letter to investors. “As a result, we have made the very difficult decision to return your capital, from a position of relative strength.”A version of this article appears in print on March 24, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Eton Park  Is the Latest  Hedge Fund  to Fizzle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.