By ALEXANDRA ALTERFEB. 2, 2016
Christopher Cox, the editor of Harper’s Magazine, was fired by John R. MacArthur, the magazine’s president and publisher, last week, after a three-month tenure.Mr. Cox said on Tuesday that he had been dismissed because of “editorial differences with the publisher,” but would not elaborate on the nature of the disagreement. A spokeswoman for the magazine declined to comment.A person familiar with the dispute said that tensions flared during a recent meeting, when Mr. Cox presented his plans to redesign the magazine’s cover. Mr. MacArthur opposed the change, said the person, who spoke on condition of anonymity to disclose internal discussions.Mr. Cox’s departure is the latest sign of upheaval at the 165-year-old magazine, which has struggled with dwindling print circulation and diminished relevance in the digital era. The magazine’s total circulation fell to 130,257 for the six months ending in June 2015, down from 187,635 two years earlier, according to the company’s filings with the Alliance for Audited Media.AdvertisementHarper’s, published monthly, is a nonprofit publication that is supported in large part by Mr. MacArthur’s personal wealth. That structure provides some financial stability as advertising revenue shrinks, but also gives Mr. MacArthur considerable influence and editorial control. He is a zealous and unapologetic defender of the magazine’s print legacy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cox was the magazine’s 15th  editor, a prestigious post previously held by Lewis H. Lapham and Michael Kinsley. As deputy editor, Mr. Cox edited several award-winning pieces, and shepherded feature articles and short stories by prominent writers such as Geoff Dyer, Karen Russell and Colson Whitehead. Before joining Harper’s, he was a senior editor at The Paris Review.AdvertisementWhen Mr. Cox was promoted to editor after five years at the magazine, Mr. MacArthur said in a statement that “Chris has brought in some of the most exciting work we’ve published,” adding, “His editorial wisdom enhances the writing in our pages and guides the work of the younger staff members.”Mr. Cox took over as editor on Nov. 1, replacing Ellen Rosenbush, a Harper’s veteran who became editor in 2010 after Mr. MacArthur fired Roger D. Hodge.Mr. Hodge, who edited the magazine for four years, said in an interview Tuesday that he repeatedly clashed with Mr. MacArthur over editorial decisions. When Mr. Cox was promoted last year, Mr. Hodge said he told him “that he should expect to get fired eventually, but that he would probably have a few good years.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Harper’s Magazine Editor Out After 3 Months.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.