

      By THE NEW YORK TIMES

UPDATED April 21, 2016

It is shaping up to be another grim year for the nation’s biggest banks.The first quarter is typically the strongest for Wall Street as clients seek to redeploy their capital, but banks were hit hard by a bad environment for trading and deal-making.The nation’s top bank regulators added that five of the biggest American banks are still too big to fail.FIRST-QUARTER RECAP Volatile market conditions kept the firm from unloading assets and cashing in rich performance fees. The uncertain market environment did not keep the firm from raking in money. Assets under management rose 11 percent in the first quarter, compared with the quarter a year earlier, to $343.7 billion, by far the most under management of any alternative investment company. – Landon Thomas Jr. FIRST-QUARTER RECAP Last year’s record in mergers and acquisitions may not yet be trickling into the coffers of advisory shops. Lazard — which is often seen as a bellwether for the deals industry – reported that first-quarter revenue from its financial advisory business fell to $266 million. – Leslie Picker FIRST-QUARTER RECAP: The bank surpassed the lowered expectations of analysts, but still had its worst quarter in more than four years as volatile markets hit all of the firm’s business lines. – Nathaniel PopperFIRST-QUARTER RECAP: Citigroup became the nation’s first megabank some two decades ago by expanding into new businesses while pushing to knock down barriers that limited its size. A much different Citigroup was evident as it reported its quarterly results. Business lines like subprime lending, which used to define the company, have all but disappeared. – Michael CorkeryFIRST-QUARTER RECAP: The bank was it was dragged down by lower long-term interest rates and a slump in its sales and trading business. Revenue overall fell nearly 7 percent to $19.5 billion from a year ago. – Michael Corkery FIRST-QUARTER RECAP: At Wells Fargo, revenue grew 4 percent in the quarter, to $22.2 billion. Wells said its credit losses rose as a result of losses on energy loans. Still, the San Francisco-based bank’s results exceeded analysts’ expectations. – Michael CorkeryFIRST-QUARTER RECAP: Volatile global markets had their effect on the world’s largest asset management firm. The firm’s assets under management, the most critical gauge of an investment managers success, declined by only 1 percent, to $4.7 trillion. – Landon Thomas Jr. FIRST-QUARTER RECAP: The falling prices of oil and stocks pushed down results in JPMorgan’s Wall Street division. The numbers looked better in JPMorgan’s consumer bank. Consumers took out more mortgages and credit card loans, suggesting some optimism in the economy. Analysts had been expecting profit to fall to $1.26 a share, according to Thomson Reuters. — Nathaniel PopperAdvertisement