AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie TsangThe scenario: elected officials promising workers nice pensions based on wishful thinking. Sound familiar?It is a problem faced across the United States, and the next victim could be Dallas. The city’s mayor said it appeared to be “walking into the fan blades” of municipal bankruptcy.Its pension fund for police officers and firefighters is near collapse and is seeking an immense bailout.How can this be when Dallas has the fastest economic growth of the 13 largest cities in the country?Panicked local retirees have pulled $220 million from the fund in the last six weeks after a recommendation that they no longer be allowed to take out big blocks of money.Even before that, there were reports that the fund’s investments were worth less than stated.Senator John Whitmire, a Democrat who has been in the statehouse since 1973, recalled enthusiastically voting in 1993 for the plan that sent the pension fund on its ill-fated quest for investment returns of 9 percent.“We all know some of the benefits, guaranteed, were just probably never realistic,” he said. “It was good while it lasted, but we’ve got some serious financial problems because of it.”Here’s a puzzle for you:1. Europe may never regain economic vigor if Italy’s banks are in a state of perpetual emergency.2. Italy’s banks cannot get healthy without economic growth.3. Italy’s economy can’t grow without healthy banks.What’s the solution?The country’s banks have muddled through for years, but with the economy so weak, bad loans have festered and good loans have deteriorated. Nearly a fifth of loans in the system — worth nearly $400 billion — are classified as troubled by the International Monetary Fund.If this also sounds like a familiar theme, that’s because it’s a longstanding problem and one that affects the rest of Europe. Italy’s troubled loans represent about 40 percent of all the bad loans within the eurozone.But, “banking is a symptom, not the cause,” says Ignazio Visco, the governor of the Bank of Italy.He argues that the bulk of Italy’s bad debt is backed by collateral and most of the remainder has a solid chance of turning into collectible debt.Economists, however, are unconvinced.They say banks prop up zombie companies that will never repay their loans, extending just enough credit to keep them current on their debts.This year’s presidential election could be remembered as a pivotal moment for the markets, which have been given the impetus to solidify deeper trends that were already underway.A revaluation of a wide range of assets and securities has been taking place.But traders are making educated guesses and if they turn out to be wrong, the market could turn upside down again.What does this mean for most long-term investors? Broad diversification, Jeff Sommer writes. Simple balanced portfolios of stocks and bonds have barely moved since the election.Against the backdrop of the swerves and shifts happening in markets, that may count as an achievement.“You don’t need a crazy technical background to do this job. A lot of the training is getting really good at talking to people.”— Genny Lopez, a contractor handling tech support calls for Apple. The company is unlikely to produce iPhones in the United States but it is providing employment for working-class Americans who lack college degrees.• The $48 billion mega-merger between Anthem and Cigna goes to trial. The Justice Department is challenging the deal and the drama has been heightened as the companies have accused each other of breaching the merger agreement. Decisions about this case and the deal between Aetna and Humana are expected before President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office, but his administration could have a major say if either side decided to appeal the decision.• Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, will answer questions at the European Parliament. He is likely to be asked about the effect of Mr. Trump’s presidency on the eurozone.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.Advertisement