AdvertisementSupported byBy Raphael MinderMADRID — A disgraced former Spanish banker, Mario Conde, was arrested here on Monday as part of an investigation into whether he fraudulently repatriated the equivalent of nearly $15 million in money he had hidden offshore while presiding over the collapse of one of Spain’s largest banks, Banesto, more than two decades ago.Mr. Conde was arrested along with six other people, including two of his children and a son-in-law. The arrest was ordered by a judge from Spain’s national court who is inquiring whether Mr. Conde and relatives set up a network of companies to help channel back to Spain money stashed away in offshore accounts in Switzerland, Britain and other financial centers before the demise of Banesto.Spain’s central bank ousted Mr. Conde and took over Banesto in December 1993 after the lender had accumulated unsustainable losses. Banesto had a financial shortfall of 605 billion Spanish pesetas at the time, equivalent to about $4 billion, and was eventually sold at auction to Banco Santander.Mr. Conde was convicted on a series of fraud and embezzlement charges and served two separate prison sentences. His arrest on Monday comes as several banking-related corruption cases are moving through the courts, set off by the bursting of Spain’s property bubble in 2008.The arrest also comes as the names of some prominent Spanish residents have appeared among the so-called Panama Papers, a giant leak of documents from a Panama law firm that specialized in creating offshore companies for the world’s wealthy. So far, Mr. Conde’s name has not cropped up in that document trove.In the late 1980s, Mr. Conde’s rapid rise to prominence, as well as his flamboyant appearance and lifestyle, came to symbolize Spain’s financial deal-making and economic boom of that era — a period of excess partly propelled by the huge subsidies that the country received after joining the European Union in 1986.A lawyer by training, Mr. Conde eventually used the proceeds from the sale of a pharmaceutical company to buy a stake in Banesto and then become its president in 1987. He then extended his reach as Spain’s most prominent banker by investing Banesto’s funds in other industries, including media.His fall from grace, in turn, then put a spotlight on the close ties between politicians and businessmen in post-Franco Spain. Mr. Conde conducted his own defense during his trial and accused Spain’s Socialist administration and the conservative corporate establishment of engineering his downfall to block his political aspirations.On Monday, the police also raided Mr. Conde’s Madrid home as well as the offices of companies linked to his relatives and associates. The latest investigation focuses on whether Mr. Conde used such companies, including a cosmetics company, to move back to Spain as much as 13 million euros, or about $14.8 million, that had been hidden overseas, according to Spain’s public prosecutors.Mr. Conde was released from prison in 2005 after serving 11 years of a 20-year sentence. An attempted political comeback, as a candidate in regional elections in his native Galicia, ended in failure in 2012.Advertisement