AdvertisementSupported bySpecial SectionBy Deborah L. JacobsWhen our only child started college in September, my husband and I embarked on our own semester abroad.To pay for it, we decided to rent our Park Slope townhouse for three months and downsize to smaller quarters in rural France. Thanks to a favorable conversion, of the dollar against the euro, the cost of living would be less.As our base, we chose the Loire Valley, about two hours southwest of Paris, where for centuries royalty built their châteaux. We wanted to to experience French life through the eyes of the locals. We would shop in open-air markets, cook with seasonal ingredients and communicate with people in their own language.To prepare, my husband, Ken, enrolled in an elementary French class at Baruch College that was free to New York residents over 60, and I worked my way through lessons 1 through 80 of the “Coffee Break French” podcasts.After searching HomeAway, VRBO and Airbnb, we rented a cottage in Amboise. It sounded idyllic and would cost $9,000 for three months. We spent several months making various repairs and improvements to prepare our Brooklyn house for a family from the Midwest who would live there while we were away. Their November departure would coincide with our return.A liquid market for short-term rentals is making people “much more flexible in their transition to retirement,” said Terry Baum, a broker with Warren Lewis Sotheby’s International Realty in Brooklyn. Rental income can pay for new endeavors or provide supplemental funds for those who have left staff jobs, by choice or circumstance, earlier than anticipated. I fall into that category; in 2014, I left an editorial job to spend more time traveling and writing books. A high-speed Internet connection would make it possible to continue my work.But though the cottage got rave reviews online, we arrived to find the beds unmade, the cabinets filled with moldy food and a strong smell of mildew in the living room. In response to our strenuous email complaints, the American owners wired a refund for the balance of our rent.Somewhat shellshocked, we abandoned the idea of spending three months in one place and charted a more itinerant journey. Distances made it impractical to inspect places in advance, but to protect ourselves we decided to limit reservations to two weeks.Our second French rental was a rambling, five-bedroom Victorian in Le Puy-Notre-Dame, a tiny Loire Valley village surrounded by vineyards. I turned the former liveryman’s quarters, with its terra-cotta floor and stenciled walls, into my office. The kitchen had a high-performance stove installed in the old hearth and a vintage butcher’s table that served as a work surface. At $106 a night via Airbnb it was our best travel deal ever, and we extended our stay by an extra week.Although it was charming, we did at times feel like caretakers. After the stovetop grill tripped the main circuit breaker, we entertained the electrician in rudimentary French. We used drain cleaner to unclog the bathroom shower. When a door handle broke, cutting off our access to the garage, the Parisian owner asked us to pry it open with a screwdriver. We left, on schedule, as he and his family arrived to celebrate the grape harvest.By then ready for warmer weather and a change of scene, we drove 500 miles south and west, to Basque Country, where we had arranged to stay in Sare, a one-street village five miles from the Spanish border. There we were tenants of Laurence and Emmanuel Chambon, owners of a 17th-century mansion that once belonged to shipbuilders. Ms. Chambon, 59, an architect, had renovated the 11,000-square-foot house, raised four daughters and operated an antiques shop there. After closing the store two years ago, she turned that space into a triplex apartment with a separate garden and entrance.Furnished with antiques and family heirlooms, it had views of fiery fall foliage, grazing livestock and, on a clear day, La Rhune — the first summit in the Pyrenees. Although it cost considerably more than our previous lodgings ($175 per night), it was still within our budget. We extended our stay twice, for a total of six weeks.After a morning of writing, I would join my husband for an excursion — walking on the beach at Biarritz or St. Jean-de-Luz, eating pintxos (the Basque word for tapas) in the Spanish city of San Sebastián, or attending one of the many autumn festivals, like one in the nearby village of Espelette celebrating the chili pepper harvest. We became regulars at the Saturday morning market in Bayonne, where we bought apple cider, root vegetables and sheep’s milk cheese from local farmers, and slurped down a plate of oysters before heading home with our haul.From there we went to Paris, where terrorists struck Nov. 13, midway through our two-week rental ($150 a night) in the residential Denfert-Rochereau neighborhood. Our flat was in an Art Deco apartment building behind a wrought iron gate, around a private garden. It was spacious, quiet and convenient to public transportation. But despite frequent turnover via Airbnb, the Tel Aviv-based owner hadn’t replaced the grungy bedding. And there were scented oil sticks in each room.More surprises awaited us in New York. We came home to find our own house spotless but needing repairs. Our tenants said the broken lock, dresser handle and dimmer switch, all of which worked fine when we left, had suffered “normal wear and tear.” We gave them the benefit of the doubt about everything except the chips and cracks from their baby gates, deducting from their security deposit charges for one day of our painter’s time.In the scheme of things, that was pretty minor.We consider ourselves lucky enough with our semester abroad that we are ready to make it a new way of life. Letting go of the place we call home was a huge risk, and I felt weird at times about the idea of strangers sleeping in our bed, but it paid all our expenses for three months, while we had a great adventure and I wrote most of a book.As travelers who enjoy going off the beaten path, we have learned to welcome the unexpected. Had we been happy in the winemaker’s cottage, we would have missed out on everything that came after it.Advertisement