By STACY COWLEYNOV. 18, 2016
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is fighting back against a federal court’s ruling last month that the agency’s structure is unconstitutional.On Friday, the bureau filed a widely expected petition for a rehearing, asking the full slate of active judges at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to reconsider the case.When Congress created the bureau, a three-judge panel said last month, it improperly gave the agency’s independent director too much unchecked power. The court’s suggested fix: Allow the president to fire the agency’s director at will.The decision has taken on added significance with the surprise election of Donald J. Trump. If the ruling stands, the new president would have the power to dismiss the director of the bureau, Richard Cordray, and reshape the agency in his own mold.AdvertisementThe consumer bureau’s petition temporarily stops the clock on that possibility. Until the court rules on the petition, Mr. Cordray cannot be removed without cause, and if the court agrees to revisit the case, the earlier ruling will be vacated.AdvertisementIn its petition, the consumer bureau said that the court’s previous ruling “sets up what may be the most important separation-of-powers case in a generation.” It added that it could have spillover effects on a number of other independent agencies, including the Social Security Administration and the Federal Housing Finance Agency.Legal scholars say that the case will probably end up at the Supreme Court. But the path there is a slow one, and right now, letting the case play out works in the consumer bureau’s favor.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The appeal process will push off by approximately two years or more the date when the president would have the power to remove the C.F.P.B. director at will,” Quyen T. Truong, a former deputy general counsel at the bureau who now works at the law firm Stroock & Stroock & Lavan, wrote in a briefing about the case.The consumer bureau has been a battleground between the agency’s Republican critics, who have long wanted to kill or defang it, and Democrats determined to preserve the changes the agency has imposed on banks and lenders since opening its doors five years ago.Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, introduced a bill in September to replace the agency’s sole director with a bipartisan, five-member commission. He has been talking about the bill with Mr. Trump’s transition team, he said this week.Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, who helped create the agency, pledged to battle any attempt to curtail the bureau’s power or independence.“If Trump and the Republican Party try to turn loose the big banks and financial institutions so they can once again gamble with our economy and bring it all crashing down, then we will fight them every step of the way,” she said in a speech last week.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.