AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe Fox News Republican debate without Donald Trump on Thursday night drew 12.5 million viewers, according to Nielsen.The number will probably be interpreted in different ways. From one perspective, it is the second-lowest viewership figure of the seven Republican debates, next to Fox Business’s mid-January debate, which attracted 11.1 million viewers (and, like the others, had Mr. Trump front and center). The figure fell off sharply from December’s CNN debate, which had more than 18 million viewers.On the other hand, Mr. Trump’s absence did not produce the big drop-off in viewers from other recent debates that Mr. Trump had suggested would happen. In a somewhat drastic overstatement, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, had said the ratings number for the Fox News debate, without Mr. Trump, would drop to “one to two million people.”The debate easily beat the competition on CNN and MSNBC. The two cable channels together had about 2.8 million viewers between 9 and 11 p.m., nearly 10 million fewer than Fox News. The networks provided live coverage of Mr. Trump’s competing event in Iowa — an appearance honoring and raising money for veterans — for about 15 minutes before moving on to round-table discussions and analysis.Mr. Trump’s event — including supporters like Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum — was occasionally shown in the background, without the audio turned up.During Mr. Trump’s event, which took place roughly from 9:15 to 10:15 p.m., CNN attracted about 2 million people, while MSNBC had about 1.4 million. The debate had about 12.8 million viewers during that time block.Mr. Trump’s presence this year, with his provocative statements and combative tone, has created an enormous amount of interest in the primary debates, helping them shatter ratings records. When Fox News broadcast the first Republican primary debate in August, it drew 24 million viewers, the top-rated nonsporting event in cable history, according to Nielsen. The Thursday debate was Fox News’s second-highest-rated program in the network’s 20-year history.Even the Democratic debates seem to have benefited from the huge interest. The most recent Democratic debate had more than 10 million viewers on NBC.Advertisement