APRIL 10, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.34 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $220 million of debt securities. Competitive.Alaska Municipal Bond Bank, $70.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.California, $74.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Colorado, $154.6 million of Platte River Power Authority general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementHartford County, Conn., $52 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Lakeville, Minn., Independent School District, $53.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementLas Vegas, $82.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York Transitional Finance Authority, $750 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Broome County, N.Y., $59.6 million of debt securities. Competitive.South Washington County Independent School District No. 833, Minn., $76.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Boise State University, Idaho, $63.1 million of general revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Buffalo, $52.7 million of general obligation bonds and general obligation refinancing bonds. Ramirez.Burlington County, N.J., Bridge Commission, $74.9 million of lease revenue notes. PNC Capital Markets.California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank, $414.2 million of clean water state revolving fund revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Denton, Tex., Independent School District, $118.8 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Florida Higher Educational Facilities Financing Authority, $89.8 million of educational facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.AdvertisementFloyd County, Ga., Hospital Authority, $84 million of medical center project revenue anticipation certificates. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Harris County, Tex., Metropolitan Transit Authority, $124.6 million of sales and use tax refinancing bonds. Cabrera Capital Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Huber Heights City School District, Ohio, $57.6 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Robert W. Baird.Illinois Finance Authority, $107.4 million of revenue bonds. Zeigler.Keller, Tex., Independent School District, $131.2 million of unlimited tax school refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Kent State University, Ohio, $103.5 million of general receipts bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Kern County, Calif., Golden Empire School Financing Authority, $150 million of lease revenue refinancing notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Maricopa County, Ariz., Gilbert Unified School District, $69.8 million of school improvement and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Marquette, Mich., $67 million of electric utility system revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, $535 million of general revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Ohio, $231 million of general obligation highway capital improvement bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Oklahoma State University, $60 million of general revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementOrange County, Fla., Health Facilities Authority, $256.9 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Goldman Sachs.Orlando, Fla., Health Obligated Group, $72.7 million of taxable hospital revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.St. George, Utah, $52 million of electric system revenue bonds. George K. Baum.Tennessee Housing Development Agency, $125 million of residential finance program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Texas State Technical College System, $60.8 million of revenue financing system improvement and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Tri-County Transportation District, Oregon, $63.7 million of senior lien payroll tax revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.University of Texas System, $134.4 million of revenue system refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Upper Santa Clara County Joint Powers Authority, Calif., $57 million of refinancing water and wastewater revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.