AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersThe Boston Globe published a parody front page on Sunday that offered a satirical view of a Donald Trump presidency.The fake page, with headlines like “Deportations to Begin” and “Markets Sink as Trade War Looms,” ran as the front page of the newspaper’s “Ideas” section, with an editorial denouncing Mr. Trump’s candidacy on the next page.The spoof, says the editorial, was intended to take Mr. Trump’s rhetoric and his policy positions to their “logical conclusion.”“It is an exercise in taking a man at his word,” the editorial says.There was no immediate comment from Mr. Trump or his campaign.The editorial called the billionaire businessman a “demagogue” whose own political vision is “profoundly un-American.” And it cast his closest rival for the 2016 Republican nomination, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, as “equally extreme” and urged Republicans, at the party’s nominating convention in July, to draft a “plausible, honorable” alternative, suggesting House Speaker Paul Ryan or former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts.The mock Trump page was conceived and executed by the Globe’s editorial writers, columnists and commentary editors, who make up the newspaper’s editorial board, said Ellen Clegg, the newspaper’s editorial page editor.Ms. Clegg stressed in a telephone interview that the front-page parody “does not involve our newsroom.”The mock front page envisions a host of political, financial and international scenarios ranging from disturbing to darkly humorous, all playing on Mr. Trump’s comments about illegal immigration, Muslims, national security and the First Amendment.A top story on the page opens with the paragraph: “Worldwide stocks plunged again Friday, completing the worst month on record as trade wars with both China and Mexico seem imminent.”Another story was about unrest in the ranks of the United States military as soldiers refused orders to kill family members of Islamic State militants.In a more tongue-in-cheek vein, a brief item reported that Mr. Trump was on the “short list” for the Nobel Peace Prize. “His feat? Healing a 1,385-year-old schism between Sunni and Shiite Muslims, which has fueled bloody conflicts across the globe for centuries.”Ms. Clegg said it was not the first time that the Globe, which tends to lean Democratic on its opinion pages, has editorialized against Mr. Trump, but it marked its most “resolute” opposition to his candidacy.Advertisement