By STEPHANIE STROMAUG. 1, 2016
In the last couple of years, the poultry industry has sharply reduced its use of antibiotics, responding to concerns among public health officials and regulators about the rise of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.But now, one major poultry processor is standing its ground and making sure consumers know about it.Sanderson Farms, the country’s third-largest poultry producer, has started an advertising campaign to defend its continued use of antibiotics — and calls its competitors’ efforts in the other direction a “marketing gimmick” aimed at charging higher prices.“There’s a lot of confusion about the labels used to market chicken,” said Mike Cockrell, chief financial officer at Sanderson. “We have decided we’re not going to sacrifice our environmental goals, our animal welfare goals or our food safety goals for marketing purposes.”The ads feature two blue-collar men, Bob and Dale, in plaid shirts and baseball caps talking about the labels on chicken.Advertisement“The ones that say ‘raised without antibiotics,’ ” Dale says in one of the ads, “That’s just a trick to get you to pay more money.”AdvertisementSanderson’s marketing campaign, which will appear in regions where its products are sold, as well as across digital platforms, is likely to intensify the already fierce fight over the use of antibiotics in agriculture. Consumers, advocacy groups and corporate customers like McDonald’s and Chick-fil-A have said they will buy only chicken raised without the antibiotics used to treat humans.Those commitments and others from big corporate buyers have persuaded four of the five large American poultry producers to begin reducing their reliance on antibiotics. Perdue has gone the furthest: Well over half of its flocks receive no antibiotics at all. Tyson, the largest chicken producer and a McDonald’s supplier, has pledged to largely eliminate antibiotics used to treat humans from its chicken operations by September 2017.Pilgrim’s Pride, the No. 2 poultry processor, and Foster Farms are also taking steps to reduce antibiotics use.But not Sanderson. “There is not any credible science that leads us to believe we’re causing antibiotic resistance in humans,” said Lampkin Butts, the president and chief operating officer of Sanderson.Mr. Butts said raising chickens without antibiotics would lead to higher mortality rates and a need for a greater number of barns to provide more room between birds.“We looked at it, and we would need more corn, more water, more soybean meal, more housing, more electricity,” he said. “But sustainability calls for using less of everything.”In interviews this year, however, Perdue said that its move to all but eliminate antibiotics from its operations — it still medicates sick flocks — had not raised its costs nor increased the mortality rate of its chickens.AdvertisementThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has repeatedly expressed concern that the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry is contributing to the rise of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. In a 2013 report, the agency linked two of 18 antibiotic-resistant bacteria to the use of antibiotics in animals.“The concern we have is the bacteria on the meat and poultry that are resistant to antibiotics and can cause disease,” said Dr. Robert Tauxe, director of the division of food-borne, waterborne and environmental diseases at the agency.Dr. Tauxe said that scientific research from around the world had demonstrated that antibiotic use in animals that produce food has a negative impact on public health.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There have been a number of well-documented epidemics where animals given antibiotics were carrying disease-causing bacteria that were resistant to those antibiotics that made people very sick,” he said.While regulators have not moved to ban the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry, they have taken steps to reduce it. For example, the Food and Drug Administration in 2005 rescinded its approval of the use of enrofloxacin, an antibiotic that was used in the poultry business. And this year, the F.D.A. began requiring those raising animals for meat to get a prescription from a veterinarian for the use of antibiotics in their operations.All Sanderson chickens get an antibiotic called gentamicin while still in the egg. Dr. Phil Stayer, Sanderson’s on-staff veterinarian, says Sanderson also uses oxytetracycline, among other antibiotics, but “very rarely.”“Our judicious use of antibiotics is to keep chickens healthy and prevent disease, not for growth promotion,” Mr. Butts said.The new ads make the point that, under federal regulation, no chicken — or any other meat, for that matter — sold for human consumption can contain traces of antibiotics.“When animals are given antibiotics, they have to be stopped within enough time for the antibiotics to wash out of their systems before slaughter,” Dr. Tauxe said. “Our concern remains, however, the bacteria on the meat and poultry that are resistant to the antibiotics the animals were given.”AdvertisementIn the industry, Sanderson is known for the standardization of its operations, which has helped keep its costs the lowest among poultry producers. The company, like others in the business, has seen revenue slide as the price of chicken has dropped.But Mr. Butts said the growing popularity of antibiotic-free chicken options had not affected Sanderson’s finances, though it was spending more than usual on advertising. In the first six months of its fiscal year, Sanderson spent $8.3 million on marketing and advertising, compared with $3.9 million in the same period a year earlier.Mr. Butts said Sanderson had conducted focus groups and other research this year showing that consumers were confused about what the various antibiotic-free labels on packages mean.“When they hear about antibiotic resistance, of course nobody likes that, but they didn’t really understand the issue,” he said.After Sanderson explained why it uses antibiotics to the people in the focus groups, he said, “most of them said, ‘O.K., that makes sense.’ ”He said it was clear that about 20 percent of consumers had made up their minds and would not buy meat from animals raised with the help of antibiotics, and that a similar number were making their decisions on buying chicken strictly on price.“The rest are what we call the movable middle,” Mr. Butts said. “They’ll listen to facts, they’ll listen to reason, and that’s who we’re targeting with these ads.”A version of this article appears in print on August 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Major Poultry Producer Defends Its Use of Antibiotics.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.