By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMJAN. 27, 2016
WASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve entered 2016 with a fairly straightforward plan to gradually increase its benchmark interest rate so long as job growth remained strong.On Wednesday, it indicated that the plan remained intact. In a statement issued after a meeting of its policy-making committee, the Fed said that it was worried about weak global growth and wobbly financial markets, but it made clear that it still expected to raise interest rates “gradually.”The Fed did not raise its benchmark rate at this meeting, pausing as expected after increasing rates in December for the first time since the financial crisis. But the statement suggested officials were weighing a second increase as soon as its next meeting in March.“I still think they are going to raise rates in March,” said Gus Faucher, a senior economist at PNC Bank. “I don’t want to oversell it, but I think that while what goes on overseas has an impact on the U.S. economy, what’s much more important is what goes on domestically.”AdvertisementIn response to the Fed announcement, equity markets fell broadly on Wednesday. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 1.1 percent to close at 1,882.95. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note was unchanged at 2 percent.AdvertisementThe Fed decided to start raising rates in December after a seven-year stimulus campaign because officials judged the economy was gaining strength. Low interest rates encourage borrowing and risk-taking, contributing to faster growth. Officials said they expected to raise rates by about a percentage point in 2016 to gradually reduce those incentives.Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, said after the December announcement that “the economic recovery has clearly come a long way, although it is not complete.”The new policy statement suggested that the Fed’s confidence in the economic outlook had since deteriorated.In December, it described the chances of faster and slower growth as “balanced.” This time, the Fed reserved judgment. “The committee is closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and is assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook,” the statement said.The Fed noted that some economic measuring sticks were doing well, like continued job growth, more spending by businesses and consumers and the revival of the housing market.On the other hand, it said domestic economic growth apparently slowed in the final months of 2015. Equity markets have fallen sharply in January, erasing wealth and weighing on confidence, while the dollar continues to gain strength, limiting demand for American exports.Forecasters estimate the economy expanded at an annual rate below 1 percent in the last three months of 2015. The government will publish a preliminary estimate on Friday.AdvertisementThe weakness and the risk that things will get worse have persuaded some analysts that the Fed is unlikely to raise rates again until the summer, or perhaps even later.“Based on the state of the economy today, we believe the bar has become insurmountable for a follow-up rate hike in March,” Ellen Zentner, chief United States economist at Morgan Stanley, wrote on Wednesday. Ms. Zentner noted that investors were betting against a March increase, based on the price of assets tied closely to short-term interest rates, and she said it was significant that the Fed had made little effort to alter those expectations.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Stanley Fischer, the Fed’s vice chairman, cautioned this month that market expectations were overly pessimistic. William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and, like Mr. Fischer, a close adviser to Ms. Yellen, also suggested in a mid-January speech that investors were leaping to conclusions.“In terms of the economic outlook, the situation does not appear to have changed much since the last F.O.M.C. meeting,” Mr. Dudley said in the speech, referring to the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed’s policy-making committee.Mr. Dudley also emphasized the Fed’s focus on job growth. Officials expect inflation to increase as labor market conditions improve. They are raising interest rates before that happens because monetary policy exerts a gradual influence on economic conditions, and they are concerned that inflation will begin to rise too quickly. Mr. Dudley said that when the Fed needed to regain control of inflation, it generally ended up causing a recession.One question mark for the Fed is the impact of global weakness on the domestic economy.Some officials see little evidence that slow growth in the rest of the developed world, and problems in China and other developing nations, will interfere significantly with domestic growth. The United States, after all, is by far the largest consumer of its own goods.Others, however, argue that the risks are being understated. The divergence between the United States and its major trading partners has increased the value of the dollar, reducing demand for exports like manufactured products and farm goods. Worries about global growth have unsettled equity markets, taking a bite out of household savings.Michael Feroli, chief United States economist at JPMorgan Chase, said it made sense for the Fed to avoid coming to a conclusion in Wednesday’s statement.“The current uncertainty over the global outlook and what it means for the U.S. economy is not easily susceptible to measurement,” he wrote, adding the Fed might go ahead with another rate increase in March, but was more likely to wait until June. “We think this language buys them time.”AdvertisementThe Fed also is wrestling with the persistent sluggishness of inflation, both a symptom of the broader weakness of the economy and an economic problem in its own right.The Fed aims to keep prices rising at about 2 percent a year, but it has consistently fallen short since the recession that lasted from the end of 2007 to the middle of 2009. The Fed’s preferred inflation gauge, which excludes food and energy prices because they are volatile, rose 1.3 percent during the 12 months through November, the most recent available data.Public expectations about future inflation also are eroding, a problem because those expectations help to shape reality. People who expect prices to rise more quickly may press for higher wages, which can lead to higher prices as businesses compensate for payroll increases. That pressure may now be flowing in the opposite direction. A regular consumer survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York found expectations of inflation in three years’ time had declined to 2.8 percent from 3.3 percent over the last two years.The Fed reiterated Wednesday that it wanted to see “actual and expected progress” toward its 2 percent goal as it considers further interest rate increases. But the central bank also said it remained confident that inflation would begin to rise “as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further.”Wednesday’s decision to hold rates steady, in a range of 0.25 to 0.5 percent, was made unanimously by the 10-member committee. The Fed said everyone was able to attend the meeting in person despite the weekend snowstorm in Washington.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: A January Pause, but the Fed Affirms Its Plan for Gradual Rate Increases.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.