By NORM ALSTERAPRIL 9, 2016
Investing in small-cap growth funds requires a strong stomach because this part of the stock market tends to lurch wildly.Since 2000, the Russell 2000 Growth exchange-traded-fund index, which tracks small-cap growth stocks, has gone through three years with stomach-churning double-digit losses of 22 percent, 30 percent and 38 percent.During that period, small-cap growth stocks were more than 25 percent more volatile than large-cap stocks, according to Christopher Bennett, senior index analyst at S&P Dow Jones Indices. And some big moves have already occurred this year. The iShares Russell 2000 Growth E.T.F., which mirrors that Russell index, plunged nearly 19 percent in January and early February before rebounding to close the quarter down 4.6 percent.“Small-cap stocks tend to overreact to the news,” said Ralph Bassett, portfolio co-manager for the Aberdeen US Small-Cap Equity fund.AdvertisementHis fund has outperformed its peers in the last four years, according to Morningstar. This year it returned nearly 3.9 percent while small-cap growth funds over all finished the first quarter off 4.1 percent.AdvertisementIn-depth talks with top management at scores of companies help Aberdeen avoid some investing mistakes, Mr. Bassett said. “A lot of growth managers have overpaid for growth that wasn’t realized,” he said. This has been especially true in some areas of technology and in biotech, he added.But the risk inherent in the sector cannot be avoided. Mr. Bassett embraces it. He is not a big believer in diversification, despite its evident benefits in reducing the volatility of a portfolio. “Choosing the right companies is more important than diversification for diversification’s sake,” he said. Winners this year include the G-III Apparel Group and the egg producer Cal-Maine Foods.Virtus Small-Cap Sustainable Growth also outperformed its peers in 2014, 2015 and the first quarter of 2016. “A lot of managers are focused on finding companies with the highest rate of growth,” Todd Beiley, a co-manager of the fund, said. “We’re focused on finding companies with competitive advantages that will produce the longest-lasting growth.”See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.Companies with “very strong and durable competitive advantages” figure to have “much higher earnings persistence and lower earnings volatility,” Mr. Beiley said.The fund owns MarketAxess Holdings (MKTX), an electronic trading platform for bonds. MarketAxess has dominant market share among electronically traded high-grade corporate bonds. With more than 1,000 broker-dealers, pension funds, mutual funds and other participants on its platform, MarketAxess enjoys a “network effect” advantage, Mr. Beiley said. The liquidity produced by so many buyers and sellers keeps attracting new traders to the platform. “Their success feeds on itself,” he said.Copart, another Virtus holding, also benefits from a network effect, he said. Copart auctions used vehicles online, including those that have been severely damaged in crashes. The insurance companies that use Copart want the largest number of potential buyers for those wrecks, and Copart has “the biggest auctions,” Mr. Beiley said. The company says more than 100,000 vehicles are available for bidding daily.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Heico, which sells more than 10,000 types of aircraft replacement parts, has an advantage of another sort, Mr. Beiley said. Replacement parts are subject to approval by the Federal Aviation Administration. The complex approval process and the inclination of buyers to go with established sources make this a tough market for others to crack, Mr. Beiley said.Timing the sale of securities is especially important for mutual funds in this volatile category. For example, the Needham Small-Cap Growth fund was hit hard last year and early this year. In 2015, the fund lost nearly 9 percent. But since Feb. 12 it has rebounded and ended the quarter with a return of 7.5 percent.AdvertisementChris Retzler, portfolio manager, resisted the impulse to unload some positions with heavy losses and has been rewarded. “We like to sell at certain valuation points relative to historical valuation,” he said. By January, for example, TTM Technologies, which manufactures printed circuit boards, had fallen to about $5 a share from a 2015 high near $11. But shares stood at multiyear lows in their price-to-sales and price-to-earnings ratios, so Mr. Retzler did not sell. TTM rebounded, rising more than 30 percent through the quarter since bottoming.It is impossible to predict the market accurately and consistently, but one thing is quite likely: Small-cap growth stocks should continue to be especially volatile.Laura Lallos, a Morningstar analyst, noted that the category often leads the way in speculative rallies but tends to “underperform in down markets.”Nancy Tooke, manager of the Eaton Vance Small-Cap fund, which holds growth and value stocks, put it this way: “ In a downwardly biased market, growth stocks, which have high valuations, tend to do the worst.”Investors should be prepared for a rough ride.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU12 of the New York edition with the headline: Where Nerves of Steel Make All the Difference.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.