By MARGALIT FOXAPRIL 8, 2016
Toni Grant, one of the first nationally renowned radio psychologists, whose advice on relations between the sexes was celebrated as refreshingly traditional in some quarters and castigated as appallingly pre-feminist in others, died on March 27 in Beverly Hills, Calif. She was 73.The cause was complications of dementia, her daughter Courtney Raspin said.A clinical psychologist, Dr. Grant was known for her soothing, honeyed voice; her pragmatic approach to listeners’ questions about a cornucopia of delicate subjects — marriage, divorce, sex, dating, cross-dressing, child rearing — and advice that, while it pulled no punches, was far less bellicose than that of some psychologists who followed her onto the airwaves.She was first given her own show on KABC-AM in Los Angeles in 1975. The show, which later moved to KFI-AM there, was syndicated nationally in the early 1980s. Eventually heard on more than 180 stations, it became one of the first psychological call-in shows to reach a wide listenership.Dr. Grant, who described her show as “a soap opera that educates,” remained on the air until 1990. After a hiatus, she returned to the radio from 1997 to 2001.Advertisement“If Dr. Joyce Brothers is the grande dame of all psychologists represented in the media, with her syndicated newspaper column and her jokey walk-ons in sitcoms and movies, then Dr. Grant (“Life is not a dress rehearsal”) is the true mother of all radio shrinks,” The New York Times said in 1999.Dr. Grant, who resided in Beverly Hills, was also said to have been the model for Nancy Love, the Los Angeles radio psychologist played by Geneviève Bujold in “Choose Me,” Alan Rudolph’s 1984 film.Toni Gale Glickman was born in New York City on April 3, 1942, and reared in Bayport, on Long Island. Seeking to deflect anti-Semitism, her family changed its surname to Grant when she was a young woman.After receiving a bachelor’s degree in English from Vassar, she earned a Ph.D. in psychology from Syracuse University. Settling in the Los Angeles area, she established a clinical practice.On the subject of a woman’s role in romantic relationships, Dr. Grant dispensed advice whose reception depended greatly on the ideology of the listener.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I tell women that no man can be a hero all of the time, and certainly every man can’t be a hero in the world,” she said on “Larry King Live” in 1999. “But every man can be a hero to his woman. And part of our job as women is to enable men.”AdvertisementCriticism of Dr. Grant as anti-feminist had come to the fore in 1988, with the publication of her book, “Being a Woman: Fulfilling Your Femininity and Finding Love.”In the book, which spent six weeks on the New York Times best-seller list, she argued that women can best preserve their relationships by behaving in a nurturing and feminine manner toward the men in their lives.“Today’s woman only seems independent; emotionally, she often emerges as more needy, insecure, lonely and desperate than her mother and grandmother before her,” Dr. Grant wrote. “Refusing to nurture men, she in turn has not been nurtured by them; refusing to be tender with men, she has not been tenderly treated by them. Her aggressive independence has given men nothing to protect, so she has not been protected.”Dr. Grant dismissed critics who condemned her sexual politics as retrograde.“I don’t want women to give up anything they’ve achieved in the world,” she told The Los Angeles Times in 1988. “In fact, I want them to achieve more. I did get a lot of flak from people who said the book was reactionary and that it advocated catering to men. In no way does it suggest that. I’m encouraging women to reclaim their feminine power, to do what is truly natural for them, for the betterment of women and men, too.”Dr. Grant’s first marriage, to Neil Hollander, ended in divorce. Survivors include two daughters from that marriage, Dr. Raspin, a psychologist, and Kimberly Warneke, a psychiatrist; her husband, John Bell; a brother, Barry Grant; and four grandchildren.In response to a frequent lament by her female callers — the scarcity of marriageable men — Dr. Grant advised looking around, accepting the bad along with the good and, when necessary, taking swift curative action.“They’re not hard to find,” she said on Mr. King’s show. “They’re everywhere, but women don’t pay attention to them because they’re quiet, they’re often boring, they’re very predictable, they’re dependable. And sometimes they wear polyester, and you have to teach them how to dress.”A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2016, on Page B8 of the New York edition with the headline: Toni Grant, Psychotherapist, Dies at 73; Her Couch Was on the AM Radio Dial.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.