
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JULY 26, 2016
Yahoo has fittingly closed a portal on tech mergers and acquisitions.The company’s $4.8 billion sale to Verizon caps two decades of deals and non-deals that shaped internet history. Yahoo got lucky with Alibaba, but failed to capitalize on its dominance by not acquiring companies like Google, Facebook and eBay. Spurning Microsoft also was a mistake. It is a one-company textbook on timing.Yahoo, the web creation of Jerry Yang and David Filo, captured the popular embrace of the internet back in 1994, and a large chunk of the internet’s value along with it. Its market capitalization once exceeded $140 billion, and it even occupied the exclusive Boardwalk spot in a dot-com edition of the Monopoly board game. It failed, however, to anticipate how technology would supplant human curation of the web.Its overpriced stock was successfully deployed during the heady days of tech mayhem in the 1990s, but put to poor use. It spent $3.6 billion on the web-hosting service GeoCities and another $5.7 billion on the early internet-radio service Broadcast.com. Both services eventually faded away. Yahoo first ignored Google and then quibbled over a price tag that was lower than Broadcast’s. Mark Zuckerberg likewise rejected a $1 billion offer for his fledgling Facebook.Yahoo kept showcasing its inverse Midas touch. The internet-ad auction firm Overture, the photo-sharing service Flickr and other promising start-ups simply were clouded by Yahoo’s miasma.It is exceptionally tough to arrest a tech business in decline. The Alibaba deal, however, gave Yahoo the financial firepower to subsist for longer than it otherwise might have. In 2005, it contributed its own Chinese business and $1 billion for a 40 percent stake in Alibaba, an investment now worth some $30 billion. The lack of self-awareness by the founders about Yahoo’s faltering health, however, was its downfall. Mr. Yang and Mr. Filo torpedoed the generous $45 billion takeover offer in 2008 from a then-panicky Microsoft.In the end, Yahoo may have managed to gin up a frothier auction than it deserved and thus fetched an outsize price from Verizon. It will be little consolation given what might have been. At least Yahoo has left behind a case study in M.&A. that should be of significant value.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »