By BILL VLASIC and NEAL E. BOUDETTEJULY 31, 2016
DETROIT — The steady growth in the American automobile market has been an economic success story: Carmakers set a record last year by selling more than 17.4 million new vehicles.But with consumer demand leveling off after six consecutive years of rising sales since the industry’s near collapse during the financial crisis, car companies are under increasing pressure to show strong monthly numbers, however they can.After all, carmakers’ monthly vehicle sales figures — the latest batch are expected on Tuesday — are the industry’s scoreboard. Pride and investor confidence are at stake, even if strong sales numbers are not always a reliable indicator of a carmaker’s financial strength.The tactics for stoking the monthly figures include deep discounts, low-profit sales to rental-car fleets and programs to prod dealers to buy excess inventory.AdvertisementOne major automaker, Fiat Chrysler, is under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission, suspected of padding sales figures with questionable dealer transactions. Last week, the company, which had long promoted its six-year string of monthly sales growth as a sign of strength, was forced to recant. Its restated figures showed that the winning streak had lasted less than three and a half years, ending in 2013.AdvertisementBut even if the government finds that Fiat Chrysler crossed a legal line in inflating its numbers, virtually every carmaker is doing whatever it takes to make sure no car it makes goes unsold.Companies regularly pay dealers to buy cars for loaner programs or as demonstration models. And throughout the industry, automakers are relying on big sales to rental fleets to bolster overall results — although those sales are far less profitable than one-by-one retail sales to consumers.So far this year, industry sales are running slightly ahead of last year’s record pace. But analysts are projecting minimal gains, if any, when automakers report their July results.“We’ve had six straight years of unprecedented growth, and there’s no way that can be sustained forever,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst with the firm Autotrader. “A dip is inevitable.”For automakers, it is far easier to put incentives on slow-selling vehicles or sell them to rental-car companies than it is to cut production in the factories. That would require shifting or idling workers, and modifying parts deliveries.So far this year, about 14 percent of all sales made by automakers have been to rental-car fleets, according to the auto research website Edmunds.com. Another 5 percent go to large commercial customers or government agencies.“There’s an advantage for some automakers to use daily rentals to introduce your brand to new customers,” said Jessica Caldwell, an analyst for Edmunds. “But as growth slows, it can also be used to keep sales up and inventories lower.”AdvertisementEdmunds predicts that 1.52 million new vehicles were sold in July, which would represent an increase of less than 1 percent from the same month last year.Ms. Caldwell says she expects automakers to roll out new incentives, particularly cut-rate financing deals, to stimulate demand for the remainder of the year.The revelation that Fiat Chrysler is under federal investigation has prompted more scrutiny of the company’s particularly strong sales record in recent years. While it has been successful selling trucks and sport utility vehicles, its cars have languished behind competing models from Toyota and Honda, for example.As a result, Fiat Chrysler is selling more cars to rental fleets. An analysis by the research firm Kelley Blue Book found that about 35 percent of cars sold under the company’s Chrysler and Dodge brands end up in rental lots.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Companies are loath to stop production of poor-selling models,” Ms. Krebs said. “The alternative is to dump them into rental.”Besides Fiat Chrysler, the companies with the highest level of fleet sales are Ford Motor, Hyundai Motor, Kia Motors and Nissan Motor, according to Kelley Blue Book. The lowest include Honda Motor, BMW and Mercedes-Benz.General Motors, the largest American automaker, has been strategically reducing its fleet sales since last year. Each month, the company highlights its increase in retail sales — and decline in rentals — as a measure of its profitable growth.Last week, G.M. surprised analysts by reporting that profit grew more than 150 percent in its second quarter, to $2.9 billion. The strong results reflect a greater emphasis on retail sales than on fleet business.“Daily rental continues to decline as a percentage of our total sales,” Alan Batey, G.M.’s head of North American sales, told reporters at a briefing last week.AdvertisementAnd G.M.’s profit margins are growing because of it. The company said it recorded pretax margins of about 12 percent in North America during the quarter, compared with 10.5 percent a year ago.By comparison, Ford’s margin for the quarter, on a profit of $2 billion, was about 11 percent. Fiat Chrysler’s second-quarter profit of 321 million euros, or about $355 million, had a margin of just under 8 percent.Fiat Chrysler’s chief executive, Sergio Marchionne, praised G.M.’s margins as exceptional in a conference call with analysts last week. And he said that closing the profitability gap “remains a permanent fixation” for his company.That could be a difficult objective if the overall market remains flat.Ford’s net income for the quarter was 9 percent lower than a year earlier and below Wall Street’s expectations. Ford officials warned that the current sales boom may have peaked.“We see the second half being softer than the first half of this year,” said Bob Shanks, Ford’s chief financial officer. “Looking into 2017, we will see further softness.”Ms. Krebs, of Autotrader, said automakers naturally wanted to extend the good times as long as possible, leading to more incentives and questionable practices like pushing dealers to buy cars as demonstration models.“These are things we see when we’ve passed the peak of the cycle and are heading downward,” she said.Besides Fiat Chrysler, though, no other car companies are known to be under investigation over their sales numbers. Its competitors so far have resisted commenting publicly on Fiat Chrysler’s problems, but they are seeking to distance themselves from what could become the industry’s latest scandal.“I only know what I have read about them,” Mr. Batey said. “But I will say that our system of reporting sales is top-notch, and we have no issues.”Bill Vlasic reported from Detroit, and Neal E. Boudette from Ann Arbor, Mich.A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: What Auto  Sales Data Doesn’t Say.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.