AdvertisementSupported byAnother ViewBy Michael W. PeregrineA newly released compendium of common-sense principles offers a promising basis from which boards may recalibrate their approach to fundamental elements of corporate governance.The principles were prepared by a diverse group of 12 prominent corporate executives and other financial leaders, including the chief executives of JPMorgan Chase, Berkshire Hathaway, General Electric, General Motors and Verizon as well as those of BlackRock, Vanguard and other institutional investors and financial services companies. It is an all-star lineup that should command broad boardroom attention.Their stated goal was to offer a set of recommendations on which they found common ground, in the hope of promoting further conversation on corporate governance and ultimately stimulating economic growth. Indeed, the principles appear premised on the crucial, if understated, connection between effective corporate governance and economic prosperity. In that regard, they reflect the frustration that governance-based debate among investors, corporate leaders and other stakeholders has failed to produce the kind of change needed to support economic strength.These principles address a number of elemental governance topics, including board composition, director responsibilities, shareholder rights, public reporting, board leadership, management succession planning and compensation of management. They emphasize critical issues of director engagement, independence, accountability and refreshment. Although focused on public company governance, most of the principles have direct relevance to the governance of nonprofit corporations and private companies as well.The principles may be particularly influential in their emphasis on the ultimate board agenda: the importance of taking a long-term strategic perspective and avoiding the frivolous and nonessential. In that regard, they discourage companies from providing quarterly earnings reports unless those reports are beneficial to shareholders.The principles courageously support a pure, undiluted executive session practice and unfettered board access to the entire management team.Moving beyond the traditional nod to board and individual director evaluation, the principles present a direct and welcome challenge to remove ineffective directors. They affirm the merits of competency-based director selection while recognizing the important contributions of directors who lack particular industry experience. Moreover, the principles are likely to add fuel to growing efforts to support — if not mandate — diversity standards for governance. These are, individually and collectively, unique contributions.But the principles also reflect some missed opportunities — important governance topics that arguably deserve note. These include the critical nature of the board’s responsibility for enterprise risk management and, in particular, compliance oversight. They do not address the growing movement toward assuring the general counsel a prominent position within the senior leadership team, or acknowledge the oft-referenced role of the general counsel as “lawyer-statesman.”Also, the principles decline to take sides in the often-contentious debate on director tenure and mandatory retirement age. Consistent with what empirical data suggests, they instead encourage careful articulation of whatever the board’s position is on these issues. This is a recommendation that confirms that there can be no single accepted approach to an important governance issue for which there are varied corporate practices.Indeed, there is no suggestion that the specific recommendations be considered absolute. Rather, they project a hope of prompting continuing, respectful dialogue on governance matters among top corporate constituents. In this respect, the principles seem less focused on establishing best practices per se, and more on offering a consensus perspective on how good governance works in the real world.In these and other ways, the principles are worthy of boardroom focus. Sensible they may be, but they are not, as some academics suggest, mere platitudes. In many respects, the principles are the most significant discussion of the roles and responsibilities of boards, companies and shareholders since the 2012 release of the “Principles of Corporate Governance” by the Business Roundtable.As such, they serve as governance manna for the many corporate boards hungry for practical guidance on today’s leading boardroom issues. The timing of their release was also — if unintentionally — propitious, coming as it does on the eve of the 15th anniversary of the Enron bankruptcy. As the boardroom memories of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act grow dim, what these principles say — and do not say — are highly useful boardroom fodder.For these and other reasons, the principles should be on the agenda at the next board governance committee meeting of companies large or small, publicly traded or private.Michael W. Peregrine is a partner at the law firm McDermott Will & Emery. His views do not necessarily reflect the views of the firm or its clients.Advertisement