By KATIE THOMASMAY 16, 2016
Valeant Pharmaceuticals International said on Monday that it would expand its discount program for two expensive heart drugs so that every hospital would be eligible for at least a 10 percent discount, with some qualifying for discounts of up to 40 percent. But some hospitals — and the companies that negotiate prices for them — said they were still waiting for details.“A press release stating they will offer discounts is one thing — but Valeant did the same thing the last time they said they had discounts, and nothing ever materialized,” said Erin R. Fox, the pharmacist who negotiates drug prices on behalf of the University of Utah Health Care System, which spends just over $640,000 a year on the two drugs. She had been contacting Valeant since last fall seeking discounts. She said she received an email Monday from the company, explaining the discounts.Last month, United States senators harshly criticized the company for failing to provide discounts to leading heart hospitals who used large quantities of the drugs, despite Valeant’s previous promises to do so. Valeant acquired the two drugs, Nitropress and Isuprel, in February last year and immediately raised their prices, leading to widespread criticism because the drugs have been on the market for years.Valeant’s policy of buying old drugs and sharply raising their prices led to an outcry from doctors, patients and hospitals as well as inquiries by United States attorneys in New York and Massachusetts and hearings in Congress.AdvertisementIn the winter, the company pledged to offer up to 30 percent discounts, based on volume, for hospitals that used the drugs. But at a Senate hearing in April, Valeant acknowledged there were gaps in the program after senators said none of the hospitals they contacted — including leading institutions like the Cleveland Clinic and Johns Hopkins — had received any discount.AdvertisementLast week, the hospitals said they still had not heard from the company and a leading group-purchasing organization, Premier, which negotiates prices on behalf of hospitals, said only one hospital out of 2,500 received a 30 percent discount on Nitropress, and only one qualified for a similar discount on Isuprel. Most hospitals, the company said, received a discount of just one penny off the wholesale price.Many other major hospitals, including the Cleveland Clinic, Johns Hopkins and the Mayo Clinic, did not qualify for any discount because Valeant did not offer discounts through their group-purchasing organization.On Monday, Valeant pledged to make those discounts more widespread, saying that it would offer them to all hospitals, regardless of whether they were a member of a group-purchasing organization. All hospitals will receive a 10 percent discount, and bigger users of the drugs would qualify for 20, 30 and 40 percent discounts. The company also said it would not raise the price on the drugs, nor would it alter the discount program to make it less generous.“Under this new program, the discounts we previously implemented for Nitropress and Isuprel will be simplified and more accessible,” said Joseph C. Papa, the newly appointed chief executive of Valeant. “I understand the concerns our partners in the health care community have had about the pricing of these drugs, and we want to ensure hospitals and patients can get the drugs they need.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Scott Knoer, the chief pharmacy officer at the Cleveland Clinic, noted that even with the discounts, hospitals would still be spending far more on the two drugs than they did a year ago because Valeant raised the prices on the two drugs so significantly — Nitropress by 310 percent, and Isuprel by 720 percent in 2015. If the Cleveland Clinic qualified for the largest discounts under the program, he said, the clinic would still be paying $2.3 million a year more for the drugs because of Valeant’s price increases.“Even with these discounts, the costs are still extraordinarily high for these lifesaving drugs,” he said.One of the country’s largest group-purchasing organizations, Vizient, said on Monday that it was in talks with Valeant about the discounts, but that it was still evaluating the details.“The critical thing for us at this point is seeing real and meaningful change from Valeant,” a Vizient spokeswoman, Angie Boliver, said in a statement. Vizient negotiates prices on behalf of some of the country’s leading heart hospitals, including the Cleveland Clinic, the Mayo Clinic, and NewYork-Presbyterian. But until now, Valeant had not offered discounts through them.Advertisement“Lip service won’t cut it,” Ms. Boliver said. “Before we do anything, we must see them offer actual value that is realistically available to all of our hospitals.”Premier, the other large group-purchasing organization, said it received details on the new program about the same time on Monday that Valeant publicly announced it.“Our pharmacy team is evaluating the terms and conditions, and looking it over together with our member committees that evaluate these contracts,” said a spokeswoman, Amanda Forster. “We will need some time to get that feedback before we can say anything pro/con about the new prices.”A version of this article appears in print on May 17, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Valeant Expands Drug Discount Offer After Criticism.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.