By RYAN McMORROWJUNE 21, 2017
BEIJING — The chairman and founder of China’s largest property developer said on Wednesday that he would step down, ending a career that mirrored the country’s giddy embrace of privately owned real estate but stumbled after his company became the target of an unprecedented Chinese corporate takeover battle.Wang Shi, the chairman of China Vanke Group, said in a post on a personal social media account that it was time to let the next generation take over. Mr. Wang, 66, wrote that he was passing the baton to an executive team led by Vanke’s current president, Yu Liang. Shareholders are set to vote on a slate of directors that does not include Mr. Wang next week.“I’m fully confident in them and filled with anticipation,” Mr. Wang wrote. “In the future, I will continue working for the good of Vanke and society.”Mr. Wang is one of China’s most recognized business figures, known for his financial success and for the wide public profile he cultivated in part on China’s social media platforms. To a new class of Chinese allowed to own their homes as the country began to embrace private ownership, he was as well known for his views on property as he was for climbing Mount Everest and for running in the Boston Marathon in 2013, the year it was bombed.AdvertisementBut he made headlines for other reasons beginning two years ago, when Vanke became the subject of a corporate takeover effort that illustrated the ambitions of a new breed of brash Chinese financial companies to shake up established powers in sectors like real estate. Mr. Wang finally sought the protection of a deep-pocketed state-controlled company, a rail transportation firm called Shenzhen Metro Group, which became Vanke’s biggest shareholder. The jockeying for control of Vanke drew government scrutiny, as the country had not seen many bruising corporate takeovers.AdvertisementIn a statement, Shenzhen Metro said it “pays tribute to Wang Shi and respects his decision.” A spokesman for Vanke declined to make Mr. Wang available for comment. A spokeswoman for Shenzhen Metro declined to comment further.Vanke has built up China’s largest property development business over the last three decades. Last year, the company had $34 billion in sales, building major projects in cities throughout China and selling nearly 300 million square feet of space, about equivalent to the area of Central Park eight times over. Its commercial housing sales made up 3 percent of the market in China.But Mr. Wang’s hold on the company came under threat in 2015. An insurer, Baoneng Group, launched a rare corporate raid in 2015, slowly buying up Vanke shares until it became the company’s largest shareholder by the end of that year. The hostile takeover attempt left Mr. Wang scrambling to stay in control.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In 2016, Mr. Wang brought in Shenzhen Metro Group as a shareholder. Another Chinese developer, Evergrande Group, jumped in as well, slowly buying up shares last summer.The corporate maneuvering and mudslinging drew the attention of China’s financial regulators, who focused on the source of insurance funds fueling Baoneng’s, and later Evergrande’s, share purchases. Regulators were just beginning to heavily scrutinize sales of insurance products that function more like investment products. Some experts have warned that the insurance products pose a risk to individual investors as well as to China’s broader financial system, and they have also tripped up companies like Anbang Insurance Group of China.Late last year, the chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission, Liu Shiyu, called the use of improperly sourced funds to mount corporate raids behavior similar to “a stranger at your door becoming a barbarian, in the end becoming industrial bandits.”Days later, China’s insurance regulator announced it had suspended one of Baoneng’s affiliates, Foresea Life Insurance, from selling new life insurance products, which had fueled the takeover attempt. Action against Evergrande’s insurance unit soon followed, ending the battle.Last year, in the midst of the takeover fight, Mr. Wang indicated that he would be willing to resign if it would help shareholders and if his management team, led by Mr. Yu, the president, remained in place.“I’ve become the focus. They want to remove me,” he said at a news conference following a board meeting in June last year. “I hope Yu Liang can replace me. Yu Liang can become chairman. This is not a bad suggestion.”A version of this article appears in print on June 22, 2017, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Leader of Chinese Property Giant Retires.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.