By NELSON D. SCHWARTZJULY 31, 2016
For most voters, the idea of more government borrowing and spending is about as popular as the Zika virus. And while Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump agree on almost nothing, mainstream Democrats and Republicans alike often talk about the national debt the way prohibitionists once discussed booze.But among economists, the outlook is changing. And with interest rates near historical lows and growth stuck in a rut even as the recovery from the Great Recession moves into its eighth year this summer, even some veterans of Washington’s budget wars are challenging the reigning fiscal orthodoxy that perceives the perennial budget gap as something inherently sinful.“The views of economists about the deficit are shifting,” said Douglas W. Elmendorf, director of the Congressional Budget Office from 2009 to 2015 and now dean of the Kennedy School at Harvard. “If the very low level of interest rates persists for years to come, as many experts and analysts think is likely, that’s a sea change for budget policy.”More borrowing might actually be healthy, many economists say, at least in the short term, by helping to elevate the economy’s long-depressed growth trajectory.Advertisement“Deficits aren’t good or bad in and of themselves,” said Dean Maki, a veteran Wall Street economist now at Point72 Asset Management. “It’s far more important whether the spending is worthwhile.”AdvertisementYou might not have heard it at the party conventions in Cleveland and Philadelphia, but regardless of who wins in November, it now appears that the next president is more likely than not to end up backing, if not embracing, more deficit spending.Mr. Trump himself said in a telephone interview last week that he believed more borrowing and spending would help lift economic growth, a departure from traditional Republican economics.“It’s called priming the pump,” Mr. Trump said. “Sometimes you have to do that a little bit to get things going. We have no choice — otherwise, we are going to die on the vine.”He added: “The economy would be crushed under Hillary. But no matter who it is, the debt is going up.”Mr. Trump insisted that his proposed tax overhaul would encourage American corporations to repatriate trillions in profits now stashed overseas, a windfall that he claimed would help pay for tax cuts. Faster economic growth under his policies, he said, would also ultimately reduce the deficit.But some experts, even those who agree that government borrowing can be helpful, fear that Mr. Trump will push the government to max out on debt, as many Trump properties have done over the years.“Donald Trump loves debt, and whatever empire he’s created, he’s done it with debt,” said Jeffrey Gundlach, a Los Angeles-based money manager, whose firm, DoubleLine, oversees more than $100 billion in assets. “And in the short term, the economy could get better and grow faster.”AdvertisementHillary Clinton has laid out ambitious, big-ticket proposals. And while she seems much less willing to borrow to the hilt than her Republican rival, the budget deficit could end up expanding if Mrs. Clinton wins in November.“If you get growth out of it, there’s no debate that some deficit spending would be a good thing,” said Kenneth S. Rogoff, a professor of economics at Harvard who has warned in the past of the risks that excessive debt poses to economic growth. “It can add to tax revenues over the long run.”Mike Konczal, a left-of-center economist with the Roosevelt Institute, is even more emphatic. “There is definitely room for fiscal stimulus,” he said.After the financial crisis, he explained, “we needed a bigger deficit in the short term, then a turn to ensure that the recovery was strong.”“Instead,” he said, “what we got was a quick turn to consolidation and austerity.”Republicans, for all their railing against deficits, have actually presided over the biggest increases in debt. And Mr. Trump is well within that tradition. Mr. Gundlach compares the G.O.P. standard-bearer to another Republican who talked tough on spending but presided over a boom fueled by debt and tax cuts in the 1980s: Ronald Reagan.But the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a bipartisan group that advocates fiscal restraint, estimates that Mr. Trump’s plan to cut taxes could raise the national debt by $11.5 trillion over the next decade to roughly $35 trillion in 2026.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hillary Clinton, while also likely to preside over a rise in federal borrowing, is far more restrained. But her proposals could quickly add up. For starters, she is calling for a $275 billion increase in infrastructure spending over five years (and many of her advisers are talking privately about a much bigger program).According to Mrs. Clinton’s plan, adjusting the business tax code would “fully pay for these investments.” Yet a broad overhaul of corporate taxation has been talked about by both Democrats and Republicans in Washington for years with little to show for it.Mrs. Clinton has also proposed expanding coverage under the Affordable Care Act, as well as increasing access to early childhood education while heavily subsidizing in-state tuition at public colleges and universities for students whose parents earn less than $125,000 a year.AdvertisementBut even though economists generally favor higher education spending as a spur to productivity, many forecasters concede that Mrs. Clinton’s tuition aid plan could expand borrowing by several hundred billion dollars.Jacob Leibenluft, a senior policy adviser to Mrs. Clinton, emphasized that additional spending was needed, even if it meant increasing taxes.“Decades of underinvestment have real economic consequences,” he said in an interview. “This is a real opportunity that we can’t afford to miss, and when we put forward these investments, we should be able to pay for them — by raising more from the wealthiest and from major corporations.”Even without new spending, the federal budget deficit is expected to rise. By 2020, the Congressional Budget Office estimates, the deficit will hit nearly $800 billion, or about 3.7 percent of expected economic output, as increasing entitlement costs for retiring baby boomers take their toll on federal coffers.That would be a reversal from Washington’s recent fiscal course, in which the budget deficit dropped from a postrecession high of $1.4 trillion in 2009 to $438 billion last year.The savings in Washington came at a price, however.From 2011 to 2014, austerity in the public sector fostered an economic headwind, reducing overall growth by nearly half a percentage point annually, economists estimate. That might not seem like much, but given the prevailing rate of just under 2 percent a year during that period, shrinking government outlays moved the needle sharply downward.Looking ahead, the key to delivering an economic payoff, Mr. Rogoff said, is to target the extra money to enhance economic productivity over the long haul, citing projects like rebuilding and improving the nation’s infrastructure and improving training so more workers can develop the skills employers need.That’s especially true now, when the federal government has the ability to borrow at exceptionally low interest rates. Yields on benchmark 10-year government bonds stand at just over 1.5 percent, having fallen by more than half since 2010.Advertisement“If the cost of investing goes down, you should do more of it,” Mr. Elmendorf said. “While federal spending is on an unsustainable path and eventually has to be addressed, I don’t think it’s urgent to make cuts in spending or increase taxes.”Mrs. Clinton’s approach, Mr. Rogoff said, would be economically superior to Mr. Trump’s version, which would largely pay for tax cuts targeted at the wealthy.The problem with Mr. Trump’s fiscal plan, Mr. Konczal said, isn’t necessarily that it would produce a deficit — instead, it is what the government would be borrowing to pay.“Running deficits to get the economy going, that’d be good,” he said. “The problem in Trump’s tax plan is that is such a shift in power to wealth holders. It’s comically large in terms of the tax cuts for the rich.”But others say that Mr. Trump — particularly if he combines tax cuts with the extensive building program he has promised, not just along the border with Mexico, but also throughout the nation’s industrial heartland — could kick-start a growth surge of his own.“I’m not a policy maker and I don’t pass judgment,” said Mr. Gundlach of DoubleLine, who is among the nation’s biggest bond fund managers. “In the short run, it’ll have the appearance of working. Long term, if you took the national debt to $30 trillion, the consequences are unimaginable.”A version of this article appears in print on August 1, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: However Vote Goes, Expect Rise in Deficits.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.