AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jennifer SabaJack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, may want to consider stealing a page from the playbook of the Yahoo boss Marissa Mayer and sell Twitter to a company with deeper pockets.At the moment, Twitter, the social-media company that he helped found, is mostly flapping about under his helm. Now would be a good time to look for an attractive suitor.Twitter is falling short of the metrics embraced by Silicon Valley and public investors. On Tuesday, it reported that its second-quarter top line increased 20 percent year-over-year to $602 million — less than the 36 percent growth in the first quarter. It also warned that advertising demand was lower than expected amid increased competition. The growth rate for monthly active users stalled at 3 percent.The slowdown does not bode well for the decade-old company as it fends off nimbler upstarts. Snapchat, for example, managed to increase its daily active users 50 percent year-over-year to 150 million, according to Jefferies. It has become the new darling among advertisers wanting to reach a younger audience. Nearly two-thirds of Snapchat users are between the ages of 18 and 34.Mr. Dorsey, who is also moonlighting as the chief executive of the payment service Square, took charge of Twitter last October and has tried to attract new users. That effort has included rolling out new features (some of them confusing), trying to reposition the brand and — perhaps more promisingly — signing deals with sports leagues like the National Football League and the National Hockey League to live-stream video.The sports initiative is an attractive one for potential buyers. Verizon Communications is busy assembling an island of misfit media assets that might welcome the human news feed. Verizon announced on Monday that it was buying Yahoo’s advertising and search business for $5 billion, roughly the same amount it paid a year ago for the faded 1990s internet star AOL.Verizon’s rationale for its buying spree is to build a network that yokes Yahoo’s strength in sports and finance with AOL properties like Huffington Post and TechCrunch. In theory, advertisers may be predisposed to an alternative to the increasingly dominant Google and Facebook.If anything, a Twitter acquisition would bear out the adage that three is a trend.Advertisement