By ELIZABETH OLSONSEPT. 20, 2016
John A. Boehner, the former speaker of the House who left Congress and his leadership post last year, is joining Squire Patton Boggs, a Washington-based law firm long known for its lobbying work.However, Mr. Boehner, who served as speaker for four years and as a Republican representative from Ohio for 24 years, will not lobby in his new role at the law firm. Instead, he will serve “as a strategic adviser to clients” in the United States and abroad on global business development, according to the firm’s announcement.“I left the private sector and got into public service decades ago because I wanted to help remove government barriers to economic growth and job creation, and that’s still the mission that drives me,” Mr. Boehner said in a statement on Tuesday.This month, Mr. Boehner, a cigarette smoker, was appointed to the board of the tobacco giant Reynolds American, which is currently fending off more regulation of the industry, including regulation of e-cigarettes. He is to serve on the board’s committee for corporate governance, nominating and sustainability.AdvertisementHe has kept a relatively low profile since stepping down from the Republican leadership in September 2015, drawing occasional attention, as when he described Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, as “Lucifer in the flesh.”AdvertisementIn April, Mr. Boehner made a surprise video appearance with President Obama — with whom he had scorching political battles, including a lawsuit House Republicans filed accusing the president of abuse of his official powers — in a humorous vignette for the annual dinner of the White House Correspondents’ Association.In it, Mr. Boehner offered a cigarette to President Obama, who once smoked but says he gave it up; he stuck to that stance in the video.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his new law firm role, Mr. Boehner will not be working with political adversaries but with a cadre of his former staff members. They include two longtime aides, John Criscuolo and Amy Lozupone, who will join the firm, forming a team that also includes the former speaker’s deputy chief of staff, Dave Schnittger, and former policy adviser, Natasha Hammond.Mr. Boehner, 66, who is not a lawyer and ran a small business in Ohio before his election to Congress, left the speakership at a time of conflicts with conservative members of his own party, who criticized his legislative deal making and called him a sellout.His negotiating skills will be put to use in his new job, where he will have “the opportunity to engage with leaders in business and government throughout the world and help them work through the challenges they face, as part of a world-class team,” he said in his statement.Stephen C. Mahon, the firm’s global managing partner, said there were “few people better equipped than Speaker Boehner to help us take things to the next level and bring our services to clients around the world.”Also among Mr. Boehner’s colleagues will be former Senators John B. Breaux and Trent Lott, who have weathered a number of changes at Squire Patton Boggs, which is among the larger firms in the United States.One of Squire Patton Boggs’s predecessor firms was hit by financial problems and merged two years ago with another law firm. The firm now has about 1,500 lawyers in 46 countries, offering services across North America, Europe, the Middle East, the Asia Pacific region and Latin America.A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Former House Speaker Boehner Joins Law Firm as Global Business Adviser.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.