By WILLIAM GRIMESMARCH 4, 2016
Ralph M. Baruch, a refugee from Nazi Germany who turned Viacom, a small cable and syndication company that CBS spun off in 1971, into a communications and entertainment giant, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan. He was 92.His death was confirmed by his daughter Michele Baruch Jeffery.Mr. Baruch was a CBS vice president and general manager of CBS Enterprises, the company’s cable television and syndication division, when the Federal Communications Commission ruled that television networks could no longer own cable systems or syndicate programs in the United States. To comply, CBS created a new publicly owned company with Mr. Baruch as its president and chief executive.The new job was hardly a plum. “I was to lead a brand-new company whose board I did not know and did not choose, with an oppressive distribution contract dictated by CBS,” Mr. Baruch wrote in his 2007 memoir, “Television Tightrope: How I Escaped Hitler, Survived CBS and Fathered Viacom,” with Lee Roderick.Other liabilities included a team of mostly castoff executives, “including an alcoholic in a key position”; an outside law firm “in which I had no confidence”; and an expensive lawsuit that threatened to derail the entire spinoff.AdvertisementMr. Baruch set about buying radio and television stations and cable systems. He started Showtime and the Cable Health Network (now Lifetime) and began producing and distributing television programs.In 1985, two years after he took the title of chairman, he and Terrence A. Elkes, Viacom’s president and new chief executive, acquired Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment and, with it, MTV, Nickelodeon, The Movie Channel and VH1. The deal completed Viacom’s transformation into a diversified communications and entertainment powerhouse. In 1987, Sumner M. Redstone paid $3.4 billion for it.Rudolph Maximilian Baruch was born on Aug. 5, 1923, in Frankfurt, Germany, where his French-born father, Bernard, practiced international law.During a 1932 trial, a Nazi storm trooper pushed his way into the courtroom where Mr. Baruch was defending a Social Democrat and began shouting insults. When the judge laughed, Mr. Baruch, who had fought 20 duels by sword and pistol in incidents provoked by anti-Semitic slurs against him — and had the facial scars to prove it — approached the bench and punched the judge.After the Nazis came to power the following year, the elder Mr. Baruch was tried for attempted murder, found guilty and sentenced to three years in prison. Using his connections in the judicial system, he engineered his escape and fled with his family to Paris, where Rudolph took the name Raoul and attended a lycée.AdvertisementAfter the fall of France, the family was again in mortal danger. Bernard Baruch had returned to Germany in 1938 to recruit spies for the French counterintelligence services, making his way back to France after the war began. When a captured spy gave up his name under interrogation, he moved near the top of the Nazi most-wanted list.The Emergency Rescue Committee helped the family to emigrate to New York in December 1940. Raoul, who soon changed his name to Ralph, found work in a shoe factory for 35 cents an hour and on weekends was an usher at a movie theater on 42nd Street.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He moved closer to his eventual profession when he was hired in 1943 as an engineer at Empire Broadcasting, a recording studio, having studied the topic with a borrowed textbook.Against the wishes of both sets of parents, he married 17-year-old Elizabeth Bachrach, known as Lilo, also a refugee from Frankfurt. She died in 1959.In addition to his daughter Michele, Mr. Baruch, who also had a home in Bedford Hills, N.Y., is survived by his wife, the former Jean Ursell de Mountford; three other daughters by his first marriage, Eve Baruch, Renée Baruch and Dr. Alice Baruch; and three grandchildren.After working for a music-licensing organization, Mr. Baruch applied for a job as an ad salesman at Channel 5, part of the DuMont television network. “I was hired for $75 a week selling spots,” he told the Cable Center in 1990. “But I thought, ‘This is an industry with a future, and I should be in it.’ ”He then worked for The Los Angeles Times’s Consolidated Television Film Sales to distribute its programs in the eastern United States.He joined CBS in 1954 as an account executive at CBS Films (later renamed CBS Enterprises), the company’s television syndication division. By the end of the decade he was head of its worldwide distribution arm.Mr. Baruch played a leading role in getting Congress to pass the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, which deregulated the cable industry.In the mid-1980s, when Viacom had attracted a swarm of corporate raiders, notably Carl C. Icahn, Mr. Baruch survived an attempt by Mr. Elkes to oust him as part of a bid to take Viacom private. In his memoir, he recalled Mr. Elkes telling him, “Ralph, you’re dead meat.” After buying Viacom, Mr. Redstone replaced Mr. Baruch as chairman but kept him on as a consultant.AdvertisementMr. Baruch served as a vice chairman of Carnegie Hall from 1997 to 1999, and a member of its executive committee. He helped found the National Academy of Cable Programming, the public affairs network C-Span and the International Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.A version of this article appears in print on March 5, 2016, on Page D7 of the New York edition with the headline: Ralph Baruch, Who Shaped Viacom’s Rise, Dies at 92.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.