By MICHAEL CIEPLYAPRIL 7, 2016
LOS ANGELES — In the 1990s, I tried, without much luck, to produce a movie about Merle Haggard for United Artists.Mostly, it was one more trip through development hell (one of the many reasons I came back to journalism). But along the way, I learned a few things — some more important than others — about a very private man who before his death on Wednesday wove dozens and dozens of country songs around his very public, all-American, outlaw persona.Among the first, and not the least important, of those lessons was that Mr. Haggard, who often toured by bus, liked to keep a Pocket Fisherman handy. He showed it off during a visit to his home near Redding, Calif. You never know, he explained, when an uncaught bass might happen by.Another early lesson involved Mr. Haggard’s first wife, the former Leona Hobbs.Those of us hoping to make the film used to call her “Leona No. 1,” because the third of Mr. Haggard’s wives was Leona Williams. To help sort through his biographical complexities, Ms. Williams inevitably became “Leona No. 2.”AdvertisementMr. Haggard’s respect for the somewhat forceful disposition of Leona No. 1, with whom he had four children, long outlasted the end of their marriage in the early 1960s. When it came time to approach his first wife about a deal for her own life rights, crucial to the film, Mr. Haggard said simply: “You can talk to her. I’m not.”I eventually found Leona No. 1 near the same Oildale, Calif., turf she had once torn up with Mr. Haggard. And I actually got to like her quite a bit.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But it took more than a few months to make terms with a woman who knew her way around some of the rougher spots in the San Joaquin Valley. She would tell you to find her down the street from the Yum Yum Donuts in Bakersfield, or at a friend’s house by the Apple Annie’s in Tulare, or at the office of a shopping-mall notary public where she finally signed her contract but said it felt like she was having a delicate biological operation performed “without any grease.”Then there was Marty, Mr. Haggard’s oldest son.He called my studio office one morning, after playing all night in a Valley club. If the movie made a hero of Merle, he said, he wasn’t sure what he might do. What Marty Haggard remembered, as he then described it, was neglect and harsh treatment by his father. He even offered to drive to Los Angeles “right now,” to get that script straightened out.But he didn’t; and a few weeks later, I happened to channel-hop smack into the middle of a religious talk-show interview with Marty, who, said the host, had come to terms with his anger at Merle. To prove it, Marty was supposed to sing one of his father’s songs — and he did.The film, of course, was never made, notwithstanding the efforts and influence of Robert Duvall, who was a producing partner, and the merits of a script by Tom Epperson, who once braved a dusty trip to Tulare in search of Leona No. 1.Merle and his fifth wife, Theresa, even showed up at my Santa Monica home for dinner one night. We barbecued two turkeys. Theresa wondered what church we went to. My wife managed an answer, which was more than I could do. And a good time was had by all.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.