By VINOD SREEHARSHAJULY 20, 2016
RIO DE JANEIRO — Goldman Sachs has led a new $10 million financing round in the Brazilian start-up CargoX, the companies said on Wednesday, an indication that investor interest still exists in Brazil despite political and economic turmoil.CargoX’s earlier investors — the Valor Capital Group, the Uber co-founder Oscar Salazar, and Hans Hickler, a former chief executive of DHL Express USA, among others — also participated in the round, which closed last month.For Goldman Sachs, the investment signals that the bank, which has a big private equity business, is open to early-stage companies and is interested in backing them well before valuations soar.The financing comes from Goldman Sachs Private Capital, a group within the company’s Special Situations division. Hillel Moerman, a co-head of Goldman Sachs Private Capital, will join the board of CargoX.AdvertisementThe start-up, whose headquarters are in São Paulo, is going after Brazil’s complex trucking industry. CargoX, founded in 2013 by Federico Vega, an Argentine and a former JPMorgan Chase vice president, is using mobile technology to reduce inefficiencies. It says it has now mapped and connected 150,000 truck owner-operators in the country.AdvertisementIn Brazil, a majority of freight is transported by trucks, which often run into bottlenecks.Brazil is in a period of political and economic upheaval. Its economy is expected to contract more than 3 percent this year for the second consecutive year. President Dilma Rousseff has been suspended and awaits an impeachment trial by the country’s Senate over violating budgetary laws. Vice President Michel Temer has temporarily taken over.Several investors and business groups have cheered Ms. Rousseff’s ouster, even though questions remain over the legitimacy of the process. Brazil’s benchmark Ibovespa stock index had rallied until falling on Wednesday, and Brazil’s currency has strengthened in recent months.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Vega said in an interview that the current political and economic drama did not factor into his company’s new financing round. He said he hoped that in tough times, truckers would have more reasons to improve efficiency.Michael Nicklas, a partner with the Valor Capital Group, said in an interview, “The political and economic situation was not a variable” in the start-up’s latest fund-raising.Valor, whose founders include Clifford M. Sobel, a former ambassador to Brazil appointed by President George W. Bush, has made 17 investments in Brazil since 2012. It became CargoX’s first institutional investor in 2014.Mr. Nicklas, an American who lives in Rio de Janeiro, has led most of Valor’s investments in Brazil.“Over the last two years,” he said, “our portfolio value has doubled, and so we’re pretty bullish on Brazil.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.