
Breakingviews By                     
ROBYN MAK

MARCH 4, 2016
The latest deal from China’s richest man is unexpectedly logical.The AMC cinema chain will buy its American rival Carmike Cinemas for $1.1 billion, including debt. AMC is controlled by Dalian Wanda group, which is led by the tycoon Wang Jianlin. It looks like rational consolidation at a defensible price — aspects mostly lacking from Mr. Wang’s recent splurge on movie studios, theme parks and soccer clubs. Perhaps financial reality is kicking in.At $30 a share, AMC is paying a premium of nearly 20 percent to Carmike’s last closing price. Subtract Carmike’s last reported net debt and the deal values its equity at $737 million. That is 44 times what analysts expect Carmike, which specializes in theaters in smaller non-urban areas, to earn this year.
                With the announced acquisition of Carmike Cinemas, AMC Entertainment is poised to control one out of every five theaters in the country.            But AMC thinks it can carve some $35 million from its target’s annual cost base. After tax, those savings are worth more than $200 million today — well above the $130 million premium that AMC is handing to Carmike shareholders.The timing looks right, too. Box-office revenue in the United States jumped 7.4 percent to top $11 billion in 2015, reversing a 5 percent decline in the previous year, according to Box Office Mojo. Adrenaline-packed hits like “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” and “Jurassic World” as well as features like reclining seats and alcohol were enough to tempt American audiences. A combined AMC-Carmike would be the country’s largest cinema chain.Mr. Wang’s other recent forays have been less straightforward, if not financially perplexing. Since taking over AMC in 2012, privately held Wanda has snapped up Legendary, the United States movie studio behind “Jurassic World”; the company that oversees Ironman triathlons; a sports marketing group led by the nephew of the disgraced FIFA boss Sepp Blatter; and a stake in the Spanish soccer team Atlético Madrid. Just last month, Wanda, which is based in Beijing, announced plans to help build a mammoth 80-hectare theme park outside of Paris.By comparison, Wanda’s second deal with AMC is a sequel investors can wrap their heads around.Robyn Mak is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »