By NEAL E. BOUDETTEJULY 26, 2016
For the last few years, Fiat Chrysler has been acclaiming a long run of rising new-car sales. At last count, it had higher vehicle sales 75 months in a row.Turns out, the hot streak actually ended three years ago, at Month 40.The company, under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission on suspicion of inflating the data for some months, said on Tuesday that it was changing the way it counts cars sold by its dealers.Under its new approach, it added, its winning sales streak would have ended in September 2013. And since then, the company would have reported two other down months it originally counted as growth months.Since the federal investigation was disclosed last week, Fiat Chrysler has said that whatever the questions are about its sale reports, its financial reporting has been accurate.AdvertisementFiat Chrysler is preparing to report its second-quarter financial results on Wednesday.The S.E.C. is looking into whether the company improperly inflated its sales totals, an action prompted by a lawsuit filed this year by two Chrysler dealerships. The dealerships contend that Chrysler had pressured dealers to report vehicles as sold in a particular month, and then to revise the sales reports a short time later.AdvertisementIn January, Fiat Chrysler called the lawsuit “baseless.”But the S.E.C. began scrutinizing the automaker’s monthly sales reports. And on July 11, Justice Department officials went to Fiat Chrysler headquarters in Auburn Hills, Mich., and several regional sales offices to examine records and interview executives.On Tuesday, Fiat Chrysler said it would adjust its monthly totals to take into account sales that did not actually go through. Until now, dealers could report a vehicle sold, even if there was no actual customer for it. Days later, after the start of a new month, the dealer could then “unwind,” or undo, the sale.Starting this month, Fiat Chrysler said it would adjust its totals to account for sales that are undone. “We saw this as an opportunity to be more transparent,” said Shawn Morgan, a spokeswoman.Fiat Chrysler is making money, although almost all of its profit is generated by the Chrysler side, which is enjoying strong sales of high-margin Jeeps and Ram trucks. Its North American business is less profitable than those of its main rivals, Ford Motor and General Motors.In the first quarter, Fiat Chrysler reported net profit of 478 million euros, or about $525 million, up from 92 million euros in the comparable period in 2015.Last week, G.M. said it had earned $2.9 billion in the second quarter. Ford reports its second-quarter results on Thursday.Although Fiat Chrysler is the only automaker known to be under federal investigation over the issue, many carmakers have come under scrutiny for the way they count monthly sales by dealers. Many allow dealers to report as “sold” cars that they soon offer for sale as “used” models, even if the vehicles have never left the lot and have never been registered by anyone other than the dealer.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.BMW, for example, created a special category in its sales reporting system, known as “Specialty 8,” for vehicles that are counted as sold but are not titled to a customer and remain on the lot for sale as new vehicles.Advertisement“The problem is that what actually constitutes a sale in the auto industry is not clear,” said Jesse Toprak, chief executive of the auto research website carhub.com. In other industries, sales reflect when a product leaves a retailer’s inventory and goes to a customer.“When some companies say these car are sold, they are still sitting in inventory, and that to me is misleading,” Mr. Toprak said.In a lengthy news release, Fiat Chrysler said it was “admittedly possible” for dealers to record a sale “without having a specific customer supporting the transaction.”The company said about 4,500 vehicles in dealer stock on June 30 had previously been reported as sold, and were returned to inventory after the transactions were undone. In May 2015, 770 cars were counted as sold even though their sales were later unwound, the most in any single month, the company said.Fiat Chrysler typically sells 100,000 to 200,000 cars a month in the United States.The company added that questions about reports of monthly sales by its dealers were not the basis for the revenue that it reports on the financial statements it files with the S.E.C.“We book revenue based on shipments to dealers,” not end customers, Ms. Morgan, the Fiat Chrysler spokeswoman, said.A version of this article appears in print on July 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Sales Not Hot as Thought, Fiat Chrysler Revises Data.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.