
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
MARCH 24, 2017
This interview with David Cancel, C.E.O. of Drift, a sales communication platform, was conducted and condensed by Adam BryantQ. What were your early years like?A. I was born in the Bronx, and grew up in Queens. My dad was from Puerto Rico, and my mom was from Ecuador. We only spoke Spanish in our house. I learned how to speak English watching “Gilligan’s Island” and “The Brady Bunch.”Both my parents worked for themselves. My dad was a contractor, and my mom was a seamstress. She did mostly wedding gowns. The only thing they ever wanted from me is the thing I never did, which is to be an accountant. In my mom’s mind, being an accountant meant I would wear a suit and ride the train to work and have a briefcase.I had a million jobs growing up — everything from paperboy to working in warehouses. In a lot of those jobs, they asked me to be the manager or the group leader. I think most of it was because of my parents. I like having autonomy, and the flip side of autonomy is accountability.AdvertisementWhen most people say they want autonomy, they really just want anarchy, with no accountability. I want extreme autonomy, and the accountability that comes with it. That usually projects some leadership capability.What were some other early lessons for you?I had a formative experience working in one of the warehouses in Woodside before college. We sold health and beauty aids. I became a manager quickly. I was the only one who was not from either Taiwan or mainland China.It was formative because the owner was this Taiwanese man, Sam, who had come over here and had started many businesses that were very successful. He would always say he was the manager, but I got to know him well and learned that he actually owned all these companies.He spent time trying to nurture this entrepreneurial side of me. He would give me new opportunities and do things to stretch me. He would let me fail a little bit, and then come in and try to teach me in a kind of stern but also loving way.So how has your management style evolved?I had two phases in my career. The first was the conventional wisdom phase. I would ask people how they manage, and there might be a few lessons in business books or magazines. I was trying to follow what other people said about projecting leadership and dominance. Then I got to a point in my career where I realized that none of that was actually working.AdvertisementWhen I was about 27, I started to think about those early lessons from Sam at the warehouse. He did none of the things that people were telling me to do. And so I started to adopt the concepts I learned from Sam. How do you hire?I’m trying to find people who are passionate, and I can learn something from them. Whether you’re an intern or an executive, I need to feel like I can learn something from you. It doesn’t even have to be in the context of work. Some people have great résumés, but there’s just nothing beyond that.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I’ll watch how we’re interacting in the interview. Are we having a conversation? Are they just on autopilot?When you’re interviewing someone, it’s kind of like the first date. When you make a bad hire and then reflect back on the first interview, they’ve always told you everything that turned out to be a problem later on. But you didn’t hear it at the time because you were ignoring them. Unless they’re a complete sociopath, they cannot hide everything in the interview process.So the first test is, do I want to be around this person? If you don’t like them in that first-date, unstressed scenario, it’s just going to get harder later on. Just think about all the people you meet in a week. How many of them would you like to talk to again? That list is usually very small. So why isn’t that the first-order filter when you’re trying to hire someone?I call my version of it the morning-after test. If you have a great meeting or conversation with this person, and they reach out to you the next day and send you an email, is your first instinct to answer that email? Or do you say, I’ll get back to this later, I’m busy right now. It’s like that test of whether you would want to be stuck in an airport with this person for 24 hours.In the interview, I’m also looking for passion and thinking about what the progression might be for this person. I think about my own progression and how I always want to feel I’m growing and not stagnant.As a manager, I feel like you need to be focused on every person’s progression and making sure you know what the next challenge is for them. That’s part of being a manager.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?I’m a big believer that you should probably take some time between college and starting your career to get some life experience. Everybody is so scripted about what colleges they need to go to and what they want to do for a career, and none of them have any experience in life. I don’t know how you’re supposed to have any idea of what you want to do.AdvertisementIf you ask me today what my five-year plan is, I don’t know. My plan is that I try to make every day as good as it can be, and then I try to make the next day better than the last one. That’s it. It’s a slow progression, but if you do it over time, amazing things happen.Also, be prepared to work hard. That can help you get ahead if you don’t have the advantages that other people have, because not many people will do it. Not many people want to do anything that involves discomfort. But if you want to grow in any dimension in your life, it involves discomfort.If you’re not willing to deal with the discomfort, you can’t grow. It’s impossible.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on March 26, 2017, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hiring Employees Who Can Teach You.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »