By JONATHAN SOBLEJUNE 8, 2016
TOKYO — Osamu Suzuki, the chairman of the Suzuki Motor Corporation, plans to give up day-to-day control of the automaker he has led for most of the last four decades, in response to a scandal over improper fuel economy tests on cars that the company sells in Japan.The move is the latest management reshuffle resulting from a wave of testing scandals in the auto industry.Suzuki Motor said on Wednesday that Mr. Suzuki, 86, would give up his position as chief executive but retain the title of chairman. It said the move was intended “to make management responsibility clear” over the testing problem, which it revealed last month.The company did not say who would replace Mr. Suzuki as chief executive, but his son, Toshihiro, is widely seen as a leading candidate. Toshihiro Suzuki became chief operating officer and executive vice president last year. The company will need to name its new chief executive before its annual shareholder meeting set for June 29, when Osamu Suzuki’s resignation from the role is scheduled to take effect.AdvertisementCarmakers industrywide have been struggling to restore public trust and erase doubts about the fuel-test results they report to governments around the world. Globally, the reporting of fuel economy and pollution ratings is under especially close scrutiny after Volkswagen of Germany admitted last year that it had installed software in 11 million diesel vehicles to cheat on emissions tests. The company’s chief executive has since resigned.AdvertisementThe turmoil has also hit Japanese automakers. Last month, the president of Mitsubishi Motors, Tetsuro Aikawa, said he would resign after the company disclosed that its engineers deliberately used unapproved test procedures that exaggerated fuel performance by as much as 15 percent on some models. The company had been using the procedures for several decades, and the financial shock caused by the admission drove it to seek a rescue from another Japanese carmaker, Nissan Motor.Suzuki has said that although its testing procedures had deviated from government standards, they had not produced exaggerated mileage ratings, and there was no need to restate any published ratings.The issue was nonetheless a blow to Suzuki’s reputation. The company said another executive, Vice President Osamu Honda, would resign his position and that board members would give up half their executive bonuses for the latest financial year. Senior managers, auditors and nonexecutive directors would also take cuts to their monthly pay, of between 10 and 40 percent, for periods of from three to six months, Suzuki said.Osamu Suzuki married into the carmaker’s founding family in the late 1950s, taking his wife’s family name, a not-uncommon practice among prominent Japanese families. He became president of Suzuki Motor in 1978.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Suzuki has stepped back from the front line of Suzuki’s management before. He traded the president’s role for the more ceremonial title of chairman in 2000, but potential successors suffered ill health. He returned to day-to-day control as chief executive in 2008 after a son-in-law, Hirotaka Ono, died of pancreatic cancer.Suzuki’s problematic fuel tests involve the way its engineers calculated what is known as running resistance, or the effect that tire friction and other factors have on fuel consumption under various driving conditions.Suzuki said last month that mileage tests at its development track in central Japan had produced inconsistent results, which engineers attributed to wind. Instead of running multiple tests to produce an average, the engineers cut corners by extrapolating running resistance from past tests. That was a violation of regulations, the company said, but did not distort results “beyond the standard margin of error.”Suzuki’s indiscretion came to light after Japanese regulators ordered all carmakers to re-examine their testing methods after the revelations at Mitsubishi, which hit the company’s sales and sent its share price plummeting. Nissan agreed to give Mitsubishi a $2.2 billion lifeline in exchange for about one-third of the company.An earlier version of the headline with this article misstated the type of scandal in which Suzuki has been involved. It is a fuel economy tests scandal, not an emissions scandal.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on June 9, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Suzuki Chairman to Step Down as Chief Executive After Fuel Economy Scandal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.