AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerIn an industry where hostile takeovers are rare, Gannett is not giving up its pursuit of Tribune Publishing, sweetening its bid on Monday just weeks after its first offer was resoundingly rejected.Gannett, publisher of USA Today, has been making an aggressive push to buy Tribune’s portfolio, which includes The Chicago Tribune and The Los Angeles Times, as circulation and advertising revenue for traditional newspapers are in a sharp and seemingly irreversible decline.Its latest move was perhaps to give Tribune a proposal it could not refuse. Gannett raised its cash bid 22 percent, to $15 a share, from the $12.25 a share Tribune rejected on May 4. Gannett’s stock gained 2.2 percent after the higher bid was announced on Monday, while Tribune’s shares soared 23 percent and closed almost a dollar below the offer price. The deal, which includes the assumption of Tribune’s debt, is now worth about $864 million, up from $815 million last month.“It is evident from our discussions with Tribune shareholders that there is overwhelming support for the companies to engage immediately regarding our proposed transaction,” John J. Louis, Gannett’s chairman, said in a statement.Tribune said its board was contemplating the latest offer.Price is only one factor for Tribune. Pride is another.Over the last year, Tribune’s shares have fallen, weighed down by management turnover, accounting weaknesses and an acquisition that was thwarted by regulators.The investor and entrepreneur Michael Ferro acquired a 16.5 percent stake in Tribune Publishing in February through his Chicago-based private equity firm, Merrick Ventures. He acquired the shares at $8.50 each, well below both of Gannett’s offers.Mr. Ferro, a relative newcomer to the media industry, quickly installed Justin C. Dearborn, another media outsider, as chief executive. Gannett pounced shortly thereafter.Instead, Tribune has drawn the battle lines. In a presentation last week, the company said it was “opposed to a steal – Gannett’s proposal is an opportunistic attempt to take advantage of a depressed Tribune stock price and a company in the midst of a strategic transformation.” The presentation was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday.It also adopted a so-called shareholder rights plan, also known as a poison pill, to make its shares less attractive to a buyer.Mr. Ferro and Mr. Dearborn, both of whom have a background in technology, have been focused on investing in areas such as artificial intelligence to raise revenue. Tribune’s executives have been promoting a strategy called Tronc, which involves pooling assets and using technology to extract more value from advertisers.But Gannett is taking a different approach. It has been consolidating newspaper companies to extract costs and streamline operations. It has said it believes the takeover will be better for Tribune shareholders than the Tronc. Combining the two companies would expand Gannett’s portfolio to nearly 120 newspapers.“By not engaging constructively with Gannett and continuing to pursue an unproven strategy based on its Tronc platform, we believe Tribune is jeopardizing its shareholders’ investment and disregarding their best interests,” said Robert J. Dickey, Gannett’s president and chief executive, in the statement Monday.When Tribune rejected the first bid a few weeks ago, it said the offer “understates the company’s true value and is not in the best interests of our shareholders.” The company has not indicated yet whether it would be more amenable to Monday’s bid.In a separate statement Monday, Tribune said it would “thoroughly review Gannett’s revised proposal.”Gannett raised its bid after “further review” that gave the company greater confidence in its ability to extract operational benefits from the transaction. Its analysis was based on publicly available financial statements, including Tribune’s latest earnings report, which showed more cash and less debt.“We like the general strategy that Gannett has outlined over the next several years to be a consolidator in the industry,” said Tony Scherrer, director of research and co-portfolio manager at Smead Capital Management. His firm oversees $2.4 billion in assets and owns about 5 percent of Gannett shares. “Tribune Publishing has some waterfront assets that they can put into their portfolio and use their top-notch management capabilities to extract value from these assets.”Gannett was also maneuvering to take the matter to shareholders. Because it missed the window to nominate its own directors to Tribune’s board, the company sought another route instead. To increase pressure, Gannett decided to solicit so-called withhold votes, encouraging Tribune shareholders to boycott their votes for the director nominees.Methuselah Advisors is advising Gannett, as is the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. Goldman Sachs and Lazard are providing financial advice to Tribune Publishing, with Kirkland & Ellis on the legal side.Advertisement