
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

APRIL 10, 2016
Mike Perlis  has been president and chief executive of Forbes Media since 2010.Q. Do you remember the first time you became a manager?A. Right out of college, I co-founded a small publishing company, in Camden, Maine. Because I love the outdoors, we published regional magazines on travel and outdoor sports, like canoeing and hiking. I’ve always felt that media is one of the great places where one can combine avocation and vocation. I remember being much younger than everyone else, and though I wanted to be a leader, I had to take into account that the people I was managing often had much more experience and were older than I was.It was an extraordinary opportunity for me to hone my skill as a generalist. I learned to be a conductor rather than being the musician with a particular skill. And as time has gone by, I’ve come to realize that being that generalist is actually a specialty. It’s a real privilege to be in the role where you can orchestrate what others are doing, but it does become a specialty, and it’s very satisfying, to continue the metaphor, to listen to the music you can create with the group.Q. What are the skills required to play that “conductor role” well?A. You have to be able to listen carefully, you have to be patient, and you have to able to articulate to your group what the goals are, what will constitute success and then lay out, with some precision, what the overarching strategic goals are that will allow the group to get there. Perspective and being able to see the whole picture is really vital, and more than anything, listening, understanding where you have talent, where you need talent, where the market opportunities are, and then translating all of this into strategic plans.AdvertisementQ. What’s the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. Great leaders walk the talk. They lead by example. There isn’t anything they ask people to do they’re not willing to do themselves. They’re willing to do the big things and the little things that project real support and the “we’re in it together” kind of feeling. And by the way, for me that’s when it’s the most fun. If you live in an ivory tower — and, as Donald Trump said the other night, “leadership is about telling people what to do and then having them do it” — that doesn’t sound fun to me.AdvertisementQ. You’ve worked as publisher of Playboy, GQ and Men’s Health, as chief executive of Ziff Davis and now of Forbes — publications that are all very different in content and culture. How do you adapt as a leader every time?A. The formula is always the same. You have to create a great product, first and foremost, and if that product finds an audience, you’ve really created the fundamental of the business because it is the connection between the content or product and the audience that allows you to monetize the business. Fundamentally it’s true wherever you are. I’ve always had a lot of fun and enthusiasm for going into new places, applying that formula and crisply and clearly defining what you want to try to accomplish. I had a great five years at Playboy and it’s a long time ago, and although it was a very different world and subject matter than Forbes, in a way there are some similarities. Playboy was also run by a family and I was the first person to have the title of publisher after Hugh Hefner, and I was also the first non-family member to become a chief executive at Forbes. So I guess by accident, it’s become something of a specialty of mine.Q. How did you manage that relationship with the founding family?A. Actually, and I say this with all appropriate humility, when the board members [at Forbes] hired me, they really turned over the reins of the business to me. They were unequivocal: They had made the decision to have someone from outside, and though they were always there to advise and help, they let me do the job.Q. You have made a lot of changes at Forbes since you’ve arrived, shifting the group toward the Internet. What were the difficulties of bringing a 98-year-old institution into the 21st century?A. Forbes has been an amazing company, but most of its culture and business had been built around a print business. When I came on board, it was time to shift toward the Internet, while honoring the old, because Forbes still publishes profitably in the United States and we publish in 37 different countries, so the print element of our business is still very strong. But we changed the culture from this old line of traditional print publishing business, and all that goes with that, to a digital, technology-based business, and that was a very big shift. Many people welcomed it because they could see where the business and the industry was going; some people had to learn there were ways to balance the old culture with the new one. Inevitably, there is that kind of “you’re in or you’re out” moment with a new culture, and there are some people who aren’t going to adapt to that.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So you find the right way to let them move on. You can’t please everyone as a chief.Q. But ideally, you want to get as many employees to buy into your new vision. How do you do that?A. Listening at first is critically important. Long-term employees have a lot of answers for a new C.E.O. They really know what needs to be done to create success. Finding the right time to transition from listening to creating a strategic plan, working closely with your team, and moving toward very directed and sometimes very different actions, I think, is the most interesting and exciting part of the process. But it always starts with listening. Over the last five years, we went from 15 million unique visitors a month to almost 50 million a month, and we’ve had a lot of success through innovation and a new approach of building the content platform and monetizing it. And one of the most gratifying things for us is what I call boomerang staffers, people who had left sometime along the timeline and came back: We’ve had at least two dozen of those.Q. What do you see a key challenge for a leader?A. What I’ve learned over the years is that everyone needs to have their replacement somewhere in the organization. We should all be thinking about if we’re not here, who is going to do our job? I’ve tried to solve this by having a program in place where people are always training their successor.AdvertisementQ. That could also create a feeling of unease.A. Yes. But if you are more threatened by it than empowered by it, then you’ve got to work on that.And it’s not just about training your replacement: If you think you’re really good at your job and you feel you’re performing at 110 percent, but you want to be a great manager and you need to mobilize action from people, you have to be willing to manage people who are only going to be able to do it at 80 to 90 percent of the effectiveness that you have, and let go of responsibilities that you know you can do better than anyone, to someone who is not as experienced and skilled, but might do it at a very efficient rate. It’s a hard thing to do and learn, but it’s so important in organizations.Q. How much have you changed as a leader over the years?A. I’m more patient, I’m more willing to wait a little longer to pull the trigger on whatever decision one needs to make in order to really inform that decision with all the information that is necessary.Again, it’s a fine balance. You don’t want to be slow, but I was a young man in a hurry, and sometime I’ve moved more quickly than I wish I had. I still have that youthful sense of urgency, but now I’m able to temper it with the right kind of patience.Q. What would you tell your younger self?A. I wish I’d learned to speak Spanish or Chinese — not just to be more communicative and fluent, because I can always manage to get by, but to be more of a global citizen. Culturally, it says something about you if you can speak more than your mother tongue.A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »