By BROOKS BARNESAPRIL 5, 2016
LOS ANGELES — On Monday night, as a stunned Hollywood scrambled to understand why Disney’s heir apparent, Thomas O. Staggs, had abruptly decided to step down, the company held a lavish premiere for its “Jungle Book” movie.A forest of ferns, palm trees and flowering plants stretched down Hollywood Boulevard. A woodland soundtrack (gurgling water, chirping crickets) and flickering tiki torches deepened the fantasy. And standing as sentry at the end of the red carpet was Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive and chairman, as sturdy, composed and tan as ever.“Ask me anything about the movie,” he said to a reporter, pre-empting a question about succession and flashing a smile.That on-with-the-show moment highlighted the box in which Disney now sits. The conglomerate has in Mr. Iger a seasoned, charismatic leader who, even on one of his more tumultuous days, can calmly focus the company on the future. Since he took over in 2005, Mr. Iger has led Disney on a numbing series of record quarterly results, even in the face of economic downturns, the occasional horrendous movie write-off and changing consumer habits that have dented ESPN, its primary profit engine.AdvertisementBut there is a downside: Nobody can seemingly measure up, complicating succession at a company that has a terrible track record on that front. Mr. Iger has been so successful that the obvious internal candidate to succeed him, the well-regarded Mr. Staggs, could not secure the unqualified backing of the Disney board. The executive whom Mr. Staggs beat to become heir apparent, James A. Rasulo, has left Disney.Advertisement“Mr. Iger is universally acknowledged as having provided exemplary leadership,” Todd Juenger, a Bernstein Research analyst, wrote on Monday. “How do you follow an act like that? Who could possibly live up? Begging the question, if not Mr. Staggs, then who?”A lot of people in Hollywood and on Wall Street contend the answer is Mr. Iger himself.Although he has announced that he will retire in June 2018, two years later than his previously stated departure, running Disney is an awfully attractive job. Analysts have speculated that Mr. Iger, 65, might be interested in extending his reign, particularly after a possible post-Disney second act, guiding the relocation of the San Diego Chargers and Oakland Raiders to a new stadium in Carson, Calif., came up short.Was the board’s reluctance to back Mr. Staggs a play by Mr. Iger to stay in power? People inside Disney have aggressively dismissed that notion, saying Mr. Staggs’s departure caused Mr. Iger anguish – they are friends – and that the rigor of succession planning is the beginning and end of the story. Furthermore, Mr. Iger has not signaled an intention to sign another deal. If he was so intent on staying, people close to him have argued, he would have simply extended his contract and not let questions swirl.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Disney declined to comment on Tuesday.So, back to the question: If not someone from inside Disney, then who? In announcing the departure of Mr. Staggs on Monday, the company said only that it would “broaden the scope of its succession planning process to identify and evaluate a robust slate of candidates for consideration.”Highlighting the company’s predicament, even outside candidates appear to be few. Hollywood’s chattering class instantly put forward Sheryl Sandberg, a Disney board member and Facebook’s chief operating officer. But Ms. Sandberg, while obviously skilled in technology, has the same lack of movie and television skill that bedeviled Mr. Staggs, who rose through the financial ranks at Disney. Peter Chernin, Rupert Murdoch’s former No. 2 at News Corporation, has also been mentioned. Mr. Chernin’s circle immediately doused that notion. He would be 67 at the time of transition.The list is so short that The Wrap, an entertainment news site, jokingly (or half-jokingly?) suggested that the board should consider President Obama.Wall Street had a muted reaction to Mr. Staggs’s withdrawal. Disney shares closed down 1.7 percent Tuesday. But some of the company’s managers took the news less in stride. While there was a general opinion inside Disney that Mr. Staggs’s first year as chief operating officer had not been a spectacular success, most people were shocked by his departure. And now, insiders asked, will the next chief executive most likely be an outsider — a devil we don’t know?One reason that Disney has long promoted from within involves its unique culture. In parts of the Disney empire, people are told, without irony, to “have a magical day.” Mr. Iger and his senior executives work in a building in Burbank, Calif., that is quite literally held up by the Seven Dwarfs. Think that’s corny? You’d better keep it to yourself.The good news is that Disney still has a 27-month cushion to figure out succession before Mr. Iger leaves, if he does not extend again.AdvertisementAnthony DiClemente, a Nomura Securities analyst, wrote on Tuesday that the departure of Mr. Staggs meant “very little’’ for Disney in the near term. But he said it was “clearly a setback to the company’s efforts to find an adequate successor to Bob Iger (if this is even possible).”A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Iger Proves a Tough Act to Follow  at Disney.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.