APRIL 3, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.40 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.20 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week: Florida Department of Transportation, $161.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.San Francisco City and County, $110.1 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Elk Grove, Calif., Unified School District, $106.8 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.AdvertisementMurfreesboro, Tenn., $79 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Forest Lake, Minn., Independent School District, $72 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAllegheny County, Pa., Higher Education Building Authority, $56 million of university revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Burleson, Tex., Independent School District, $121.4 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Centre County, Pa., Hospital Authority, $86 million of medical center revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $77.5 million of health care facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.Central Dauphin County, Pa., School District, $64.8 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Denver City, Tex., Independent School District, $67.6 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Eagle Mountain-Saginaw, Tex., Independent School District, $156.9 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Hilltop Securities.AdvertisementFairfax County, Va., $131.5 million of sewer revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Guilford, N.C., $94.1 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Indiana, $66.9 million of Purdue University student facilities system revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Kansas City, Mo., $331 million of special obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Kentucky Economic Development Finance Authority, $65.5 million of health care facilities revenue and refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Las Vegas Redevelopment Agency, $85 million of tax increment refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, $550 million of water system revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Lubbock, Tex., $124 million of general obligation refinancing and tax and waterworks system surplus revenue certificates of obligation. Citigroup Global Markets.New York State Dormitory Authority, $150 million of Fordham University revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Parker County, Tex., $53.9 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Pennsylvania, $52.8 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Port Arthur, Tex., Independent School District, $77.7 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.San Diego Public Facilities Financing Authority, $105.2 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementSan Diego Unified School District, $150.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Successor Agency to the San Francisco Redevelopment Agency, $90 million of allocation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Tarrant County, Tex., $63.2 million of water revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $912 million of hospital revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of California, $842 million of general revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.University of Connecticut, $340 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. Jefferies.Victor Valley, Calif., Community College District, $53.7 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Wisconsin, $76.1 million of energy power supply system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.