By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHJULY 20, 2016
A group of hedge funds sued the governor of Puerto Rico on Wednesday, saying he had started violating the island’s hard-won new debt-restructuring law before the ink from President Obama’s pen was even dry.The law, which the president signed on June 30, puts Puerto Rico under the watch of a federal oversight board to police its spending and promote fiscal reform. But the law has a built-in lag of at least two months before the federal board will be in place.In the meantime, the hedge funds said Gov. Alejandro García Padilla was exploiting the lag by grabbing hundreds of millions of public dollars and spending them on “purposes that apparently enjoy political favor.”They said the outlays would have been challenged if the oversight board had already been in place, and that holders of Puerto Rico’s general obligation bonds had first rights to the money. They asked the court to declare the payments invalid and freeze the money until the oversight board was operational and able to confirm the payments’ propriety.AdvertisementThe hedge funds filing the lawsuit included Monarch Alternative Capital, Stone Lion Capital Partners, Aurelius Capital Management, Autonomy Capital (Jersey), Covalent Capital Partners and Fundamental Credit Opportunities, among others.AdvertisementThe complaint was filed in United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico, in San Juan. It also named as defendants Juan Zaragoza Gómez, Puerto Rico’s secretary of the Treasury, and Luis Cruz Batista, the director of its Office of Management and Budget.The lawsuit is likely to harden public opinion on the island, where some people already see the federal oversight board, known as the junta, as an unacceptable display of Yankee imperialism. The word “junta” means “board” in Spanish, without dictatorial connotations, but with federal oversight now on the horizon, it has been appearing on anti-junta banners and graffiti.One of the biggest government outlays cited in the lawsuit was $800 million that was transferred to Puerto Rico’s pension system for public employees. An additional $250 million was apparently used to prop up the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico, which was declared insolvent last year. In normal times, the bank is a major player in the island’s economy, managing the government’s cash, structuring its debts and making loans to selected private businesses, among other duties.The lawsuit also claimed that $2.5 million had been improperly used to cover a year’s worth of spending by the Office of the First Lady, and an additional $1.2 million went for “development of high-performance Puerto Rican athletes.” And some $800 million was headed for the University of Puerto Rico, the lawsuit said, “to maintain artificially low tuition rates, well below what comparable state universities in fiscally balanced states charge.”The complaint did not list all the expenditures it wished to challenge, but it said that many others were being made “for purposes that cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, be described as ‘essential.’”The governor’s chief of staff, Grace Santana, said more lawsuits were expected in the coming days, and the administration would fight them aggressively.“To be clear, creditors suing the commonwealth will not receive special treatment or secure additional leverage,” she said in a statement. “Such litigation is pointless and counterproductive. It poses an obstacle to the orderly restructuring of government debts, and only serves to strain resources that might otherwise be devoted to a voluntary resolution.”AdvertisementMs. Santana did not address the hedge funds’ complaints about recent expenditures.For more than a year, Governor García Padilla has been warning that Puerto Rico does not have enough money both to pay its debts and to provide essential public services, like policing and public education. He said that when the cash ran out and he had to make a choice, he would choose essential services.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawsuit said that existing laws in Puerto Rico ranked governmental expenditures in terms of priority, and projects like developing high-performance athletes were nowhere near the top.Neither are pensions, for that matter. By law they are a safe, secured credit only to the extent that they have been funded, and the billions that are supposed to be sitting safely in the pension fund appear to have been spent on other things. If so, Puerto Rico’s law seems to leave retirees in the vulnerable position of being unsecured creditors.The hedge funds that filed the complaint, by contrast, are all holders of Puerto Rico’s general obligation bonds, a type of debt that the island’s Constitution puts at the top of the hierarchy, saying in effect that holders of this type of debt have first claim on “all available resources of the commonwealth.”On July 1, Puerto Rico was scheduled to make debt payments of about $2 billion, of which some $816 million was due to holders of general-obligation bonds.But late in the day on June 30, shortly after President Obama signed the new restructuring law, Governor García Padilla invoked a Puerto Rican law giving him the power to call a debt moratorium. The creditors did not get their money.The hedge funds say the governor had no legal standing to declare the moratorium, because the new federal law overrides the Puerto Rican law. Their lawsuit does not seek to make Puerto Rico come through with the $816 million now, however. That would be a steep uphill fight, because the new federal restructuring law also bars creditors from suing to enforce their claims.The purpose is to give Puerto Rico some breathing room, much the way the bankruptcy code gives struggling companies shelter from their creditors. Lawmakers and the Obama administration raced to enact the restructuring law before July 1, saying that otherwise Puerto Rico could be hit by a hail of creditor lawsuits that could take years to sort out.Potential creditor lawsuits were stayed as of July 1, but because the oversight board will not be impaneled until September, Congress also included a provision barring “the transfer of any funds or assets outside the ordinary course of business, or that are inconsistent with the Constitution or laws of the territory” in the meantime.AdvertisementThe lawsuit asked the court to declare Puerto Rico in violation of this provision.Puerto Rico needed a special restructuring law because all branches of its government are specifically prohibited from seeking relief through bankruptcy.Lawyers for the island had argued all the way to the United States Supreme Court that this exclusion was wrong and unfair, but their arguments did not prevail. So rather than amend the existing bankruptcy laws to admit Puerto Rico, Congress enacted a separate law, similar to bankruptcy, under the Territorial Clause of the United States Constitution. Other territories will be able to use the law in the future, if they ever find themselves struggling with debts they cannot pay.The new law, the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management and Economic Stability Act, is known by the acronym Promesa — “promise” in Spanish. It gives Puerto Rico the power to unilaterally abrogate debt, something normally available only in bankruptcy. In exchange for such extraordinary powers, Promesa requires the island to submit to federal oversight by a seven-member board. A majority of the board’s members are expected to be Republicans, reflecting that party’s control of both houses of Congress.A version of this article appears in print on July 21, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Funds Sue Governor of Puerto Rico Over Spending.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.