By VINDU GOEL and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 14, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — The gavel is finally poised to drop in the drawn-out auction for Yahoo’s core internet business.Final bids for the services, which include Yahoo’s search, email, advertising and media operations, are due Monday, with the board set to make a decision soon afterward, according to people briefed on the process who asked for anonymity because the bidding was confidential.The sale of Yahoo’s business would close out a largely unsuccessful four-year effort by Marissa Mayer, the company’s chief executive, to turn around the internet company. Although Yahoo was once the place where many web users began their wanderings, it fell on hard times over the last decade through a series of strategic and managerial missteps. Although Yahoo’s properties still draw more than one billion visitors a month, the company accounts for a tiny slice of the time people spend online.The Silicon Valley internet company has conducted several rounds of bidding since February, when it announced that it would explore a sale to separate its struggling operations from its much more valuable investment stakes in two Asian internet companies, Alibaba and Yahoo Japan. The process was eased this spring when the company settled a dispute with a persistent critic, the hedge fund Starboard Value, giving the activist investor four board seats.AdvertisementThe bidders for Yahoo’s operations include the telecommunications giants Verizon Communications and AT&T, several private equity firms and a Quicken Loans co-founder, Dan Gilbert, who is getting financial backing from Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway.AdvertisementThe offers are expected to vary depending on what assets are included, but Wall Street expects the business to fetch as much as $6 billion, including intellectual property and land.The field, winnowed from a bigger group of suitors, has a number of different plans in mind for Yahoo. Verizon — which has not been shy about discussing its interest in a deal — would probably merge Yahoo’s internet business with AOL, another onetime online giant, which it owns. Some of the private equity firms plan to curtail costs sharply while working out ways to profit from Yahoo’s still sizable audience.Though several bidders have acknowledged running into what one called “hairy” issues, nothing has emerged as a deal breaker. People involved in the auction describe it as competitive.As the process has dragged on, Yahoo’s business, based on advertising, has continued to deteriorate. Recent product releases, like a new travel app, Radar, and new information bots for Facebook Messenger, have made barely a ripple.Yahoo will report its second-quarter financial results on Monday, and analysts expect the company to post significant declines in revenue and profit.Any sale of Yahoo has been slowed by a trickle of unpleasant revelations to bidders about expensive decisions made by Ms. Mayer, a former Google executive who was named Yahoo’s chief in July 2012.The biggest surprise: In late June, Yahoo told bidders that they could be on the hook for more than $1 billion in immediate payments to Mozilla, the company that makes the Firefox web browser.AdvertisementIn a 2014 deal, Yahoo promised to pay Mozilla at least $375 million a year to make Yahoo the default search engine on Firefox — about $100 million a year more than Alphabet’s Google unit was then paying for similar prominence, according to Yahoo and Mozilla filings.To sweeten the deal, Ms. Mayer personally negotiated a provision that gave Mozilla unusual leverage to demand all of remaining payments upfront if Yahoo were sold, according to people briefed on the terms of the contract.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To demand the payout, Mozilla would have to show that the change in ownership was hurting the Mozilla brand and degrading the search experience, according to one of the people briefed on the terms. If Mozilla switched to another search provider instead, Yahoo would only have to make up the difference between its $375 million annual guarantee and the fee paid by Mozilla’s new partner.The deal’s provisions put pressure on any winning bidder to continue Ms. Mayer’s heavy investments in search, which she has championed despite the long odds of success against Google. About 42 percent of Yahoo’s $5 billion in revenue last year came from search.Yahoo decided the contract’s provisions were not significant enough to disclose to shareholders, despite a series of letters last year from the Securities and Exchange Commission asking the company to lay out the terms of the agreement and the risks to Yahoo. A spokeswoman for the agency declined to comment on the dispute.A Yahoo spokeswoman, Rebecca Neufeld, declined to comment on the Mozilla contract or the broader sale process.Denelle Dixon-Thayer, the chief legal and business officer of Mozilla, said she could not discuss specific terms of the Yahoo contract because of a confidentiality clause, but she acknowledged that Mozilla had protected itself from “downside risk.”Ms. Dixon-Thayer said that when Mozilla switched to Yahoo from Google in 2014, its priority was making sure there was viable competition in search.“The most important thing to us is a focus on search, a focus on improving and building a search product that we can all be proud of,” she said. “We need to and want to see more innovation in search.”AdvertisementBidders are also trying to determine how much they would have to pay out in severance if they cut staff. As of March 31, Yahoo had 9,400 employees, excluding those already scheduled to be laid off this year.Ms. Mayer and the board have handed out hefty stock awards to keep Yahoo employees from jumping ship over the last year and a half as the company has repeatedly shifted strategies.As of March 31, Yahoo had 35.5 million unvested restricted stock units outstanding. At the company’s current stock price, those have a value of more than $1.3 billion. The company also had 5.4 million stock options outstanding.Yahoo’s top four executives alone, including Ms. Mayer, would collectively receive about $100 million, including two years of stock awards, if they were fired. Rank-and-file employees would get their next six months of stock awards accelerated, and middle managers would get 12 months to 18 months.Brian Wieser, an analyst for Pivotal Research, estimates that Yahoo’s operating business is worth $3.5 billion, but he said that whatever the final price, the sale would have little impact on Yahoo’s stock price, which has already risen this year on speculation of a deal.“Investors just don’t care,” he said.Once any deal is announced, investors will turn their attention to the biggest issue affecting the stock: How will the remaining stub of Yahoo make money from its 15 percent stake in Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce company with a face value of $31 billion, and its 35.5 percent stake in Yahoo Japan, worth about $9 billion? That process, fraught with complex tax and legal issues, could itself take many months.A version of this article appears in print on July 15, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Yahoo Is Said to Collect the Final Bids in an Auction for Its Core Operations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.