By GEORGE GENE GUSTINESMAY 15, 2016
Publishing imprints at comic book companies typically have a unifying trait. Series at DC Comics aimed at mature readers are funneled through its Vertigo and Young Animal lines, while Marvel’s Icon presents projects from top-tier creators.What links many of the comics published by Boom Box, the imprint from Boom Studios, is that they tell personal stories with a sprinkle of glee. It is touchy-feely, but it also seems to be working.The imprint’s newest series, “The Backstagers,” written by James Tynion IV and drawn by Rian Sygh, begins in August. It focuses on the theater crew at a private school for boys. Like many of the other Boom Box comics, it has a cast that is diverse in race and sexual orientation.For Mr. Tynion, who is best known for his work on Batman and “The Woods,” his Boom series about high school students transported to an alien planet, this was a chance to work on something closer to home.Advertisement“It’s very important to me to explore things that are more personal,” he said. “I was a stage crew kid growing up myself. It’s a very strange place that always held a special part of my heart.”AdvertisementThe tween-to-teen male focus of “The Backstagers” makes it almost a mirror image of one of the imprint’s biggest successes, “The Lumberjanes,” about a diverse group of girls at summer camp, including a transgender character. Last year, “The Lumberjanes” won two Eisner Awards, the industry equivalent of an Oscar, for Best New Series and Best Publication for Teens. The comic has also been optioned for a film by 20th Century Fox.Other series published by Boom Box include “Goldie Vance,” which began last month, about a 16-year-old black girl who solves mysteries at the Florida resort that her father manages; “Jonesy,” about a Latina teenager who can make people fall in love, though her power does not work on her own heart’s desire; and “Giant Days,” about three female university students navigating adulthood.“Giant Days,” which is written by John Allison and is drawn by Lissa Treiman and Max Sarin, was nominated for two Eisners last month: Best Continuing Series and Best Writer.“The main reason Boom Box stands out is because of its target audience,” Oliver Sava, a comics writer for the A.V. Club, said in an email. “It’s one of the few places to find comics that aren’t just appropriate for younger readers, but written with them in mind. There’s a generally light tone across all of the Boom Box series, which means every book has a strong sense of humor and a more cartoonish art style.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added, “Women are often at the core of these books, both on and off the page, and it’s refreshing to see a publisher provide a platform for worthwhile creators struggling to break in at other publishers.”Overseeing the imprint is Shannon Watters, an editor at large at Boom, who is also one of the creators of “The Lumberjanes.” She is proud that the comics have received critical acclaim and that readers have embraced them and their noncynical vibe. “They are the kind of comics you want to read over a bowl of cereal on Saturday morning,” she said.The sense of joy is presented in the magnification of small moments: earning a badge in “Lumberjanes,” waxing poetic about doughnuts in “Jonesy,” or the word “tenants” presented in an explosion of stars when the friends in “Giant Days” land their first off-campus apartment.The success of “The Lumberjanes” started with grass-roots efforts. Ms. Watters and her fellow creators — Brooke Allen, Grace Ellis and Noelle Stevenson — made copies of the first eight pages, included an order form, and gave them out free. “It was supposed to be eight issues, and then it became something much more, kind of growing ever since beyond our wildest dreams,” Ms. Watters said.AdvertisementNot everyone has embraced the message of acceptance extolled by the series.It’s a golden age for queer characters in comic books. Some popular figures, like Iceman, have finally come out of the closet.
Others are being brought to life as lesbian or transgender.“We’ve continued to normalize queer kids in ‘Lumberjanes,’ which has provoked some parents to not let kids read it,” Ms. Watters said. “Otherwise, there hasn’t been a huge amount of backlash.”The fear of negative reactions has not been a deterrent for other writers. Mr. Tynion, who is bisexual, said “Backstagers” is for all ages, but he nonetheless hopes to reach a certain audience.“I wanted to create the book for the young queer boy who feels an outcast and doesn’t see that much of him reflected,” he said. “I want that reader to call this book his own.”A version of this article appears in print on May 16, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: The Illustrated Stories of Teenagers, Told With Humor and a Light Heart.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.