
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

JULY 21, 2016
One of the enduring mysteries of the 2008 financial crisis has been why the Justice Department made so few attempts to prosecute the individuals responsible for it, given the abundance of tangible evidence of wrongdoing by Wall Street bankers, traders and executives in the years leading up to the great unwinding.Yes, the United States attorney in the Eastern District of New York tried, and failed, to prosecute the Bear Stearns executives who were responsible for the two hedge funds that collapsed in July 2007. And yes, in November 2013, Kareem Serageldin, a former senior trader at Credit Suisse, was sentenced to 30 months in prison for inflating the value of mortgage bonds in his trading portfolio, allowing them to appear more valuable than they really were in hopes of receiving a bigger bonus. (Mr. Serageldin was released from prison in March.) But that is pretty much it. The Justice Department’s main accomplishment was extracting $200 billion in civil fines and penalties from a variety of financial institutions in exchange for releasing them from the threat of future prosecutions.We might never know why Eric H. Holder Jr., the former attorney general, chose to let Wall Street off the hook with just a proverbial slap on the wrist. After six years as attorney general and a short break after leaving government last year, he recently rejoined his old Wall Street law firm, Covington & Burling, in Washington as a partner focused on litigation, complex investigations and regulatory matters.Mr. Holder does not give many interviews. He declined Gretchen Morgenson’s request last week to discuss his logic for not prosecuting the giant British bank HSBC for money laundering, despite the recommendations of his staff to do so. But in late May, Mr. Holder sat down with David Axelrod, who was the chief strategist for Barack Obama’s two presidential campaigns, for an hourlong conversation on Mr. Axelrod’s “The Axe Files” podcast. Toward the end of the conversation, Mr. Axelrod, a friendly interviewer for sure, asked Mr. Holder about the elephant in the room: Why were so few Wall Street bankers, traders and executives held accountable for the 2008 financial crisis, compared to the many individuals who were sent to jail for their roles in the savings-and-loan crisis of the 1980s?Advertisement“There is a fundamental question people have to ask themselves,” Mr. Holder responded. “Do you actually think that if we could have brought these cases, we would not have?” That’s the party line, of course.AdvertisementHe then added that Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in the Southern District of New York, and Loretta Lynch, Mr. Holder’s successor as attorney general and a former federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, would have brought cases against Wall Street if they could have. They didn’t, he said, because “we have a responsibility in the Justice Department to only bring those cases where we think we have a better than 50 percent chance of winning, and if you look at the different ways in which decision-making was made in these financial institutions, we simply didn’t have the ability to point to specific individuals to say that person was responsible for this specific action. We simply did not have the proof. If we could have made these cases, we certainly would have brought them.” He said that he, too, was “frustrated” by the lack of prosecutions of individual wrongdoing, but he did seem to take pride in the “record-breaking” amount of money collected from the banks in the form of civil penalties.But forcing big banks to hand over their shareholders’ money in exchange for burying forever the evidence of wrongdoing is not nearly the same as holding people accountable for their behavior.Leaving aside for the moment the long list of Wall Street whistle-blowers — among them Richard M. Bowen III at Citigroup, Alayne Fleischmann at JPMorgan Chase, Michael Winston at Countrywide Financial and Peter Sivere at Barclays Capital — who tried to interest law enforcement officials in what they had witnessed at their companies (instead, each of them was fired), there may be another reason the Justice Department has proved to be less than vigilant in its sworn duty to prosecute Wall Street wrongdoing. It has more to do with legal arcana than with a supposed lack of evidence: The Justice Department was afraid that it was misapplying the law — the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989, known as Firrea — used to force Wall Street into financial settlements.That law gives the government wide latitude to bring civil fraud cases against federally insured depository institutions and has lower burdens of proof than those found in criminal business fraud statutes. Importantly, it also has a 10-year statute of limitations, allowing the government more time to bring a case, or to threaten to bring a case. And since the investigations into Wall Street wrongdoing got such a late start — they really got going in 2012, about four years after the start of the crisis — the 10-year statute of limitations proved to be an effective weapon to get the big banks to settle. Bank after bank capitulated.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But one bank tried to fight, arguing in part that the law had been misapplied. In October 2013, a jury found that Countrywide Financial, by then a subsidiary of Bank of America, had sold about 17,000 shoddy mortgages in 2008 to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under a short-lived program known colloquially as the “hustle.” In July 2014, after the jury’s decision, federal Judge Jed Rakoff imposed a $1.27 billion penalty on Bank of America.“While the process lasted only nine months,” Judge Rakoff wrote in his decision, “it was from start to finish the vehicle for a brazen fraud by the defendants, driven by a hunger for profits and oblivious to the harms thereby visited, not just on the immediate victims but also on the financial system as a whole.”Bank of America appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The bank argued that Judge Rakoff — long known for his tough stance against big Wall Street banks — was unfairly biased against it, that it was unable to present “a meaningful defense” and that “from beginning to end, what took place in this case was not only unfair, but utterly unprecedented.” In a brief filed in support of Bank of America, lawyers at WilmerHale, on behalf of four powerful organizations — the Clearing House Association, American Bankers Association, Financial Services Roundtable and Chamber of Commerce of the United States — argued instead that the very use of Firrea to go after Bank of America in the “hustle” case was the problem because that law was intended to protect a bank from the harm of others, not from itself.The appeal was the first of a case that relied upon Firrea, so the Second Circuit’s ruling was watched carefully. If it were overturned, that could mean the end of using Firrea as a cudgel to get banks to pay in the remaining 175 or so civil lawsuits still pending against Wall Street.AdvertisementOn May 23, the Second Circuit threw out the verdict against Bank of America and vacated the penalty against it. In its opinion, the court decided not to address the specific issue of the use of Firrea against Bank of America because the bank had “persuaded” the court that the government had not proved that Bank of America violated the law in the first place.But that the Second Circuit reversed the decision deeply troubles Mr. Bowen, the Citigroup whistle-blower, who was fired from his Wall Street job after alerting his bosses to wrongdoing at the bank and whose pleas for justice have continued to go unheeded.“Bottom line,” he wrote me in an email from Dallas, where he is a senior lecturer in accounting at the University of Texas campus there, “the D.O.J. could not stand the embarrassment of pursuing prosecutions, only to then have the courts throw out those convictions because the D.O.J. had no legal grounds to pursue them under Firrea. That would be the ultimate proof of the D.O.J.’s incompetence and the reason they have not pursued prosecutions despite the evidence.”The mystery continues.William D. Cohan is a former senior mergers and acquisitions banker who has written three books about Wall Street. His latest book is “The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »