By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJAN. 20, 2016
Most Walmart Stores’ employees in the United States will get pay raises — to an average of $13.38 for full-time workers — as part of the company’s previously announced commitment to invest in its work force as it faces pressure from labor-backed groups and seeks to retain workers in a tighter labor force.Walmart said on Wednesday that more than 1.2 million hourly workers would get wage increases on Feb. 20. The company, which is the largest private employer in the United States with 1.4 million total workers, also said it would provide free, basic short-term disability programs to full-time hourly workers. It will also start allowing workers to accrue paid time off as they earn it.Once the new pay raise takes effect, the average full-time hourly wage at Walmart stores will be $13.38, up from $13. For part-time workers, the hourly wage will be $10.58, up from $10. Last year, before the changes, the average full-time hourly wage was $12.85 and $9.48 for part time. Walmart declined to provide the average hourly wages for Sam’s Club workers.The new wages at Walmart stores are still below the $14.95 average that, according to government data, hourly retail workers earn. That includes workers at auto dealers and other outlets that would most likely pay more than discounters like Walmart. But Walmart’s entry level pay is above the $9.26 average hourly pay for cashiers and low-level retail sales staff, according to a Hay Group survey.The moves are the biggest changes Walmart has made in its efforts to offer better wages and benefits to its workers.The company first announced its wage commitment last February, when it said it would raise base employee wages for 500,000 workers to $9 an hour, with plans to raise that to $10 an hour in February 2016.A version of this article appears in print on January 21, 2016, on Page B9 of the New York edition with the headline: Walmart to Give Pay Raises Next Month.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.