By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONJAN. 20, 2016
DAVOS, Switzerland — At the World Economic Forum here, heads of state, billionaire investors and corporate chiefs meet to discuss the state of politics and regulation, and tackle the biggest challenges facing societies globally. This year, they are sending warning signals about the state of the markets.But ask some of the men and women at Davos whether the forum itself is a pulse on what’s happening around the globe, and they will tell you something different.“This is a great rearview mirror place,” said William F. Browder, at one time the largest foreign investor in the Russian stock market, and the founder of Hermitage Capital Management. “It’s a contrary indicator of what’s going on in the world,” Mr. Browder said, adding that no one last year predicted the collapse of commodity prices or the stock market rout that started in China and ricocheted across the globe.Mr. Browder, who said he had been coming to Davos for 19 years, added that nobody who attends ever predicts any important event.AdvertisementBut to look forward or backward is not really why the Davos man (and the occasional Davos woman) comes each year. Rather, it is to network. And to mingle with the rest of the ultrarich and influential.AdvertisementBillionaire investors like Ray Dalio and Paul E. Singer, and chief executives like James P. Gorman and Martin Sorrell, were swarmed by people seeking a few words with them, if even for just a minute, at the Congress Center in downtown Davos on Wednesday where most of the annual meeting takes place.“I’m in Davos,” one man declared when he answered his phone. Another man could be overheard telling his companion loudly, “I’m going to a dinner, and Chuck Hagel is speaking.” He added, “It’s not often you hear someone like him speak.”The endless lines for security checks and the bodyguards and police who walk the halls help to give the event — and those who attend — a sense of importance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Davos provides a stardust effect of sorts. Participants talk favorably about that “Davos moment” — as if describing a scene in a movie — when they have a meaningful conversation with someone famous they did not already know.For Anthony Scaramucci, who runs the investment firm SkyBridge Capital, that standout moment happened Wednesday morning, even though he has attended the forum more than a handful of times, he said. He found himself standing with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.Mr. Scaramucci told Mr. Biden that the two share a hometown: Scranton, Pa.“He says: ‘Anthony, give me your phone, I’m calling your mom,’ ” Mr. Scaramucci recalled. It was 3 a.m. in Scranton when Mr. Biden first suggested calling Mr. Scaramucci’s mother. About two and a half hours later, Mr. Scaramucci yielded, handing the phone to Mr. Biden, he said.Mr. Biden talked for so long that “the handlers are trying to push him to get going, and he’s like, ‘back off,’ ” Mr. Scaramucci added.For some, Davos fatigue has crept in around the edges. When asked why he still attended despite concerns about whether the discussions at the forum were still relevant, one person, an investor who declined to be identified, chalked it up to a “bad habit.”Yet he quickly added that the forum afforded him the opportunity to meet with a concentrated collection of high-powered contacts in one place, outside of their comfort zones.Michael de la Merced contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »