By GREGORY SCHMIDTAPRIL 3, 2016
The Powerpuff Girls have battled a rogue’s gallery of evil lab monkeys, hillbilly monsters and androgynous devils. But for the first time, they face a new challenge: a fight for relevancy.Eleven years after their television series ended, the Powerpuff Girls — Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup — are returning to Cartoon Network on Monday. But as children are increasingly moving away from watching television, the network has a new plan to reach them on many platforms, including publishing, digital and licensed products.This broader approach is part of an effort to create a wider world for fans, said Christina Miller, the president and general manager of Cartoon Network, which is owned by Turner Broadcasting System, a unit of Time Warner.“It’s not one dimension or one platform,” she said. “It’s about bringing an experience to life in multiple ways.”AdvertisementThe landscape has changed since the first Powerpuff Girls series began in 1998, when TV was the focus and brand extensions came later. “There was too much linear thinking in the past, with less planning and more reaction,” Ms. Miller said. Now, the Powerpuff Girls will have a slow rollout and pop up in a variety of places — in a runway show, for instance, and on mobile devices.Advertisement“The last time, we launched a show,” Ms. Miller said. “This time, we are launching a franchise.”She says the strategy has evolved because viewers are seeking more engagement. “The difference between a fan and an audience is that fans want to do other things: play games, buy products and participate on social media,” she said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This time, the digital world will play a bigger role for the Powerpuff Girls, including appearances on the Cartoon Network Anything app, a network with 15-second videos, quick games and other bite-size activities. Even though only micro content is offered on the app, the average use time is 10 minutes, Ms. Miller said.The digital approach is being used for other Cartoon Network properties, including “OK K.O.! Lakewood Plaza Turbo,” which made its debut as a mobile game and was later opened up to hackers at Game Jam, a gathering of artists and developers. The network is also pushing into virtual reality with its “Adventure Time” series.The network’s rethinking of its properties involves collaboration with content creators and licensing partners like Lego and Spin Master, Ms. Miller said.Ronnen Harary, a co-founder and co-chief executive of the toy company Spin Master, praised the openness of Cartoon Network’s approach.“The transparency today is excellent, much better than in the past,” Mr. Harary said. “Toy companies are not an afterthought. We are listened to, and they value our thoughts.”A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Cartoon Network’s Powerpuff Girls Fight for Relevancy Beyond TV.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.