By EMILY STEELMAY 21, 2016
The fight for control over Sumner M. Redstone’s $40 billion media empire has escalated significantly.In an unexpected development, Mr. Redstone on Friday removed Philippe P. Dauman, the chief executive of Viacom, from the trust that will control his companies after he dies or is declared incompetent. Mr. Redstone also removed George Abrams, a longtime director at Viacom.Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams were also removed from the board of National Amusements, the private theater chain company through which Mr. Redstone, 92 and in frail health, controls his media empire.Early Saturday morning, Mr. Redstone confirmed the news through a statement from Michael C. Tu, a partner at the law firm Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe.Advertisement“Sumner Redstone took decisive and lawful action today which he firmly believes is in the best interests of Viacom Inc. and its stockholders when he removed Philippe Dauman and George Abrams as trustees of his trust and directors of National Amusements Inc.,” Mr. Tu said in the statement. “Mr. Redstone acted after he expressed his concerns regarding Viacom’s performance to Messrs. Abrams and Dauman, both Viacom directors, and received no response from them.”AdvertisementIn his own statement, Mr. Dauman called the moves “shameful” and “illegal,” and said that Mr. Redstone was not capable of making the decision to remove him.It is not clear how Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams will respond, but the next stage of the battle is likely to involve a renewed fight over the competency of Mr. Redstone.Mr. Dauman formed a close bond with Mr. Redstone decades ago when he was a young corporate lawyer. Mr. Abrams, a Boston lawyer and longtime Viacom director, was seen as an ally of Mr. Dauman’s among the trust’s seven voting members.The trust wields enormous power over the future of Viacom and CBS. Similar to an activist shareholder, it could vote to maintain the status quo at the two companies but also could oust their leadership teams or sell the companies.The development puts in jeopardy Mr. Dauman’s position as chief executive of Viacom and is viewed as a major coup by Shari E. Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, who is the vice chairwoman of Viacom and CBS as well as a member of the trust. Long ostracized by her father, Ms. Redstone has said recently that the two have patched up their relationship.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Redstone does not to see eye-to-eye with Mr. Dauman or approve of his stewardship of Viacom, which has suffered a 40 percent plunge in the stock price in the last year. In February, Ms. Redstone voted against Mr. Dauman’s ascent to the chairman position of Viacom.Shortly after news of Mr. Redstone’s decision emerged — first reported by Fortune — Mr. Dauman issued a statement of denunciation.“They are a shameful effort by Shari Redstone to seize control by unlawfully using her ailing father Sumner Redstone’s name and signature,” Lex Suvanto, a spokesman for Mr. Dauman, said in a statement.Advertisement“As she knows, and as court proceedings and other facts have demonstrated, Sumner Redstone now lacks the capacity to have taken these steps,” Mr. Suvanto said. “Sumner Redstone would never have summarily dismissed Philippe Dauman and George Abrams, his trusted friends and advisers for decades.”In the statement on behalf of Mr. Redstone, Mr. Tu said: “The public statement made on Mr. Dauman’s behalf attacking Mr. Redstone’s capacity is disappointing and incorrect, as reflected by Mr. Dauman’s own testimony given under oath less than six months ago that Mr. Redstone is as ‘engaged, attentive and as opinionated as ever.’ That is exactly the Sumner Redstone who made these decisions today.”Ms. Redstone could not be reached for comment.The development comes a little more than a week after a trial over his mental competency was dismissed in a California court. The judge overseeing the case sided with Mr. Redstone, but made clear that he had not made a decision about whether or not Mr. Redstone was mentally competent. The judge said that a videotaped testimony of the media mogul showed that it was “not in dispute that Redstone suffers from either mild or moderate dementia.”As part of that trial, Mr. Dauman submitted a declaration that Mr. Redstone was “engaged and attentive” during meetings last fall.Earlier this week, the board of Viacom moved to stop paying Mr. Redstone following the dismissal of the suit, a monthslong  salacious legal battle that included embarrassing details about Mr. Redstone. Mr. Redstone has suffered minor strokes and has a severe speech impediment.It is not clear whether other people were named to replace Mr. Dauman and Mr. Abrams on the trust.Other trustees include Ms. Redstone’s adult son Tyler Korff and Leonard L. Lewin, the divorce lawyer for Shari’s mother, Mr. Redstone’s wife of 52 years. Also on the trust are David R. Andelman, a CBS director, and Norman I. Jacobs, a lawyer who has represented Mr. Redstone.A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Redstone Removes Viacom Chief From Trust and Parent Board.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.