
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

NOV. 7, 2016
One of the vexing issues in white-collar crime is figuring out the appropriate sentence for someone who usually has an otherwise spotless record and poses no physical threat to the community. Recent cases show how hard it is to determine a just punishment for defendants who have so much going for them yet engaged in criminal conduct.Andrew Caspersen, sentenced last Friday to four years in prison, seemed like the epitome of a success story. Described by a headline in The New York Times as a Wall Street scion, he came from a wealthy family and, armed with an Ivy League education, held a position at the private equity firm Park Hill Group that put him near the upper reaches of financial power.Then he threw it all away by bilking family and friends out of more than $38 million — and was seeking more when he was arrested in March — to finance wildly speculative options trades that ultimately failed. At the sentencing hearing, Mr. Caspersen’s lawyer portrayed the fraud as the product of a gambling addiction that drove his client to keep betting more and more on the market until he was broke.Unlike those who commit street crimes, white-collar offenders are much more likely to be members of the middle class, and possibly even among the economic elite like Mr. Caspersen. They have the resources to present a sympathetic picture of their life while claiming that violations of the law were just aberrations from an otherwise exemplary life.AdvertisementThese offenders can often serve up a variety of reasons to explain, and perhaps diminish, their violations. Thus, Mr. Caspersen claimed that his gambling addiction fueled the trading that led to the fraud, not ordinary greed that would make it palatable to impose a harsher sentence.AdvertisementIn federal fraud cases, the sentencing guidelines are the starting point for determining the appropriate punishment. They put great weight on the amount of the loss caused by a defendant, or the intended gain from the misconduct. This can lead to sentences of a decade or more.For example, insider trading convictions led to prison terms of 11 years for the former hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam and 12 years for the former lawyer Matthew Kluger for crimes that had little direct impact on investors but led to outsize gains for the defendants and those who traded on their information.Jed S. Rakoff, the judge for the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York who sentenced Mr. Caspersen, has been a frequent critic of the numerical focus of the sentencing guidelines, once calling for them to be scrapped in a speech to white-collar defense lawyers. He described the Justice Department’s recommendation of a sentence of more than 15 years for Mr. Caspersen based on the amount he took from investors as “absurd” because of the overemphasis on numerical calculations that ignore the factors leading to criminal conduct.Federal judges are not bound to follow the guidelines, and often vary from them, especially in white-collar cases in which defendants can present a number of reasons they are not the typical offender who should receive a prison term.The issue is what excuses are appropriate for a judge to consider in determining the right punishment for the crime. Figuring out the appropriate sentence requires consideration of multiple competing interests, not the least of which is the message sent to the general public about how this type of criminal should be treated.In Mr. Caspersen’s case, Judge Rakoff agreed that he was afflicted with an addiction to gambling, but said it was just one factor in the sentence because “it was a fraud that involved the deception of people who had a lot of faith in the defendant.” By giving a four-year prison term, the judge took a position somewhere in between what the government wanted and the defense was hoping for — a common occurrence.A sentencing scheduled for Wednesday before Judge Rakoff will present another issue that arises frequently in white-collar sentencing: How much should the loss of prestige and income by the white-collar offender be a factor in mitigating a sentence?AdvertisementPaul Thompson pleaded guilty to helping manipulate the London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor, while he was a trader at Rabobank, working with other defendants to push the rate to help the bank’s positions.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In a memorandum submitted to Judge Rakoff, his lawyer pointed to the impact of his conviction, that he “has lost his job, his career, his reputation, and, despite decades of sacrifice and hard work, he is unlikely to work in his chosen profession ever again.” In asking for probation, the lawyer argued that manipulating Libor submissions “was widespread, condoned and well-known throughout the industry,” so that the punishment he “has already suffered has been harsh.”The Justice Department appears torn by what is an appropriate sentence in a case like this in which the financial harm is difficult to measure. It recommended that he receive at least a year in prison, yet told Judge Rakoff that “beyond his participation in the scheme at hand, however, all available evidence suggests that Mr. Thompson is fundamentally a decent person.” Should that kind of person be required to spend time in a federal prison?Convictions always have an impact on both defendants and their families, whether it be a white-collar case or a street crime. Judges are fearful of imposing a light sentence on those who look more like them because it would foster the perception that offenders with greater wealth and social standing can expect better treatment in the criminal justice system. So the argument that a defendant has already paid a price for a violation rarely gains much traction.What judges really want to hear is an expression of contrition, word that the defendant is sorry for any harm caused while promising never to engage in such misconduct again. For those who plead guilty, like Mr. Caspersen and Mr. Thompson, the acknowledgment of guilt puts them in a much better position with the court because they can avoid the perception of trying to get away with something or planning the next crime.Bridget Anne Kelly and Bill Baroni, former aides to Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey who were convicted last Friday for their role in shutting access lanes to the George Washington Bridge as political payback for a New Jersey mayor who did not endorse the governor’s re-election effort in 2013, are in a difficult position when their sentencing occurs next year. By testifying that they did nothing wrong and continuing to proclaim their innocence, they are now locked into a position that prevents them from acknowledging that their conduct was illegal and asking for leniency.Under the sentencing guidelines, the two defendants could easily face a recommended prison term of more than four years for the corruption charges. Prosecutors may ask the court to find they committed perjury by testifying that they were unaware of any scheme to engage in misconduct on behalf of the governor, which could push the potential punishment even higher.They have suffered the same loss of their career and social status as Mr. Caspersen and Mr. Thompson, but by going to trial, any claim they might make that they have “suffered enough already” is likely to fall on deaf ears.Sentencing is certainly an art, not a science, despite the attempt at precision in the loss calculations in the sentencing guidelines. Judges are left with making a decision based on what they see in the defendant in front of them, in the hope that the punishment will be perceived as fair. Like it or not, that is the system we have, even if it leaves the public unsatisfied with a penalty that can be considered too lenient — or too harsh.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »