NOV. 6, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.51 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.25 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementPasadena, Calif., Water and Power Department, $122.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementSequoia Union High School District, Calif., $120 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Dublin Unified School District, Calif., $60 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Blount County, Tenn., $126 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Bristol, Tenn., Industrial Development Board, $122 million of Pinnacle Project sales tax revenue and sales tax capital appreciation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Chesapeake Bay Bridge and Tunnel District, Va., $348 million of first-tier general resolution revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Cook County, Ill., Community High School District No. 228, $50 million of general obligation limited tax debt certificates. Mesirow Financial.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $56.2 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Mississippi, $226.6 million of general obligation bonds. Morgan Stanley.Montgomery County, Tex., $141.4 million of unlimited tax road bonds and limited tax refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementNew Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $137 million of Higher Education Capital Improvement Fund revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Sacramento Area Flood Control Agency, Calif., $220 million of Consolidated Capital Assessment District No. 2 assessment revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Virginia Port Authority, $129.4 million of port facilities taxable revenue refinancing bonds series 2016A. Morgan Stanley.Virginia Port Authority, $99 million of port facilities revenue refinancing bonds series 2016B. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.A version of this schedule appears in print on November 7, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.