By ELINOR COMLAYOCT. 3, 2016
Financing commercial property has been local banks’ bread-and-butter business for years, but a postcrisis push for loan growth prompted regulatory warnings about lax lending standards, and small banks are now shying away from the market.A shakeout in commercial real estate is under way as some banks unwind or sell off the loans that are under regulators’ microscopes, and bankers say they are wary of making new loans.Brokers say they are finding fewer lenders for some commercial property deals. Aaron Appel at Jones Lang LaSalle in New York said there was less competition for $5 million to $10 million commercial property deals, particularly loans that involve construction or redevelopment projects, which are considered riskier because they are not properties that are generating income.Commercial property brokers have been working more with institutional investors like private equity and pension funds partly as a result of some banks taking a step back, Mr. Appel and others said. And foreign banks have stepped in on some of the deals.AdvertisementThe lending chill comes as regulators have been warning banks about being overly aggressive in commercial real estate lending. A joint bulletin in December notified the industry that “during 2016, supervisors from the banking agencies will continue to pay special attention to potential risks associated with CRE lending.”AdvertisementAs a result, bankers say they are sticking to business closer to home and finding growth by acquiring other small banks.Joseph J. Lebel III, chief lending officer of OceanFirst Bank in Toms River, N.J., has reviewed some of the commercial loans that other banks have put up for sale recently but decided not to buy any because they have weak loan terms and other features that point to aggressive underwriting.OceanFirst, with $4.2 billion in assets, is being more selective about its lending and focusing on smaller deals, Mr. Lebel said. The bank has the capacity to make $10 million to $20 million commercial loans, but it does not want to aggressively compete for those loans, he said. Instead, the bank recently acquired another Jersey Shore bank, Ocean City Home Bank, for about $146 million.“My market is a market that I can drive to my customer and my customer can drive to me,” Mr. Lebel said. “It’s relationship-based lending where they know us, we know them, we’ve been in their offices, they’ve been in our branches and you build a little bit more than a transactional-based relationship.”This year, Frank Sorrentino III, a builder and developer turned banker, was hearing from former peers that his bank’s rates were too high. They said his company, ConnectOne Bancorp, a $4 billion bank in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was out of step in the competition for deals to finance apartment complexes and other commercial buildings in northern New Jersey. Mr. Sorrentino, who helped found ConnectOne a decade ago, said regulatory scrutiny on lending had led to fewer banks making commercial real estate loans on the New Jersey side of the New York metropolitan area.Mr. Sorrentino estimated that about two-thirds of ConnectOne’s remaining competitors — the banks that are not under a regulatory agreement or have not yet sold themselves — have been “hobbled.” “They’re being more cautious,” he said.The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have warned banks away from using more than 300 percent of a minimum capital standard for commercial real estate loans. For regional and local banks, that can be a low limit, because commercial property loans are among the largest loans they make, explained Dennis S. Hudson III, chief executive of Seacoast Bank, a lender in Stuart, Fla., with $4.4 billion in assets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Seacoast has been focusing on deals under $8 million. “Here in Florida, we’ve been through downturns in the past, and we know that if you have too much exposure in commercial real estate, you can have higher risk, so we’ve intentionally stayed away from it,” said Mr. Hudson, the third member of his family to run Seacoast.AdvertisementBigger American banks have also been drawing back from taking on large commercial property loans because they can no longer count on being able to sell some of the credit to investors through syndication. In the past, bigger banks might make a $500 million loan and sell $25 million chunks of it to smaller banks; but now, those smaller lenders are bumping up against regulators’ limits for commercial real estate loans.“That market has kind of filled up on the domestic front, so they’re going internationally to find those lenders,” said Michael Gigliotti, senior managing director and a broker at the real estate financing firm HFF in New York. Federal Reserve data shows that the American offices of foreign banks have increased their commercial mortgage holdings 56 percent in the last year to $51.8 billion. The Shops at Hudson Yards project in New York, Mr. Gigliotti noted, was financed entirely by foreign banks, among them Deutsche Bank, Bank of China, Crédit Agricole, Commercial Bank of China and Bank of Nova Scotia.For local banks, regulators’ pushback over commercial property loans means another squeeze on growth and profitability that is likely to lead to further thinning of bank numbers, said Collyn Gilbert, an analyst at Keefe Bruyette & Woods. “Commercial real estate has been such the lifeline for community banks for decades upon decades,” Ms. Gilbert said. “If we are seeing a shift in that, then where are these banks going to go for growth?”There were 6,122 banks in the United States in the second quarter, and at the current pace of consolidation, it should dip below 6,000 this quarter, as banks like New Jersey’s OceanFirst try to expand their business without increasing their risk.Its purchase of the 11-branch Ocean City Home Bank adds another conservative lender and a longtime local fixture. Analysts said it was hard for smaller banks like Ocean City Home Bank to resist selling out in this environment. “I think the smarter bankers know that the outlook is only going to get tougher and tougher,” Ms. Gilbert said.Ocean City Home Bank, like others, had tried to expand to spread out its increasing compliance costs.“There were really no other banks in our area that we could acquire,” said Steven E. Brady, the bank’s chief executive, adding that compliance expenses at Ocean City Home Bank have gone up 50 percent because of the Dodd-Frank Act. When two other banks approached Ocean City Home Bank, Mr. Brady saw an opportunity. “We had the same rules and regulations as Chase, but we didn’t have the scale to do it.”A version of this article appears in print on October 4, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Property Loan Scrutiny Puts Chill on Local Banks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.