By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 12, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — When Elon Musk proposed a very-high-speed train from San Francisco to Los Angeles, many analysts and observers regarded the idea as ludicrous. Shervin Pishevar and Brogan BamBrogan thought otherwise and began building a company to prove the naysayers wrong.Now that start-up, Hyperloop One, is mired in legal infighting between the two men and other former senior executives as accusations of nepotism and threats of physical harm rise.Mr. BamBrogan and three other former executives sued the company on Tuesday, claiming that they were harassed and wrongfully fired by Mr. Pishevar and other senior Hyperloop One managers.The lawsuit claims breach of contract, defamation, unlawful infliction of emotional distress and assault. Mr. BamBrogan accuses Mr. Pishevar’s brother, Afshin, Hyperloop One’s former chief legal officer and formerly a personal injury lawyer, of placing a noose on his office chair while the two worked there.AdvertisementLast month, Mr. BamBrogan sought a restraining order against Afshin Pishevar.The former executives’ lawsuit, filed in California Superior Court in Los Angeles, paints a picture of disarray and nepotism at what was one of the most aspirational start-ups around. Its mission centers on building a high-speed train that can shuttle people or cargo in minutes rather than hours. Mr. Musk came up with the idea of a high-speed train, but is not associated with Hyperloop One.AdvertisementIn May, Hyperloop One announced a new $80 million investment round from current and new investors, including GE Ventures. Russia’s President Vladimir Putin also reportedly likes the concept.“Hyperloop is not a party trick,” the plaintiffs write in the lawsuit. “It is a serious concept that deserves serious development.”Orin Snyder, a lawyer representing Hyperloop One, said in an emailed statement: “Today’s lawsuit brought by former employees of Hyperloop One is unfortunate and delusional. These employees tried to stage a coup and failed. They knew that the company was aware of their actions, and today’s lawsuit is their pre-emptive strike. The claims are pure nonsense and will be met with a swift and potent legal response.”Despite skeptics, Hyperloop One was promising enough to draw a number of prominent executives in technology. Perhaps the most prominent example was Mr. Pishevar, a refugee from Iran who began life in America as a cabdriver, eventually becoming a venture capitalist who invested in the likes of Uber and Warby Parker. He is also a prominent Silicon Valley backer of both President Obama and Hillary Clinton.And Mr. BamBrogan was a senior engineer at Mr. Musk’s SpaceX rocket company.A Hyperloop One director and a defendant in the case, Joe Lonsdale, is also a well-known venture capitalist who helped found the data analysis firm Palantir.But according to the lawsuit, Hyperloop One was run as the personal fief of Shervin Pishevar and Mr. Lonsdale, who together control 78 percent of its voting rights. The two men rarely spent time at the start-up except, the court filing claims, to give tours of the place to friends, celebrities and even a nightclub doorman.Mr. BamBrogan and his fellow plaintiffs — Knut Sauer, formerly Hyperloop One’s vice president for business development; David Pendergast, former assistant general counsel; and William Mulholland, former vice president for finance — accuse Mr. Pishevar and Mr. Lonsdale of unfair favoritism toward relatives and associates.AdvertisementMr. Pishevar, according to the lawsuit, once pressured a prospective investor into investing in his Sherpa Capital venture fund in order to invest in Hyperloop One.The suit describes an atmosphere of waste. Once Mr. Pishevar began dating Hyperloop One’s public relations consultant, it says, he nearly tripled her monthly retainer to $40,000 from $15,000, more than any other employee in the company — only to dismiss her after their engagement was later broken off.The plaintiffs also accused Mr. Lonsdale of forcing Hyperloop One to retain his younger brother’s financial firm as an exclusive adviser, when better investment banks were available.But the main trouble for the plaintiffs arose after they wrote a letter to Mr. Pishevar, Mr. Lonsdale and the company’s chief executive, Robert Lloyd, on May 26, expressing their concerns.Soon after, according to the lawsuit, Mr. Pishevar’s brother, Afshin, left “a hangman’s noose” on Mr. BamBrogan’s chair. The complaint includes a still image from security camera video that, the lawsuit contends, depicts the act.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Later, Mr. Lloyd told those who signed the letter that the company planned to fire Mr. Pendergast and Mr. Mulholland and demote Mr. BamBrogan. The lawsuit says Mr. BamBrogan, fearing for “his physical safety,” subsequently resigned, as did Mr. Mulholland, Dr. Sauer and Josh Giegel, a senior engineer.Mr. Pendergast was fired outright, the lawsuit states.On June 16, Mr. Lloyd told Hyperloop One employees that Mr. Giegel was joining the board — though Mr. Giegel, according to the lawsuit, was sending in his resignation. Mr. Giegel ultimately ended up staying and was given the title of co-founder.And Mr. Lonsdale, according to the lawsuit, sent an email to Hyperloop One’s board and the company’s engineering team describing Mr. BamBrogan as “unstable” and having “gone haywire.”On Hyperloop One’s website as of Tuesday morning, before the lawsuit was filed, Mr. BamBrogan and Mr. Mulholland were still listed as team members. By Tuesday afternoon, the men’s names had been removed from the site.Afshin Pishevar’s LinkedIn profile still describes him as chief legal officer, though Hyperloop One’s website does not.A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Hyperloop One Founder Sues the Start-Up He Left.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.