AdvertisementSupported byBy Tim GrayCraigh A. Cepukenas, lead portfolio manager of the Artisan Small Cap fund, likens his approach to farming. First, he said, he and his colleagues on Artisan’s growth team identify promising companies and place them in their “garden,” with a holding equal to 0.5 percent to 1 percent of the fund’s assets. Starting small minimizes mistakes, he said.If the company’s profit starts to grow as expected, they increase the stake to a “crop” position. The crops are 30 to 35 stocks that account for 70 percent to 75 percent of the fund’s assets, he said. They are typically about 3 percent of assets each. Once the company’s growth falters or the managers find something they like better, they “harvest” by selling. “A careful capital allocation strategy is our risk control.”The Artisan managers are patient with their plantings. The LKQ Corporation, for example, has been a holding since 2004, Mr. Cepukenas said. The company distributes auto parts to body shops, especially parts recycled from wrecked cars throughout North America. “Recently, they’ve made acquisitions in Europe and are replicating the model abroad,” he said.Another longer-term bet is Guidewire Software, which serves the property and casualty insurance industry. Many of these insurers rely on aging, custom-built software, Mr. Cepukenas said. “There’s a lot of pressure on them to make their systems more efficient — consumers are demanding better access via the internet and mobile,” he said. Guidewire’s software replaces the old systems. “It’s a huge addressable market.”The institutional shares of the Artisan fund, with an expense ratio of 1.02 percent, returned 8.85 percent in the second quarter, compared with 2.46 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.A cooperative approach prevails, too, at Federated Investors, where the growth team put two funds — Federated Kaufmann and Federated Kaufmann Small Cap — among the quarter’s top performers. (The first fund focuses on midcap stocks.)“It’s the same investment process for each, and we can have some overlap of the holdings, ” said Tom M. Brakel, a senior portfolio manager.Each member of the team has a sector specialty and decides which stocks in that field the funds will own. Mr. Brakel, who trained as a physician in his native Netherlands, oversees pharmaceuticals and biotechnology. He said he continues to find promising prospects, even though the broader business headlines, such as those about Britain’s departure from the European Union, can overshadow good news in his sector.“With the macronoise about ‘Brexit’ and the U.S. elections, we forget that we’re in the middle of a golden age of drug innovation,” he said. “It’s driven by new science — personalized medicine and the human genome.”Consider Genmab, a Danish company developing drugs for cancer and other illnesses. It was among Federated Kaufmann’s top 10 holdings on May 31, the most recent data available. Mr. Brakel said its treatment for multiple myeloma, a bone marrow cancer, received early approval from the Food and Drug Administration. “At the recent annual meeting of the oncologists, people were talking about it having unprecedented efficacy,” he said.A tenet of the growth team’s approach is that they should visit as many companies as possible, Mr. Brakel said. “When you ask questions of management, one on one, you get an immediate sense of whether they know what they’re talking about and whether they really know their sector,” he said. “You can’t pick that up from a press release or a PowerPoint presentation. You pick it up when you’re sitting opposite a C.E.O.”The visits help the eight portfolio managers develop broad networks of contacts in their industries that can lead them to investments.Such knowledge helped Federated Kaufmann decide to invest in Tesaro, a Waltham, Mass., biotech company. Leon O. Moulder, the chief executive, “is a serial entrepreneur,” and the company has reported promising data recently on its ovarian cancer therapy, Mr. Brakel said.The A shares of Federated Kaufmann, with an expense ratio of 1.95 percent, returned 7.5 percent in the second quarter, while the institutional shares of Federated Kaufmann Small Cap, with an expense ratio of 1.5 percent, returned 7.81 percent.Compared with the managers of the Artisan and Federated Kaufmann funds, John P. Bichelmeyer, manager of the Ivy Micro Cap Growth fund, is an outlier. He is a solo skipper and seeks investments among the smallest of the small, the so-called microcaps.Mr. Bichelmeyer took over his fund a year ago and has rejiggered it. He has halved its number of holdings, from about 100 to 50. “The average position size has gone up, so now you’ve got a portfolio where every name can make a difference,” he said.As he concentrated the portfolio, Mr. Bichelmeyer also reduced the number of pharmaceutical, semiconductor and information technology hardware companies while adding those that concentrate on software and information technology services. He said he especially likes software-as-a-service companies, such as SPS Commerce, which has prospered as retail distribution has grown more complex.“If you want to be a supplier to Walmart or another large retailer, they’re going to send you a huge rule book you have to follow,” he said. “Establishing and maintaining compliance with these rules isn’t easy. SPS Commerce’s online software codifies each retailer’s rule book, which allows suppliers to keep up with the constant changes.”One of the benefits of investing in the smallest software-as-a-service companies is that they can exploit niches that are initially too tiny to make much difference for a Microsoft or Oracle, Mr. Bichelmeyer said. “In a growth-starved world, these companies offer very attractive long-term growth rates,” he said.The Ivy fund, with an expense ratio of 1.69 percent, returned 11.14 percent in the second quarter.Advertisement