
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

MARCH 3, 2016
The Ambac Financial Group is getting the right pressure but from the wrong place.Ambac, a United States bond insurer that spent three years in bankruptcy as a result of the financial crisis, is under threat of a proxy fight from the hedge fund Canyon Capital Advisors. Canyon wants Ambac to hasten settlement proceedings on $4 billion of claims originating from unstable mortgage debt bundles and other instruments. The trouble is that the hedge fund has a position on both sides of the trade.Canyon is run by Joshua S. Friedman, an alumnus of Drexel Burnham Lambert and Goldman Sachs, who owns about a 4.5 percent stake in Ambac. It also has “built a significant economic interest in” the claims under dispute, according to a report this week by Reuters, citing unnamed sources.The logic of Ambac buying up as many claims as possible makes sense. It will reduce interest costs and the financial guarantor ought to be able to pay less than the face value it would require if it waited for them to mature. Even Ambac seems to accept that it’s a good idea. It bought $635 million worth last year.As the company argues, though, snapping up too many of them too quickly could hinder Ambac’s ability to meet other liabilities. These include debt issued by the city of Chicago and Puerto Rico, both of which are under significant duress.That ought to be of concern to Ambac shareholders. The outstanding $4 billion of claims dwarf Ambac’s $700 million market value. Canyon also hasn’t disclosed how big a stake it has in the troubled assets. A couple of other investors share similar views to Canyon, Reuters reported last month, though they have not yet even revealed their names — and not all are shareholders.In an attempt to achieve its aims, Canyon is lording over Ambac the idea of trying to replace at least half of its board. While the hedge fund may have a case, last decade’s mortgage bond boom and bust is riddled with conflicts of interest at issuers, rating agencies, investment banks and investors alike. Even just a whiff of another one should be enough to put investors on edge.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »