AdvertisementSupported byBy Sam RobertsFred Schwartz, the fur dealer who redefined luxury by marketing affordable pelage as the television pitchman Fred the Furrier, died on Sunday at his home in Great Neck, on Long Island. He was 84.The cause was pancreatic cancer, his wife, Allyne Schwartz, said.A fourth-generation fur dealer who later became a philanthropist dedicated to stopping genocide, Mr. Schwartz was best known in the 1970s and ’80s as what his advertising agent described as “America’s first media furrier.”Featured in television advertisements wearing his signature designer glasses under a mane of silver curls, he would appear against the backdrop of a skating rink in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, a ski resort in Sundance, Utah, or a glacier in Canada and invite women by their first names — customers named Juanita, Eileen, Deborah, Marilyn — to “come in out of the cold” to visit his Fur Vault stand-alone retail outlets or his boutiques at leading department stores.With his brother, Harold, Mr. Schwartz thrived by undercutting his competitors, usually by buying pelts in bulk, assembling coats with heavier male skins and manufacturing them more cheaply in the Far East. He cloaked them in dreamy names like Crème de Mink, but priced them more modestly — from $400 to about $8,000, or about $1,170 to $23,400 today if adjusted for inflation.Mr. Schwartz gave up his anonymity to become the public face of his company in 1976, joining the ranks of other personal pitchmen like Bernadette Castro, Sy Syms and Frank Perdue. But he did so reluctantly.The idea came from Martin Shaw, the president of the advertising agency that represented Mr. Schwartz. When he suggested a campaign featuring the avuncular Mr. Schwartz to counter the impersonality of the typical department store, Mr. Schwartz balked. But Mr. Shaw, who was originally paid by the firm in furs instead of cash, persuaded him.“He told me the price of hiring an outside spokesman,” Mr. Schwartz once recalled.The script of the first commercial originally concluded with the line, “Come on in, Judy, and when you do, just ask for me — Fred Schwartz,” Mr. Schwartz said in an interview with The New York Times in 1980.He added, referring to Mr. Shaw: “I looked at the last line and I told him, ‘I can’t say Fred Schwartz.’ And Martin said, ‘What do you mean you can’t say Fred Schwartz? That’s your name.’ He was getting panicky, and almost out of desperation I said, ‘What about Fred the Furrier?’”After retiring from the company, Mr. Schwartz in 2005 founded the Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, a study center in Oswiecim, Poland, with offices elsewhere, devoted to the prevention of genocide. While he was Jewish, he had no direct Holocaust connection but visited the camp in 1993 and was struck by its facelessness.“I felt that until we can attach human characteristics to the people who perished there, we won’t understand the horror,” he said.Near the Nazi death camp, he also restored a synagogue, which had been a munitions dump during World War II and later a carpet showroom during Poland’s Communist era. The synagogue is now affiliated with the Auschwitz Jewish Center, which operates under the stewardship of the Museum of Jewish Heritage in New York.“Our goal is to recreate a permanent structure symbolizing Jewish life in a place that, for too many years, has only represented Jewish death,” Mr. Schwartz said.Fred Schwartz was born on Oct. 10, 1931, in the Tremont section of the Bronx. His father, Samuel, was a third-generation furrier. His mother was the former Molly Siegel.A child of the Depression, he was a born salesman. Buying balloons at 3 cents apiece, he peddled them at the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade for a quarter. He graduated from William Howard Taft High School in the Bronx and from City College, where he majored in social science.In addition to his wife, the former Allyne Kalmus, he is survived by their four children, Steven, Amy and Gary Schwartz and Anni Kluger; seven grandchildren; and his brother.Samuel Schwartz, an immigrant from Poland, “had no idea what went on in the classroom because he had never sat in one all his life,” Fred Schwartz told The Times in 2003. “So for him to allow me to go to school was an intuitive sense that this was probably a very good thing for me.”After failing an exam for the foreign service and being rejected by scores of executive training programs, he was hired by his brother, who was already working in Manhattan’s fur district as a retailer.They sold Russian kolinsky (weasel) wraps, then included mail-in cards in their holiday gift boxes that entitled recipients to an orchid corsage.They licensed the fur department at the S. Klein department store in Union Square in Manhattan in 1967 and remained there until the store closed in 1975. They then shifted to Alexander’s department store and later to Bloomingdale’s, where they sold under the brand Northern Lights.“We established a concept that furs do not have to be sold in a forbidding environment,” Mr. Schwartz said.Business boomed as women became more upwardly mobile and increasingly entered the work force, dressing for success without waiting for men to reward them with furs.The Fur Vault expanded to other cities, and the company began a men’s fur sportswear line under the name of Harold’s son, Andrew Marc. The company went public in 1984, and earned $3.4 million on $50 million in sales the next year. By the late 1980s, though, it was struggling during an industrywide downturn. Mr. Schwartz stepped down as chairman in 1988 and retired a year later.Defending his profession against allegations of cruelty by animal rights advocates, Mr. Schwartz reminded The Washington Post in 1986 that fur was “the original covering” for primitive beings, the “first thing humans put on their bodies.”“You have to remember,” he said, “in the beginning, we were all furriers.”Advertisement