By SAM ROBERTSFEB. 8, 2016
Paul Aiken, who as executive director of the Authors Guild began parrying digital-era challenges to copyrights and royalties nearly two decades ago, died on Jan. 29 at his home in Manhattan. He would have been 57 two days later.The cause was complications of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, his wife, Stefanie Rosenfeld, said.In 1993, even before Amazon went online or Google was incorporated, Mr. Aiken, as a dispirited lawyer producing a baseball trivia calendar on the side, joined the Guild and started generating news releases that presaged the portents of electronic publishing.First he criticized a publisher for agreeing to pay authors only 5 percent of proceeds for digital rights. Then he warned facetiously that a page-turning copying machine would take “the drudgery out of copyright infringement.”Advertisement“What’s funny,” Mr. Aiken recalled last year in the Authors Guild Bulletin, “is that these two news releases brought up topics that we would revisit again and again over the next 20 years: publishers being cheap and unfair in paying for digital rights, and technology, particularly scanning technology, threatening to undermine the entire book market.”In 2005, the Guild joined in a suit against Google for scanning copyrighted books without permission, but a proposed $125 million settlement was overturned by a federal judge, who ruled in Manhattan that the scanning constituted fair use under the law.The author Scott Turow, one of seven Guild presidents under whom Mr. Aiken served, said Mr. Aiken “believed passionately, like the Framers, that copyright was the key to maintaining the class of independent authors who are essential in a democracy, and he fought with fervor and imagination to bolster writers’ livelihoods and to defend them from the many who scheme to reduce the value of the written word.”In every case, Mr. Aiken rebutted the argument that copyright impeded progress and defended the principle that creative artists should be rewarded for their works.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.During Mr. Aiken’s tenure, the Guild also embraced his suggestion to compile an Authors Registry to find authors of so-called orphaned works that publishers and producers sought to mine or reissue.“I can tell you what all authors like,” he said in 2008. “They like their books to be read, and except for the most financially perverse of authors, they like a good royalty check.”AdvertisementPaul Daymond Aiken was born in Chicago on Jan. 31, 1959. His father, Daymond, was a mathematics professor. His mother, the former Marion Kuebler, taught English. She survives him.Besides his wife and mother, he is survived by his children, Melanie, Wil and Andrew John; his brothers, Greg and Judd; and his sisters, Amy-Jo Zdroik and Deeda Aiken.Mr. Aiken earned a bachelor’s degree in science from Lawrence University in Appleton, Wis., in 1981, graduated from Cornell University Law School, and worked at Kornstein, Veisz & Wexler in New York, where he met Robin Davis Miller, who recruited him in 1993 after she became the Authors Guild’s executive director.Mr. Aiken succeeded her in 1995. He served until 2014, when he resigned because of his illness.A version of this article appears in print on February 10, 2016, on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Paul Aiken, 56, Leader of Authors Guild.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.