
Standard Deduction By                     
VICTOR FLEISCHER

FEB. 8, 2016
About a year ago, there was a viral debate over the color of a dress. Was it white and gold? Or blue and black? The answer seemed like it must be objective — something is either blue or it isn’t — but in fact was subjective. The answer depended on how your brain processed the image and how it subconsciously subtracted either the blue or gold to account for the implicit effects of daylight.What is Hillary Clinton’s attitude toward Wall Street? The question evokes similarly heated and overly confident responses online, even among Democrats. Mrs. Clinton is deep in the pocket of Wall Street, as evidenced by her lucrative speeches to Goldman Sachs. Or she is a progressive fighter with a smart and sophisticated plan to rein in Wall Street’s excesses.There is no right answer. She is either of these things, depending on how your brain processes information. On tax policy, Mrs. Clinton has a strong team in place and has put forth some sensible proposals, focusing the weight of her tax increases on those who earn more than $5 million annually. Some observers subtract the evidence of being too friendly to Wall Street, focusing on her detailed policy proposals.But I remain skeptical. I tend to subtract Mrs. Clinton’s more recent left-leaning policy proposals. Consider her first major tax proposal of the campaign, on capital gains. Rather than suggest that we abolish the capital gains preference, she proposed a gradual step-down in rates depending on the length of time an investor holds assets, with the lowest rate of 20 percent available after five years.AdvertisementI find this approach troubling because it would do little to address top-end income inequality, which is exacerbated by the lower rate of tax on long-term capital gains, much of which is generated by the sale of assets with long holding periods.For me, the question is one of authenticity. Mrs. Clinton’s capital gains proposal seems to have originated on Wall Street. Laurence D. Fink, the chairman of the asset management firm BlackRock, is frequently suggested as a possible Treasury secretary should Mrs. Clinton become president.In April 2015, he spoke out against Wall Street’s “gambling culture,” proposing that gains on assets held for less than three years be treated as short-term gains and taxed at ordinary rates, followed by a step down that would reduce the rate to zero after 10 years. Mrs. Clinton’s plan, announced in July, has a similar structural design.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.One notable difference between the financial overhaul approaches of Mrs. Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders relates to size. Mr. Sanders would break up the big banks. Mrs. Clinton’s approach, while arguably more effective at reducing systemic risk, is more nuanced and technocratic, and more tolerant of large institutions.AdvertisementWhen it comes to Wall Street, Mr. Sanders seems to prefer what a colleague has called “big dumb rules” — rules that lack precision but are easier to enforce. Mrs. Clinton seems to prefer more precise, tailored solutions that make incremental improvements but might leave the Securities and Exchange Commission, Treasury and other relevant agencies vulnerable to industry influence and regulatory capture.Despite Mrs. Clinton’s populist speeches, there is some evidence to indicate her approach would be similar to that of her husband, former President Bill Clinton. Mr. Clinton, guided by advisers like Robert E. Rubin and Lawrence H. Summers, presided over a strong economy and a strong period on Wall Street. But he also presided over the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated investment and commercial banking, and other Wall Street-friendly moves that helped set the table for the financial crisis of 2008.James Carville, Mr. Clinton’s longtime adviser, once grumbled, “I used to think that if there was reincarnation, I wanted to come back as the president or the pope or as a .400 baseball hitter. But now, I would like to come back as the bond market. You can intimidate everybody.”As president, would Mrs. Clinton use her regulatory authority aggressively to crack down on Wall Street’s risky activities? Or would she use a light touch, afraid of giving the market the jitters? BlackRock is the largest financial institution in the world, with more than $4.5 trillion in assets under management. It is among the top shareholders in every Wall Street bank. It is the bond market. It can intimidate most everybody. And so I find it hard to shake the feeling that at the end of the day, in a Clinton administration, it would be Larry Fink, not the technocrats, calling the shots.Victor Fleischer is a professor of law at the University of San Diego, where he teaches classes on corporate tax, tax policy, and venture capital and serves as the director of research for the Graduate Tax Program. His research focuses on how tax affects the structuring of venture capital, private equity, and corporate transactions. Twitter: @vicfleischerWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »