AdvertisementSupported byBy Landon Thomas Jr.WASHINGTON — Executives of the International Monetary Fund mutter darkly about Greeks tapping their phones in Athens. Greek government officials accuse the fund of torpedoing their economy via tough austerity measures.And both the Greeks and the fund moan about the refusal of Germany to consider any form of debt relief for Greece.Signs of the growing tensions over Greece and its debt were evident at meetings of the I.M.F. in Washington last week. But nothing exemplifies the growing discord more than a simple chart on a draft memorandum drawn up by the fund that has been making the rounds at meetings here.The chart depicts just how wide the gap is between Europe and the I.M.F. in terms of assessing Greece’s ability to pay down its growing debt burden — currently close to 180 percent of its gross domestic product — in the coming decades.And it highlights the danger that, just as it was last summer, Greece may be pushed to the edge of bankruptcy as a result of an inability, if not an unwillingness, of the fund, Europe and Greece to reach a compromise.Ever skeptical of Greece’s capacity to keep a lid on spending and to increase taxes over the years, the fund’s economists project that the debt will approach 300 percent of G.D.P. by 2060 — an outcome depicted vividly on the chart as a line sloping sharply upward.The stance of Europe, which is on the hook for a much larger chunk of the debt than the I.M.F., is represented by a line trending defiantly downward.In the view of finance ministers in the euro area, Greece will meet the demands of the toughest austerity program ever imposed upon a nation and will generate enough cash to bring the debt below 100 percent of G.D.P.The implication of the chart and the accompanying memorandum — neither of which has been made public — is that the I.M.F., as things stand, will not be able to support the next bailout agreement that Greece and Europe reach.Late last week, the managing director of the I.M.F., Christine Lagarde, said publicly what many senior fund officials have said quietly for months: Europe’s assumption that Greece, in the decades ahead, can annually achieve a budget surplus (minus interest payments) of 3.5 percent of G.D.P. and pay down its debt is “highly unrealistic” and would require a “heroic” sacrifice from an austerity-battered populace.That assessment is hardly a surprise. Since the spring of 2010, the time of the first Greek bailout, I.M.F. economists have been saying that Greece would never be able to pay back such a tremendous amount of debt.Three economists, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Thomas Philippon and Dimitri Vayanos, examined the history of Greece’s debt boom and bust in a new paper.They contend that in terms of money borrowed and economic output lost, the Greek crisis has far exceeded even the classic emerging market busts in Latin America and Asia — many of which were resolved via various forms of debt restructuring.As a result, they conclude, the very thought that Greece can pay its way out of this mess without having its debt reduced in some way is fantasy.“There is no exit for Greece without debt relief,” Mr. Gourinchas said.Part of the problem is that the fund’s role now is highly unorthodox. While the fund is owed $12 billion, it is not promising to lend any new money this year, which, at least in the view of the Greeks, reduces its credibility. Isn’t it hypocritical of the fund, some Greek officials say in private, to push us so hard when it is not willing to lend new money? At least the Europeans are promising to put more money on the table, they point out.Fund officials have responded: How can we be your enemy if we are the ones pressuring Europe to give you a break on your debt?Matters have not been improved by the recent leak of a private exchange between the fund’s lead negotiator, Delia Velculescu, and the head of the fund’s European department in Washington, Poul Thomsen.In the phone transcript, published by WikiLeaks, it was suggested that the only way to get an agreement would be to push Greece once again to the precipice of default.“I brought this up with my Greek colleagues,” said Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the finance minister from the Netherlands, who is leading Europe in the talks with Greece. “It’s an issue of trust — how can the I.M.F. do its work if they have to worry all the time about having their phones tapped?”As to the matter of Greece’s debt, Mr. Dijsselbloem remained adamant: It is not being discussed.While it remains most unlikely that the I.M.F. would walk away from the talks, that such a step is even being suggested underscores how uncertain the negotiations have become.That is because Germany has frequently said that it requires the I.M.F. to be an active participant in the process. So if the fund does not bless an agreement, Germany will be very unlikely to embrace it.Despite all the tensions, negotiations are continuing. Greece, unlike in past years, sent its full team of negotiators to Washington last Thursday to resume talks that had been temporarily suspended.They include the finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos; the debt expert Stelios Papadopoulos; the economy minister, Giorgos Stathakis; and the Greek government’s longstanding financial adviser, Glenn Kim, an independent investment banker who previously worked for Moelis and Lehman Brothers.The crux of the talks has long been Greece’s bloated pension program, which still pays out about 10 percent of G.D.P. annually. Fund officials have always said that without significant pension cuts, they could not approve any new deal.Greece has argued that, in depression-like economic conditions, Greeks cannot afford pension cuts, especially when pensioners are now the only breadwinners in many families.Under the labor minister, Georgios Katrougalos, the Greek government is now pushing a plan that would freeze current payouts and cut future ones and that would increase contributions from employers.Whether that will be enough to win over the I.M.F. and, ultimately, Europe regarding the debt question remains to be seen.“No amount of pension reforms will make Greece’s debt sustainable without debt relief,” Mr. Thomsen, the fund’s European head and overseer of the Greek talks, wrote in a recent blog post. “And no amount of debt relief will make Greece’s pension system sustainable without pension reforms.”Advertisement