By REUTERSMARCH 1, 2016
WASHINGTON — Spending on construction jumped in January by the largest amount in eight months, reaching an eight-year high aided by both private and public expansion.The economic outlook was further bolstered by another report on Tuesday showing that manufacturing appeared to stabilize in February, with production accelerating and new orders holding steady at higher levels. Also, automobile sales slowed a bit in February, but they remained at levels consistent with strong consumer spending.The reports added to upbeat data on consumer spending, the labor market, industrial production and durable goods orders in suggesting that economic growth picked up at the start of the first quarter, which should further ease fears of a recession.“To be clear, none of this data are at levels suggesting a boom, far from it, but neither do they support the notion of an economy slipping into recession,” said Steve Blitz, chief economist at ITG Investment Research in New York.AdvertisementThe Commerce Department said construction spending increased 1.5 percent to $1.14 trillion, the highest level since October 2007, as both private and public outlays rose. That came after an upwardly revised 0.6 percent increase in December, previously reported as a 0.1 percent gain. Construction outlays were up 10.4 percent from a year ago.AdvertisementThe strong construction spending report prompted economists at Barclays to raise their first-quarter gross domestic product growth estimate by three-tenths of a percentage point to a 2.4 percent annual rate. The economy grew at a 1.0 percent rate in the fourth quarter.“The very good construction report for January is further proof that concerns about recession in the U.S. are far overblown,” said Gus Faucher, deputy chief economist at PNC Financial in Pittsburgh.In January, construction spending was buoyed by a 0.5 percent rise in private construction projects to the highest level since November 2007. Outlays on private nonresidential structures, which include factories and offices, rose 1 percent. Spending on private residential construction was unchanged in January.
            Total construction spending at a seasonally adjusted annual rate.        NOV.–0.5%DEC.+0.6%JAN.+1.5%$1.14 trillion1.081.020.960.90’14’15MARCH 1, 2016
Public construction outlays jumped 4.5 percent to their highest level since September 2010. Spending on state and local government construction projects, the largest portion of the public sector segment, rose 4.4 percent. Federal government construction spending advanced 5.8 percent.The Institute for Supply Management said its index of national factory activity increased 1.3 percentage points, to a reading of 49.5, last month, the fifth consecutive month of contraction. A reading below 50 indicates a contraction in manufacturing, which accounts for 12 percent of the American economy.A strong dollar, weak global demand and spending cuts by energy companies after a plunge in oil prices have undercut manufacturing. Continuing efforts by businesses to sell unwanted inventory have also been a drag on factory activity.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The survey was the latest indication that the worst of the manufacturing downturn was probably over. Reports last month showed solid increases in industrial production and new orders for long-lasting U.S.-manufactured good.A second manufacturing survey on Tuesday from data firm Markit also corroborated the improvement in factory activity. The signs of stabilization in U.S. manufacturing is in contrast to factories in Asia where output shrank in February. In Europe, manufacturing activity is waning.AdvertisementThe I.S.M. survey showed new orders held steady at a five-month high, though export orders fell. Factories reported a significant decrease in the number of customers saying inventories were too high last month. Customers’ inventories had been considered too high for six consecutive months.“It looks like the worst of the inventory correction is now behind us,” said Daniel Silver, an economist at JPMorgan in New York.Manufacturing could get support from strong demand for autos. Carmakers reported on Tuesday that February auto sales in the United States soared to a 15-year high for the month.“Consumers, while still cautious overall, are confident enough in their own personal economic situation and the outlook to be able to purchase a car,” said Sam Bullard, a senior economist at Wells Fargo in Charlotte, North Carolina.A version of this list appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B8 of the National edition with the headline: Construction Spending Rises And Manufacturing Steadies.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.