By ALESSANDRA STANLEYFEB. 7, 2016
Americans are once again paying for the 2008 financial collapse.This time, though, it’s willingly.Entertainment industry executives and publishers say there is a growing audience for movies, plays, television shows and novels that address the misdeeds and systemic failures that brought the economy to the edge of collapse eight years ago.“The Big Short,” which is based on a nonfiction best seller by Michael Lewis, has earned more than $100 million at the box office worldwide. Accordingly, there are movies in development with titles that pretty much give away their plots: “Smoke and Mirrors,” “All We Had” and “Straight to Hell.”“These projects are not operating in a vacuum,” said Len Amato, president of HBO Films. HBO has a movie about Bernard L. Madoff coming out in 2017. ABC’s two-part mini-series “Madoff” aired last week.“You can see what’s happening in the political process — both parties are dealing with grass-roots movements standing up against the shrinking of the middle class and the rise of income inequality,” Mr. Amato said. “Audiences are not only ready to take that on in television and movies, they very much want to understand how we came to this point.”AdvertisementIn “Money Monster,” a thriller set for release in May, George Clooney plays a hyperbolic, Jim Cramer-esque host of a cable show. Held at gunpoint by a viewer who lost all his savings in a market plunge, Mr. Clooney’s character is forced to investigate a financial conspiracy. “I’m telling you it’s rigged,” the gunman says in the trailer. “They’re stealing everything from us, and they’re getting away with it, too.”AdvertisementThe movie’s anti-Wall Street theme echoes across the spectrum of popular culture.The market crash threatens to destroy a publishing house run by the hero of Jay McInerney’s latest novel, “Bright, Precious Things,” to be published later this year. In March, the Public Theater in New York will host the debut of “Dry Powder,” a sardonic take on private equity shenanigans that stars John Krasinski (“The Office”) and Claire Danes (“Homeland”).A few years ago, there was less appetite for art that delved into the inner workings of the financial industry. Writers and directors delivered nonfiction books about the disaster and documentaries like the 2010 film “Inside Job,” but by and large entertainment executives seemed to doubt that audiences would spend money to relive how they lost so much of it.“Margin Call,” a 2011 drama about the disintegration of an investment bank at the start of the crisis, was a critical success but not a popular one. It took in less than $20 million worldwide, and more than 70 percent of its audience was overseas, according to Box Office Mojo. (By contrast, “The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn Part I” grossed $712 million worldwide that year.)“We were like a depressed Catholic family avoiding the subject at dinner,” said Adam McKay, who directed and co-wrote “The Big Short,” which is nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. “But people are realizing that all those problems that caused the crash are still around.”Film historians liken this lag to the ones that followed the Vietnam War and the 1929 stock market crash. Movies were made about those events in real time, but the most powerful ones came years later. “The Deer Hunter” and “Coming Home” were released in 1978; “Apocalypse Now” came out in 1979. Classic films about the Great Depression, like Frank Capra’s “Meet John Doe” and John Ford’s “Grapes of Wrath,” didn’t make it to the screen until World War II was underway.“After a cataclysmic event, it takes a while for the collective unconscious to bubble to the surface,” said Brian Koppelman, one of the creators of “Billions,” a new Showtime series about a hedge fund titan under investigation by a crusading United States attorney. (Andrew Ross Sorkin of The New York Times is another of the show’s creators.)“Billions” is set in the present, but like many other contemporary financial dramas, it is darkened by the shadow of 2008. For one thing, Mr. Koppelman noted, viewers today are more prepared to digest the details of what went wrong. “We have all learned the language. In 2008, who knew what a ‘tranche’ was?” he said.Advertisement“The Big Short” ends with a written warning that Wall Street could be repeating its mistakes: “In 2015, several large banks began selling billions in something called a ‘bespoke tranche opportunity,’ ” referring to the apparent rebranding of the complex securities at the heart of the 2008 mess.The movie, which stars Brad Pitt, Christian Bale and Steve Carell, looks like a sure thing now, but Mr. McKay said it took a few years to persuade the studio to greenlight it. “They worried that the material was too esoteric and wonky, but they were more open once we found a way to make it entertaining,” he said.“It also helped that ‘Wolf of Wall Street’ was a success,” he added, referring to Martin Scorsese’s 2013 film about a crooked 1980s stockbroker played by Leonardo DiCaprio.Hollywood executives did not exactly rush to embrace that project, either, which cost about $100 million and runs three hours in length. Red Granite Pictures, whose principal film backer is the Abu Dhabi-based businessman Mohamed Ahmed Badawy Al-Husseiny, financed the film.But it grossed $392 million worldwide. Those returns helped embolden other studios.Washington and Wall Street are to blame in most of these works — comedies as well as dramas. But some take a particular angle that reflects the personal interests of their creators.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Actresses increasingly seek roles that allow them to play strong, complex women, and several have optioned works that focus on female executives in the banking world. Sony Classics bought “Equity,” a film that stars Anna Gunn of “Breaking Bad” as an investment banker brokering an initial public offering and dealing with corruption in the financial world.Warner Bros. has made a deal with Reese Witherspoon to adapt “Opening Belle,” a comic novel by Maureen Sherry, a former managing director at Bear Stearns. Ms. Witherspoon plans to play the heroine, a trader who is fighting sexism — and selling mortgage-backed securities — when the markets implode.Last October, the Irish author Paul Murray published a satirical novel, “The Mark and the Void,” about the Irish banking crisis.Michael M. Thomas, a writer and former partner at Lehman Brothers who left the firm long before it filed for bankruptcy protection in 2008, took a more patrician, and rococo, path in his novel “Fixers,” which was published last month. Mr. Thomas’s fictionalized account of what went wrong is an indictment of Wall Street greed and parvenus, but it also holds President Obama responsible for letting them get away with it. In the novel, a cabal of power brokers rigs the election in favor of an Obama-like candidate and steers him away from reforming Wall Street and sending bankers to jail.“The culture has become much more attuned to the financial world,” said Sandy Climan, president of Entertainment Media Ventures, a movie and digital media investment company in Los Angeles. “Creators are now dramatizing what people were already thinking about.”A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: After a Crisis, Catharsis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.