
Breakingviews By                     
LAUREN SILVA LAUGHLIN

JUNE 19, 2017
Walmart’s market capitalization dropped 5 percent, losing $11 billion, after Amazon unveiled its $13.4 billion deal to buy Whole Foods Market on Friday. Meanwhile, Whole Foods shares closed Friday nearly 2 percent above the agreed price, implying that some investors think a rival bid could emerge. But even for Walmart, that would be a stretch.Whole Foods’ filing suggests it wasn’t shopped around. Amazon became serious only in late April, when the company’s team signed confidentiality agreements. That means some shareholders, notably Jana Partners, an activist owner of an 8 percent stake, could be receptive to a higher price. A grocery industry buyer like Walmart could also cut costs, helping to justify paying more than the 27 percent premium Amazon is offering.Then there’s the defensive value. If investors were right to sell off grocery chain stocks across the board in the United States and Europe on news of Amazon’s plunge into the sector, it could be worth keeping Jeff Bezos’ online giant away from Whole Foods.Walmart is one of few candidates. Its $230 billion market value dwarfs other listed United States grocers, including Target, Kroger and Sprouts Farmers Market, as well as Albertsons, which is private. Its balance sheet cash could in theory finance nearly half the acquisition, and with total debt at about 1.5 times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, it could borrow more.AdvertisementAdding an upscale brand might help Walmart attract new customers and lift its grocery business. Yet that would be a change of direction. Its recent strategy has been to improve its e-commerce offering, including with Friday’s deal to buy the men’s clothing online retailer Bonobos.Financially, too, topping Mr. Bezos’ offer would be tough. Assume Walmart is able to cut Whole Foods’ operating costs by a generous 3 percent, or about $450 million a year. Taxed at 35 percent and capitalized on a multiple of 10, those savings are worth just under $3 billion today, roughly the same as Amazon’s premium. Walmart would be irrational to pay more, especially since it would also have to cover a $400 million break fee.AdvertisementThis math applies to any interloper. And even hefty cost cuts wouldn’t make Whole Foods’ Ebitda expand enough for the after-tax return on an acquisition to exceed the 8.6 percent weighted average cost of capital Morningstar attaches to the company. Whatever magic Mr. Bezos has in mind, his advisers have done the trick of making his deal hard to beat.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »