
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
AUG. 5, 2016
When a company delays the release of its financial results because of an accounting error, spooked investors typically flee, and shares plummet.Not so for Diamond Resorts International, a timeshare operator based in Las Vegas. Its stock has fallen just 2.2 percent since it postponed its second-quarter earnings release on Aug. 1.The reason for the delay, the company said, was a last-minute discovery by its auditor of a problem with the way Diamond had been valuing its inventory of unsold timeshare units since 2014. A restatement of the company’s net income may result.It is unclear why Diamond’s auditor, BDO USA, just spotted a problem that began some time ago. BDO did not respond to an email seeking comment.AdvertisementSeth Lubove, a Diamond spokesman, said the earnings delay was “an unexpected and unfortunate occurrence.” But fixing the problem will be “noncash in nature,” he said, and would have little impact on the company’s financial performance. Changing the figures will have no effect on Diamond’s compliance with the terms of its credit agreements, the company said.AdvertisementThe main reason Diamond’s stock has remained steady in the face of a possible restatement is its pending $2.2 billion acquisition by Apollo Global Management, the private equity giant. That buyout, announced in late June, is still on, Diamond said, regardless of the accounting problem.After discussing the matter with Diamond, Apollo said in a statement that it was “confident this will not impact the timing of our acquisition on the terms previously announced.”But it is notable that one longtime insider at the company decided not to wait for the deal to go through to cash in a bounty of his Diamond shares. Lowell D. Kraff is a principal at Trivergance L.L.C., a private equity firm he co-founded with David F. Palmer, Diamond’s chief executive. Mr. Kraff, a former vice chairman of Diamond’s board and a director since 2007, resigned his position in May at the company’s annual meeting.On July 14, Mr. Kraff began selling his Diamond shares in the open market, regulatory filings show. He made his last sale on July 28, just days before the accounting disclosure. Over the period, he exercised call options on the company’s stock and sold 1.26 million Diamond shares. That represented 28 percent of his holdings and generated $38.2 million. Had he tendered his shares at the offer price, he would have received approximately $75,000 more.I asked Mr. Kraff about the timing of his sales. In a statement provided by his lawyer, Mr. Kraff noted that his board service at Diamond ended in May. “I had no knowledge of the possible restatement prior to the company’s public announcement in early August,” he said.As for why he chose to sell in the open market rather than tender his shares to Apollo at a slightly higher price only a few weeks later, Mr. Kraff cited “personal financial reasons, including to repay borrowings associated with the exercise of the call options earlier in July.”The company said it was not aware of Mr. Kraff’s sales until they were disclosed publicly.The terms of the Diamond deal are $30.25 per share with tender offer documentation due Aug. 10. The transaction will go through if more than 50 percent of Diamond’s shareholders submit their shares.AdvertisementSupport from shareholders seems likely. The transaction price represented a 25 percent premium over Diamond’s shares the day before the bid was made and almost double the stock’s $16.19 closing low in early February.Apollo’s interest in Diamond comes at a time of concerns about its business practices and the possibility for heightened regulatory scrutiny across the timeshare industry. The company’s resort network consists of 426 vacation destinations in 35 countries.A quick internet search of Diamond Resorts turns up blistering reports from timeshare owners recounting its hard-sell tactics.Diamond defends its practices. Such complaints are anomalies, the company said, and are not representative of its relationships with 525,000 member families.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Lubove, the Diamond spokesman, said the company tracks and monitors every comment and complaint received, whether from customer surveys or other direct contacts, from Better Business Bureaus or regulatory bodies. It also tracks the resolution of all complaints.“Over the past several years, the complaints we receive regarding sales practices generally represent fewer than 2 percent of the total sales tours which we conduct,” Mr. Lubove said in a statement. “Other non-sales-related complaints represent an even smaller percentage of our total member and guest visits.”The accounting hiccup may well be a nonevent. It did, however, cause Diamond to delay a $1.8 billion debt sale intended to help finance the acquisition. Debt investors require accurate financial statements from the issuing company, after all. Without that cash, the deal could well founder.Those statements are coming soon, Mr. Lubove told me late on Wednesday. Diamond expects to meet the Securities and Exchange Commission’s deadline of Aug. 9 for filing its delayed second-quarter financial results, he said. And to the extent required, the company expects to file any amended reports from earlier periods within the same time frame.In acquisitions that use financing, such as bond sales or bank loans, a buyer does not have to conclude a deal until something known as the marketing period has elapsed. Such a period typically runs from “10 to 20 business days following the satisfaction of specified conditions,” according to a 2014 presentation by Gibson Dunn, a law firm with a large mergers and acquisitions practice.AdvertisementDuring a deal’s marketing period, the presentation said, certain requirements must be met. Among them: The target company’s auditors “shall not have withdrawn any audit opinion covering financial statements,” and the target company “has not announced a restatement.”Given that the Apollo-Diamond merger agreement contains similar language, I asked Apollo about the impact a restatement from Diamond could have on the acquisition process. Charles Zehren, a spokesman, reiterated Apollo’s previous statement that it was confident the matter would not affect the timing of the deal.It remains to be seen whether debt buyers flock to the deal and what yield they demand.Clearly, Diamond’s shareholders want the Apollo takeover to go through. So do Diamond’s top executives and directors, who are among the bigger beneficiaries of the buyout, regulatory filings show.As of July 13, Diamond’s top executives and directors beneficially owned almost 23 million shares in the form of options and company stock. If the transaction is completed, a filing stated, those 15 people “would be entitled to receive an aggregate amount of $624,131,129 in cash.”The bulk of that will go to Stephen J. Cloobeck, Diamond’s founder, and Mr. Palmer, the chief executive. Mr. Cloobeck would be entitled to $384 million and Mr. Palmer would receive $173 million.If everything remains on track, that will be a nice payday.Twitter: @gmorgensonA version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Math Hiccup That Could Become a Headache.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »