
Book Entry By                     
JONATHAN A. KNEE

AUG. 8, 2016
With the fall of the studio system, when actors labored under long-term employment contracts, came the rise of the talent agents, those mysterious professionals whose job is to procure employment for artists. The mystery extends from what agents actually do to the economics of the agencies where they work, as all the major industry players are private and notoriously secretive. In “Powerhouse: The Untold Story of Hollywood’s Creative Artists Agency,” James Andrew Miller has taken on the formidable task of lifting the veil on the sector.It is a story worth telling. The agents’ collective fate — they are typically paid 10 percent of clients’ earnings — is a reflection of the broader media ecosystem. Besides, agents — with their intense, complicated relationships with their intense, complicated superstar clients — represent enduring figures of fascination in popular culture. Indeed, it is because of these relationships that agents have often risen to run movie and television studios, whose ultimate success is believed to hinge on access to temperamental artists.C.A.A. is an inspired choice as the lens through which to track the industry’s transformation from tight-knit private gentlemen’s clubs to the sprawling diversified giants they are today, controlled by some of the world’s largest private equity firms. Established more than 40 years ago by five renegade agents from the once-dominant William Morris agency, C.A.A. eventually eclipsed its predecessor and transformed the structure and the role of agencies.The good news is almost everyone who survived has talked to Mr. Miller. Given the compelling characters involved, notably C.A.A.’s founding partners, Michael Ovitz and Ron Meyer, and their successors, Bryan Lourd and Richard Lovett, after more than 500 interviews, there was more than enough material for a truly compelling narrative. The bad news is that instead of producing such a book, Mr. Miller has simply organized more than 700 pages of raw interviews in more or less chronological order — interspersed with occasional brief asides, written in the overheated prose of a showbiz trade rag. Worse, although the front of the book has 11 pages of names listed as the relevant “dramatis personae,” no index or detailed biographies help readers keep track.AdvertisementThere are critical times in the agency’s history where hearing the firsthand accounts of competing protagonists — such as the period in which Mr. Meyer left for Universal, Mr. Ovitz left for Disney and the so-called Young Turks secured the agency for themselves at a fraction of its value with no money down — provides a unique window into the personalities and interpersonal dynamics. But mostly, it is a repetitive slog that cries out for the traditional synthesizing journalistic function of an author. This is not to say that there are not plenty of entertaining tidbits and stories along the way. It is rather that the payoff is pretty meager for the reader relative to the investment.The more serious problem with Mr. Miller’s approach to the material in this particular milieu is captured by an observation made by Tom Hanks: “Here’s the thing. Agents lie to you every day.” Far too many of the interviews in “Powerhouse” have the feel of a tale often told and perfected over time. Occasionally, a ray of real candor comes through, such as when Edgar Bronfman Jr. admits that part of the reason he offered Mr. Meyer the Universal job was get back at Mr. Ovitz the same way Mr. Ovitz was trying to get back at him. (Note: Mr. Bronfman uses more colorful language to express that sentiment.) The book reads mostly like the public observations of master manipulators with complex personal agendas.Including competing self-serving narratives only partially solves the book’s structural problem. One simple way to cut through the noise can be to look at the numbers. Mr. Miller describes himself as an honors graduate of Harvard Business School, so he should have been well positioned to analyze the financials to test various claims. Instead, he seems to have been content to simply repeat or transmit the selective assertions provided by his subjects. So, for instance, he reports that the initial investment of the private equity firm TPG Capital in C.A.A. was $166 million for 35 percent of the company at a $700 million valuation. These numbers are accurate despite the fact that 35 percent of $700 million is $245 million, not $166 million. That is because C.A.A. had pulled out an additional $200 million in debt simultaneously with the TPG investment, significantly leveraging the company. Yet Mr. Miller simply fails to mention this immense new borrowing, much less discuss how these spoils were divided at C.A.A. or what its impact was on the company or the culture. Only three pages earlier, Mr. Miller had noted that “borrowing was rarely used” at C.A.A. and that “the partners kept putting as much money back into the agency as they could.” He also includes interviews from TPG leadership bemoaning “the misconception” that private equity relies on debt to generate returns.Another key topic that “Powerhouse” reflects but does not adequately examine is the increasing reliance on sports at both C.A.A. and its now largest competitor, William Morris Endeavor, albeit in different ways. Mr. Miller notes that the question of whether this push represented “strategic genius or hubristic disaster” has long caused controversy, both internally and externally. In his view, however, this issue “is now not worthy of debate.” As evidence of this conclusion, he points to the fact that at C.A.A. in 2015, sports revenue eclipsed revenue from each of the film and television divisions. Mr. Miller is silent, however, about whether the sports division, which as recently as a few years ago was still unprofitable, as yet generates any cash flow.Advertisement“Powerhouse” quotes the president of ESPN, John Skipper, as confessing that “it has always puzzled” him “when major sports organizations believe they need a third party to advise them on how to sell their media rights.” There is plenty of evidence that these organizations are increasingly asking themselves the same question. Given the now overwhelming focus on sports at the major agencies, how this gets answered and how the agencies respond will define the next chapter in their histories. Unfortunately, “Powerhouse” provides few clues as to how that chapter will end.Jonathan A. Knee is professor of professional practice at Columbia Business School and a senior adviser at Evercore Partners. His next book, “Class Clowns: How the Smartest Investors Lost Billions in Education,” will be released by Columbia University Press in November.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »