By BARRY MEIERFEB. 6, 2016
In a sharp rebuke, a federal judge on Friday issued a preliminary injunction ordering abortion opponents not to release videos they had secretly made at meetings of abortion providers, and he added that the opponents’ claims that such organizations were illegally selling fetal tissue were baseless.In the ruling, Judge William H. Orrick of United States District Court in San Francisco also brushed aside claims by the abortion opponents that their use of fraudulent documents and violations of confidentiality agreements to infiltrate meetings of abortion providers were protected because they were journalists involved in what they described as an undercover investigation.The ruling marked the second major setback in recent weeks for the anti-abortion group, the Center for Medical Progress.Late last month, the center’s director, David Daleiden, and an associate, Sandra S. Merritt, were indicted by a grand jury in the Houston area on criminal felony charges of tampering with a government record — specifically, creating phony California driver’s licenses. Mr. Daleiden was also charged with trying to buy human organs, a misdemeanor. Both have pleaded not guilty.AdvertisementThe little-known group leapt into headlines last summer when it released videos claiming to show officials of Planned Parenthood discussing how they profited from sales of fetal tissue.AdvertisementThe disclosures set off investigations into Planned Parenthood and political efforts to cut off the group’s funding. Planned Parenthood insisted it had not broken any laws and said that the abortion opponents had edited the videos to create false impressions.In July, after the first videos were publicized, a group that represents Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers, the National Abortion Federation, sued the Center for Medical Progress, Mr. Daleiden and others in federal court in San Francisco.Video from the Center for Medical Progress, an anti-abortion group, purported to show Planned Parenthood officials trying to illegally profit from the sale of fetal tissue. A leader and another employee of the anti-abortion group were indicted.The organization accused Mr. Daleiden and his colleagues of illegally gaining entry to its national meetings by falsely posing as executives of a company that procured fetal tissue. In the process, they also signed confidentiality agreements, agreeing not to divulge anything about the meetings, a practice that the federation said it adopted to protect participants from harassment by anti-abortion groups.Judge Orrick initially issued a temporary restraining order barring the group from releasing videos, transcripts or other material from the meetings pending his review of the legal issues involved. On Friday, he issued a preliminary injunction ordering the group not to release any material gathered at the association’s conventions.The Center for Medical Progress also made recordings of abortion providers it courted after meeting them at conferences and it infiltrated a Planned Parenthood clinic in Texas.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In his ruling, Judge Orrick said that his review of hundreds of hours of video secretly shot by the center at meetings of abortion providers found no evidence that any of them had violated the law. No one “admitted to engaging in, agreed to engage in, or expressed interest in engaging in potentially illegal sale of fetal tissue for profit,” he wrote.Lawyers for the Center for Medical Progress argued in the case that the First Amendment protected the group because its members were informing the public about abortion providers — a defense that Mr. Daleiden has also raised against the recent criminal charges.But Judge Orrick said that the desire of the National Abortion Federation to have its members protected from unwarranted harassment was paramount. And he questioned whether Mr. Daleiden and his colleagues were involved in journalism.He wrote that the group’s projects “thus far have not been pieces of journalistic integrity, but misleadingly edited videos and unfounded assertions.”AdvertisementA defense lawyer involved in the case, James Bopp Jr., said in a statement that if the judge’s order stood, “No reporter will feel to do an undercover investigation of powerful interests like Planned Parenthood.”A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline:  Federal Judge Orders Abortion Foes Not to Release Secretly Filmed Videos .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.