By STEPHANIE STROMFEB. 2, 2016
If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em. Unilever, the global food and consumer products giant, said on Tuesday that it would begin selling an eggless sandwich spread.Hellmann’s Carefully Crafted Dressing and Sandwich Spread will make its debut a little more than a year after Unilever sued Hampton Creek, the upstart food company whose Just Mayo eggless spread has dented the market share of conventional mayonnaises.“We talk with our fans all the time, share ideas and begin to have idea of what they’re interested in,” said Russel Lilly, marketing director at Hellmann’s, which is known as Best Foods west of the Rockies. “There was clearly a lot of excitement and interest from our fans and that’s why we decided to take this step.”Carefully Crafted will hit shelves in the middle of this month, together with three organic versions — Original, Roasted Garlic and Spicy Chipotle — of Hellmann’s mayonnaise.AdvertisementUnilever’s retail sales of mayonnaise dropped to $839 million last year, or 46.6 percent of the United States market, from a peak of $884 million in 2012, and Kraft’s have eroded even more, according to data from Euromonitor.AdvertisementOver the same time, sales of what Euromonitor calls “other” brands, which includes Just Mayo, have climbed steadily to $111.7 million, up from $61.3 million in 2012.According to data from IRI, sales of Hampton Creek’s Just Mayo product more than tripled last year, as the company gained broader distribution. IRI put sales at a little more than $8 million.In late 2014, Unilever sued Hampton Creek, charging that the cracked egg image and use of the word “mayo” on labels for its spread product violated federal regulations that define foods. Unilever then had to scramble to change language on some of its own websites that referred to nonmayonnaise products as “mayonnaise,” and it eventually dropped the suit.The Food and Drug Administration then picked up the baton last August, essentially making the same charges that Unilever had in its lawsuit. But after negotiations that led to some minor adjustments to the label, Hampton Creek was allowed to keep the brand name Just Mayo on its product.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company also makes Just Cookies; supplies university, school and corporate cafeterias through an alliance with the Compass Group; and sells its egg protein to manufacturers for use in their products.Josh Tetrick, the founder of Hampton Creek, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday that Unilever had said it was working toward plant-based replacements for proteins normally derived from meat. He said Unilever had not bought any of Hampton Creek’s egg substitute.Mr. Tetrick said he welcomed the competition from Unilever’s new product. “The whole point of Hampton Creek is to bring its way of doing things to the entire food system,” he said. “There’s no way a single company can do it alone, so I’m glad Unilever is doing this and I hope Kraft and Nestlé and many others follow suit.”As for whether Unilever might now dent Just Mayo’s sales, Mr. Tetrick said, “We’ve got a pretty good head start.”A version of this article appears in print on February 3, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Hellmann’s Introduces Spread Minus the Eggs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.