By MICHAEL CORKERYFEB. 18, 2016
Citigroup said on Thursday that it had granted its chief executive, Michael L. Corbat, a 27 percent pay raise, as the big bank crossed several hurdles on its way toward becoming a more profitable and stable company.Mr. Corbat was awarded total compensation of $16.5 million for last year, up from $13 million in 2014.In addition to his $1.5 million salary, Mr. Corbat was awarded $9 million in stock and about $6 million in a cash award.In announcing his compensation in a securities filing on Thursday, the bank said: “Citi has continued to become a simpler, smaller, safer and stronger bank under Mr. Corbat’s leadership.”AdvertisementFor the bank, 2015 was certainly better than the previous year, when it failed the Federal Reserve’s annual stress test, agreed to multibillion-dollar mortgage settlements and became embroiled in a series of scandals related to its Mexican operations.Last year, Citigroup earned $17.2 billion, its highest profit since 2006. The bank continued to whittle down its “bad bank,” known as Citi Holdings, which holds many of Citigroup’s unwanted assets.As part of that paring down, Citigroup completed the sale of a subprime lending unit, called OneMain, and sold off other consumer units around the globe.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Citigroup also passed its 2015 stress test, which was considered a litmus test for Mr. Corbat’s leadership.This year so far has been a bit rocky for Citigroup as well as for other banks. Shares of Citigroup are down nearly 24 percent since the start of the year, as investors fret about the bank’s exposure to the slowdown in emerging market economies and the collapse in oil prices.Mr. Corbat’s $16.5 million in compensation was slightly higher than the $16 million pay package that Bank of America’s chief executive and chairman, Brian T. Moynihan, received. Mr. Moynihan’s pay package last year was 23 percent greater than his 2014 compensation.JPMorgan Chase increased the pay package of its C.E.O., Jamie Dimon, 35 percent, to $27 million last year.AdvertisementThe pay package of Lloyd C. Blankfein, chief of Goldman Sachs, was cut for the first time since 2011. Last year, his pay was $23 million, $1 million less than he made in 2014. The compensation of Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, James P. Gorman, decreased to $21 million, from $22.5 million.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Citigroup Chief’s 27% Raise Puts Total Pay at $16.5 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.