
Breakingviews By                     
JEFFREY GOLDFARB

MARCH 1, 2016
It sounds as if Jamie Dimon has been brushing up on his Sun Tzu.Mr. Dimon, the chief executive and chairman of JPMorgan Chase, appears to be goading one of his biggest rivals into the perilous terrain of global investment banking. He suggested in an interview with Bloomberg News that if Wells Fargo wanted to compete internationally, it would have to buy a Wall Street franchise. That would recklessly push the otherwise boring Wells Fargo, led by John G. Stumpf, deeper into businesses it does not know well.Wells Fargo, based in San Francisco, has a generally narrower focus on home buyers and corporate borrowers in the United States, which appeals to investors these days. Simplicity has trumped sprawl and riskier operations like bond trading since the financial crisis. JPMorgan trades at 90 percent of its expected 2016 book value, according to estimates culled by Reuters Eikon, but the larger Wells Fargo fetches a multiple of 1.3 times.Mr. Dimon gives the impression that he is both impressed by and fearful of Wells Fargo’s slow and steady rise in corporate finance. Though it is not top five in any broad market category, Mr. Stumpf’s bank claimed 2.5 percent of the industry’s global fees last year, as tallied by Thomson Reuters. That’s a far cry from JPMorgan’s leading 6.9 percent, but it put Wells Fargo ahead of the likes of UBS and Lazard, mainly on the back of selling bonds and syndicating loans for clients.Notwithstanding concerns from regulators, there would probably be some willing sellers of investment banking operations. Barclays, Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank are struggling to develop profitable strategies in the new capital-intensive world order. Mr. Dimon may be theoretically correct in saying that top clients operate globally, and that Wells Fargo could chase them across oceans with an acquisition leveraging its corporate relationships and lower cost of capital.History suggests that kind of derring-do is fraught with danger, however. It would be uncharacteristic for Wells Fargo, and would undoubtedly spook its shareholders, including Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. Mr. Stumpf will be familiar with Mr. Buffett’s aversion to investment banking. Such a bold move would distract Wells Fargo from the traditional lending at which it excels and developing the technology needed to attract a new generation of customers.Surely, Mr. Dimon would not want any of that to happen.Jeffrey Goldfarb is United States editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »