
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

FEB. 3, 2016
Sumner Redstone is out as chairman of CBS, and the title is going to Les Moonves, the chief executive. That swaps one kind of poor governance for another — an independent chairman would have been a better choice — but at least Mr. Moonves has done well for shareholders.Philippe Dauman, the boss of Viacom, the troubled other piece of Mr. Redstone’s $40 billion empire, may have a rougher time securing the same two-handed grip on power.The speculation, shareholder pressure and family drama surrounding the Redstone realm over the last year or so have played out like an episode of “Game of Thrones” — a television show that’s far too popular to have come out of Viacom of late. Questions loom about the 92-year-old Mr. Redstone’s ability to make decisions, even though he was executive chairman at CBS until Tuesday and remains in the same role at Viacom at least until the company’s board meets on Thursday.Nominating Mr. Moonves as chairman squares things away for CBS, which has managed to keep itself relatively unsullied by the events. The same can’t be said of Viacom, the owner of the cable network MTV and the movie studio Paramount Pictures. For one thing, the company’s performance has trailed that of CBS, which was supposed to be the more boring of the two when they split a decade ago, and shareholders are restless despite Mr. Redstone’s controlling voting stake.AdvertisementIn addition, though, Mr. Dauman serves as a Redstone trustee in the event of his death, as well as his health care proxy. Mr. Redstone’s daughter, Shari, vice chairwoman at both companies, applauded Mr. Moonves’s promotion but made clear that she didn’t want a trustee or someone “intertwined” with the family to become chairman of either company. That ruled her out, but without saying so directly, it also excluded Mr. Dauman.Mr. Dauman could, in theory, quit with a hefty payout — more than $75 million, according to the latest Viacom proxy statement — if he is forced to report to someone other than Mr. Redstone.AdvertisementSome investors might be happy to pay that price rather than see Mr. Dauman’s power at the company consolidated. Either way, it sets the stage for a fraught transition.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »