By HIROKO TABUCHIAPRIL 13, 2016
There is the cold-eyed calculation of the costs of an airbag recall: $100 each, translating to millions of dollars in expenses for Takata, the auto parts supplier.There are top executives involved in detailed discussions on how to handle the airbags that can rupture, sending shards of metal flying.There was even an email exchange about rolling back safety testing at Takata — a proposal that was rejected — even as the recalls mounted.Hundreds of pages of internal Takata documents and emails examined by The New York Times reveal new details about how economic pressures helped guide the company’s handling of its airbag defect, which has been linked to at least 11 deaths and more than 100 injuries. All but one of the deaths have been in the United States, including a 17-year-old who was killed last week when the Takata airbag in her Honda Civic ruptured in a crash.AdvertisementFourteen automakers have recalled about 28 million inflaters in 24 million cars to fix Takata’s faulty airbags, in the largest and one of the most complicated recalls in automotive history. On Wednesday, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said that about 85 million more similar airbag inflaters might need to be recalled if Takata cannot prove they are safe. That would bring the total recall tally to 113 million inflaters, the replacement costs of which could add up to billions of dollars.AdvertisementThe internal communications, unsealed as part of a lawsuit against Takata, also shed new light on how much top executives in Tokyo knew and directed the company’s response to the mounting deaths and injuries. Takata faces a criminal investigation into the defect, including over accusations that it manipulated test data.The plaintiff in the case, Patricia Mincey, was paralyzed from the neck down after the Takata airbag in her 2001 Honda Civic inflated forcefully after a low-speed collision in June 2014. Ms. Mincey, 77, died this week from complications from her quadriplegia, her lawyer, Theodore Leopold, announced on Wednesday.“Takata’s conduct went from tragic to catastrophic by causing Ms. Mincey’s untimely death,” Mr. Leopold said.“We are saddened by the news of Patricia Mincey’s death and offer our condolences to the Mincey family,” Takata said in a statement.“There may be some confusion as to what has been communicated and what is going on. The total number of inflators under review is around 62,000. The cost of replacement is $100. Total replacement cost is near $6.2 million.”The company began to tally its costs a few months after the first airbag recall, issued by Honda in late 2008. Three ruptures had been reported the year before.In an email sent in April 2009, Al Bernat, the former vice president for engineering at Takata, forwarded a note warning that the cost of recalling those inflaters would cost about $6.2 million, or $100 for each inflater, a cartridge filled with a propellent that generates the gases that inflate the airbag. “Takata is responsible for 100 percent of the cost,” the email says.In the same email is a discussion of 62,000 airbags that are “under review” because the propellant was manufactured during a similar time period. But Takata and Honda limited their recalls to a subset of just 4,200 cars.AdvertisementJust a month after Mr. Bernat sent that email, a teenager from Oklahoma, Ashley Parham, was killed when the airbag in her 2001 Honda Accord exploded out of her steering wheel in a minor crash. It took two more months for Honda to expand the recall, to 440,000 cars, the first in a series of recall expansions that have continued, prompted by subsequent ruptures and deaths.In response to questions about the newly released documents, Takata said it believed the contents of the documents had been taken out of context by Ms. Mincey’s counsel. Both Honda and Takata denied that cost was an issue in deciding to recall just the 4,200 cars.Yet, even as the recalls mounted, Takata looked for ways to cut costs.In an email discussion in September 2010, Takata officials discussed eliminating, or sharply reducing, a type of safety testing that measures the density of the airbag’s propellant. One official said that the measure would save the company $1.5 million. In 2010, the company had revenue of $3.2 billion at current exchange rates.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The propellant contains a compound called ammonium nitrate, which can become volatile when it is exposed to moisture or to temperature swings, or if it lacks the proper density. If the propellant combusts violently, it can rupture its steel inflater casing.Larry Moquin, a director at Takata, appeared to push back against the cost-saving measure, raising safety concerns.“How does it make our product more robust? It does not. It removes an insurance step,” he says. “This is where we have to stand up for the technology and ensure that cost reduction changes do not adversely affect the product.”Takata said on Wednesday that the suggested cost-cutting measure was not adopted.The company’s documents also show an extensive understanding of the seriousness and scope of the defect, even as it sought publicly to minimize it.“This is a cost savings issue
                        
                        How does it stop a reoccurrence problem? No effect
                        
How does it make our product more robust? It does not. It removes an insurance step”
                 A 2009 report lays out multiple root causes of the ruptures, including moisture, hot weather, propellant density, leaky inflaters and even mere field exposure.“All of these elements, when compromised, can contribute to the probability of vessel failure,” the report says.AdvertisementAnd a study that same year of what Takata calls “Event 0” — the first known Takata airbag rupture, in a 2002 Honda Civic, in 2004 — declared a broken seal on the inflater and moisture as the main culprits. Honda and Takata have said that they treat that episode as an anomaly, not similar to subsequent ruptures that prompted safety recalls.The documents show Takata’s top executives involved in detailed talks over the defect and acknowledging deep problems.In an email in July 2009, Paresh Khandhadia, the company’s top propellant engineer, referred to a direct discussion with Takata’s chief executive, Shigehisa Takada, about the likelihood that shocks and vibration could damage the propellant.And in a March 2014 email, Hiroshi Shimizu, Takata’s senior vice president for global quality assurance, told an executive, Rodolf Claus: “As you are well aware, we have been struggling to deal with AN base propellant due to its chemical characteristics,” using an abbreviation for ammonium nitrate.Later that year, in a congressional hearing, Mr. Shimizu told lawmakers that “the ammonium nitrate that we are using, it’s safe and stable.”Takata declined to comment on that discrepancy.Other officials pointed out the company’s struggles to meet orders.In a February 2007 email, the Takata officials Brian Cooper and David Cox discussed the pressures in keeping up with a demanding client, Toyota. One project was already 12 weeks overdue, they said.“Why do we set ourselves up for quality issues?” Mr. Cooper said. “Train wreck on the horizon. Who has the ball?”A version of this article appears in print on April 14, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Files Show That Takata Was Worried About Costs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.