By JOHN KOBLINMARCH 2, 2016
Melissa Harris-Perry is still frustrated with MSNBC.Ms. Harris-Perry, the former weekend morning host, said in an interview that she remained baffled by the way the network treated her in recent weeks. She also expressed a concern that the removal of her show could leave the network lacking when it came to the coverage of social justice and race.For its part, MSNBC denies that her show was ever going to be canceled before she publicly complained about the network on Friday, and said that it remained committed to covering the issues that her program often highlighted.“We deserved a proper burial,” Ms. Harris-Perry said by phone. “We didn’t deserve to be disappeared. It was evil, and it was cruel. And it had racial implications.”Those implications, she explained, were not indicative of an endemic problem of racism at the network. Instead, she said, by removing her namesake show, MSNBC is unlikely to pay as much attention to matters of diversity that her program routinely explored in depth.AdvertisementPhil Griffin, the president of MSNBC, emphasized in a phone interview on Wednesday that the network had no interest in canceling the show, and that he remained “stunned” that Ms. Harris-Perry refused to return to the air after several weeks of her program being pre-empted for news about the presidential election.Advertisement“The point is she’s wrong,” he said. “We were not trying to get rid of that show. We were focusing on the breaking news of the last couple of weeks.”Ms. Harris-Perry has received public support from many people in recent days, including Eric H. Holder Jr., the former attorney general, who praised the show for focusing on issues and stories “too often unheard/ignored.”The messy breakup between Ms. Harris-Perry and MSNBC, who officially parted ways on Sunday, comes at a time when the network has shifted its strategy during the day fairly drastically with an added emphasis on election coverage, not opinion-based programming.Yvette Miley, a senior vice president for MSNBC, said that the network would “continue to find distinct and diverse voices.”“If they’re judging us through the lens of the departure of Melissa Harris-Perry, we know we have the perception versus reality to manage,” she said. “But we’re going to meet the challenge to still provide meaningful programming that touches people.”But to Ms. Harris-Perry, the shift at the network had been jarring. She recalled the day in 2012 when President Obama spoke from the Rose Garden about the killing of Trayvon Martin and declared, “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.She said that an “all-points bulletin” went out to the black correspondents and analysts who happened to be present at MSNBC that day.“Obviously everybody hit the third-floor studios,” she said.She went on the air, as did other African-Americans who worked for the network. There was a special that night, she said, and it became a running joke “that when the bat signal went up,” she and every other “African-American put on their super capes.”AdvertisementShe contrasted that with a scene from a few weeks ago shortly before the South Carolina primary. She said she was watching the network as Kate Snow, Steve Kornacki and Ari Melber had a lengthy discussion about black voters in South Carolina. She was sitting in the building, ready to go on the air if she was needed. She said that Ms. Miley emailed producers to remind them that both Joy Reid and Ms. Harris-Perry were ready to appear on the air. They never heard anything.“It was jaw-dropping, given that someone who wrote two books about the black vote was in the building,” said Ms. Harris-Perry, who is also a professor at Wake Forest University.“I don’t have the words,” she continued. “It didn’t make me feel proud to work there.”Ms. Miley confirmed that she sent email to producers that day, but said the fact that Ms. Harris-Perry did not go on the air was nothing more than the “ebbs and flows” of cable news, she said.“I don’t think it was a purposeful intention to silence or not include her in the conversation,” she said.But by that point, Ms. Harris-Perry explained, she said she already felt that the network had left her behind. Her show had already been pre-empted and her relationship with Mr. Griffin had deteriorated. They had not spoken in at least a year, she said, and she had never even met or spoken to the new chairman of NBC News, Andrew Lack, though she did remain in communication with other MSNBC executives.Mr. Griffin, who acknowledges that their relationship was strained, said he did everything he could to accommodate Ms. Harris-Perry, including giving her additional time off.“We believed in that show,” he said.Ms. Harris-Perry said that she had received inquiries about her options in television, but that she had not made any decisions about what to do.As for MSNBC, Ms. Miley said, “We will spend nights thinking about what we could have done differently. But pursuing politics in this matter, and at this time, was the right call.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Former MSNBC Host Says Her Show Deserved a ‘Proper Burial’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.