By LIZ MOYERFEB. 2, 2016
A hedge fund manager convicted of insider trading is being allowed to leave the San Francisco halfway house where he was serving out his 24-month sentence while he appeals his 2012 conviction.The release of Doug Whitman, granted after a hearing in a federal appeals court on Tuesday, comes as the United States Supreme Court prepares to hear arguments in another insider trading case.In 2012, Mr. Whitman, who ran Whitman Capital in Menlo Park, Calif., was found guilty of making $1 million in illegal profits from trading shares of stocks like Google and Polycom. He was sentenced in late 2013, and has yet to succeed in overturning his conviction. He had four months left on his sentence.The case was one of more than 80 convictions and guilty pleas secured in recent years by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan. But a ruling in December 2014 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit threatened to upend many of those convictions.AdvertisementThe Second Circuit said insider trading required knowledge that insiders passing along confidential tips were doing so in exchange for personal benefits that had “some consequence.” It overturned the convictions of two men prosecuted by Mr. Bharara, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson, who traded on information they got through analysts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In October, the Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal in that Second Circuit case, United States v. Newman. Then last month, the high court said it would review a decision by another appeals court where an insider trading conviction had been upheld.Dennis Riordan, a lawyer for Mr. Whitman, said the decision to release his client was a strong indication that another attempt to appeal the conviction would be taken seriously.Advertisement“We’re delighted with the court’s ruling today, and we think that it bodes well for the merits of the appeal,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.