By SYDNEY EMBER and RAVI SOMAIYAMARCH 2, 2016
In a sweeping overhaul of its leadership, Tribune Publishing announced on Wednesday that it was combining the role of editor and publisher across its portfolio of newspapers, which include The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune.With the reorganization, Davan Maharaj, the editor of The Los Angeles Times, will become publisher and editor in chief of the newspaper, and Bruce Dold, who was named editor of The Chicago Tribune two weeks ago, will also take on dual responsibilities. Similar changes will occur at the company’s other daily newspapers, including The San Diego Union-Tribune and The Hartford Courant.The management changes are the latest under the Tribune Publishing’s new chairman, Michael Ferro, one week after the company abruptly replaced its chief executive, Jack Griffin.“By giving our newsroom leaders dual responsibilities, we are ensuring our local brands remain vital to the communities they serve with our journalists and creators producing premium, compelling content across all mediums,” said Justin C. Dearborn, a close associate of Mr. Ferro, who succeeded Mr. Griffin as chief executive.AdvertisementTimothy E. Ryan, a longtime Tribune executive who was named publisher of The Los Angeles Times in September after Austin Beutner was ousted, will become the company’s president of publishing. He will report to Mr. Dearborn.Turmoil has been routine for Tribune Publishing, which, like the rest of the newspaper industry, has struggled with declining circulation and steep drops in print advertising revenue. In 2014, Tribune Publishing was spun off from the Tribune Company, now called Tribune Media, which retained the more valuable digital and television assets. The publishing unit, meanwhile, was saddled with $350 million in debt.AdvertisementBy early this year, according to people with knowledge of the company’s finances, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to reveal confidential information, the company was down to about $40 million in cash reserves and was not able to raise any debt.It was, said one of those people, a few bad months away from being unable to pay its bills. And so it brought in Michael Ferro, a Chicago entrepreneur and majority owner of The Chicago Sun-Times, who took a $44 million stake in early February. Within a few weeks, Mr. Griffin had been replaced.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tribune Publishing said on Wednesday that Mr. Ferro was donating his stake in The Sun-Times to a charitable trust to avoid perceived conflicts of interest.Tribune Publishing also announced on Wednesday that its fourth-quarter revenue grew 1 percent, to $462 million. During an earnings call, Mr. Dearborn said Tribune Publishing “remained focused on consolidation within the legacy publishing industry” and would consider other acquisitions, particularly if they bolstered the company’s digital capabilities.“We will continue to evaluate these opportunities but are only interested in transactions that will be financially accretive and that will add strategic digital sockets,” he said.In the last six months, Tribune Publishing’s stock price has dropped as much as 50 percent, with a low of $5.68 in February from $11.50 in September. On Wednesday, Tribune shares closed at $9.19.A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Tribune Publishing to Combine Editor and Publisher Roles at Its Newspapers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.