AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie BennerDavid T. Morgenthaler, a mechanical engineer who became an early figure in the modern venture capital industry, died on June 17 in Cleveland. He was 96.His death was confirmed by his son Gary.Intrepid and intellectually curious, Mr. Morgenthaler (pronounced morgan-THAY-ler) worked in jet engine manufacturing and industrial metallurgy before he moved into investing, supporting nascent companies and entrepreneurs with his own money. He later opened his fund to outside investors.He founded his firm, Morgenthaler Ventures, in 1968, making early investments in several companies, including Apple Computer.But it was Mr. Morgenthaler’s investment in Manufacturing Data Systems, which provided programs to run machine tools, that netted him his fortune. He invested $200,000 in the new business in 1969, a stake that became worth $20 million after the company went public in 1976. He helped orchestrate the company’s sale to the oil-field services giant Schlumberger for just shy of $200 million in 1981.Mr. Morgenthaler’s career took a more political turn when he worked with the National Venture Capital Association.As one of the organization’s founding directors, he moved it from Chicago to Washington, where he helped push a legislative agenda that would shape the industry. He helped persuade Congress to lower the capital gains tax rate to 28 percent from 49 percent to encourage investment in small businesses, and to change laws in 1979 so that pension funds could invest in venture capital firms.“Big business had lobbying in D.C. and was influencing legislation, but it was small business that was creating new jobs in the country,” Gary Morgenthaler said. “He pushed the venture industry to have a mission and a purpose, to be the voice of small business in America.”Mr. Morgenthaler’s passion for investing overlapped with his personal life after his eldest son, David, died of cancer in 1989. He began to invest more in biotechnology and life sciences companies that sought to cure disease.David Turner Morgenthaler was born on Aug. 5, 1919, in Chester, S.C., into a family of farmers. After his parents were divorced, he lived in several places in the South, including South Carolina, North Carolina and Florida.He attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in mechanical engineering, and served with the Army Corps of Engineers during World War II.After the war, Mr. Morgenthaler worked at several start-ups before becoming an investor in new businesses.Over the years, his firm has broken into four separate investment groups. Morgenthaler Ventures is on its ninth venture fund and still makes investments in information technology. Canvas Ventures, another information-technology investment group, was spun out of Morgenthaler in 2013. The life sciences investment arm merged with Advanced Technology Ventures and is now Lightstone Capital Partners. MPE Partners makes private equity investments.For many years, Mr. Morgenthaler served on the board of the Cleveland Clinic, a nonprofit teaching hospital. He financed a professorship at Carnegie Mellon University, and a Stanford entrepreneurship prize, the David T. Morgenthaler Grand Prize, was established in his name. He also served on the Hoover Institution’s board of overseers and on the Science, Technology and Economic Policy Board of the National Academies.In addition to his son Gary, Mr. Morgenthaler is survived by his wife, Lindsay Jordan, whom he married in 1945; another son, Todd; a daughter, Lissa; seven grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren.Reprinted from Sunday’s early editions.Advertisement