By ALEXANDRA ALTERMARCH 2, 2016
The technology news site CNET is known for covering the latest digital products.But this week, the site tried something different. On Wednesday, CNET published a 5,500-word story about a female social media guru in Silicon Valley who is kidnapped by a taco truck owner. The man handcuffs the woman in the back of his truck and forces her to create a social media campaign to promote his tacos.If it sounds like satire, that’s because it is. “The Last Taco Truck in Silicon Valley” is a short story by the novelist Michelle Richmond, and it starts CNET’s venture into publishing fiction.In an era when many general interest magazines have abandoned publishing short fiction, CNET is entering the literary arena with a new monthly series, Technically Literate, which will feature short stories about technology and how it shapes our lives. For its first stories, CNET has recruited several prominent Bay Area authors, including Ms. Richmond, the novelist Nayomi Munaweera; Cristina Garcia, author of “Dreaming in Cuban”; and Anthony Marra, author of “The Tsar of Love and Techno.”The fiction series grew out of an effort to attract new audiences to CNET, which has more than 33 million monthly visitors. When the site was introduced about 20 years ago, technology was still a niche subject. Now, technology saturates practically every facet of daily life and takes center stage in movies, television and fiction, including in the HBO show “Silicon Valley” and recent novels by Dave Eggers, Jonathan Franzen and Joshua Cohen.Advertisement“We hope it will help us expand our brand,” Connie Guglielmo, CNET News’s editor in chief, said of the series. “If you don’t experiment, you stay in place, and that’s kind of counter to the culture here.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To shepherd the stories, CNET brought in the novelist Janis Cooke Newman, who will be editor at large for Technically Literate.AdvertisementCNET is allowing the authors to write anything they want as long as it features technology in some way. Ms. Garcia’s story takes place in 1943 in Cuba, where a night watchman is taken hostage by German soldiers who arrive in a submarine. (The technology driving the story? Batteries.) Mr. Marra’s story, about a girl who adopts a false name and persona, explores how technology allows us to forge new identities. Ms. Richmond’s story, which is narrated by an “evangelist” for a hoodie company who is taken hostage by the taco truck owner, is a satire about an unhinged foodie’s relentless pursuit of popularity on social media.Ms. Richmond, who lives in a small town near Silicon Valley, said she hoped publishing on CNET would attract new readers to her work.“There’s often a lot of fear around this idea that books are dying or literature is dying, which is definitely not true,” she said. “CNET has such a huge reach. I love the idea of this story living in this online space and attracting a lot of readers who are not going there to read fiction, but discover something they would not have discovered otherwise.”A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Site for Technology News Expands Into Storytelling.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.