By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 13, 2016
LONDON — Tracey McDermott, the top executive of the British Financial Conduct Authority, will leave the regulator when Andrew Bailey, its new chief executive, takes over in July, the agency said on Wednesday.Ms. McDermott, the regulator’s former director of supervision for investment, wholesale and specialists, had served as acting chief executive since the departure of Martin Wheatley in September.Mr. Wheatley, who had headed the Financial Conduct Authority since its inception in 2013, announced in July that he planned to leave the financial regulator. The announcement came on the same day that George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, called for new leadership at the agency.John Griffith-Jones, the Financial Conduct Authority’s chairman, said in a news release that Ms. McDermott had done “a terrific job leading the F.C.A. over the last seven months, building on the enormous contribution she has made in her various roles over the previous 15 years.”Advertisement“Transitions are always challenging, and her energy and clarity of purpose have been invaluable in steering the organization in the right direction,” he added.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. McDermott announced in January that she had withdrawn her name as a candidate for the top post, but that she would continue in the role until a permanent successor was named. She has served at the Financial Conduct Authority and at its predecessor agency, the Financial Services Authority, for 15 years.Mr. Bailey, the deputy governor for prudential regulation at the Bank of England and the chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority, another British financial regulator, was named the Financial Conduct Authority’s new chief in January. He will begin a five-year term on July 1.AdvertisementThe Financial Conduct Authority did not indicate on Wednesday what Ms. McDermott planned to do after leaving the regulator.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.