By CHAD BRAYAPRIL 12, 2016
LONDON — The Financial Conduct Authority of Britain said on Tuesday that it had barred a former Royal Bank of Scotland trader from the financial services industry for misconduct related to the manipulation of a global benchmark interest rate known as Libor.The financial regulator said that the trader, Paul White, had acted “recklessly and with a lack of integrity” in the information he submitted regarding the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, as it related to the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc.To set Libor and other rates, banks submit the rates at which they would be prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities. Libor is used to price more than $300 trillion in securities each year.The regulator said that Mr. White improperly considered requests from derivatives traders at R.B.S. and another bank, which was not named, as well as his own trading positions, in making Libor submissions from May 2007 to November 2010. If the information was inaccurate, regulators concluded, it could have manipulated the Libor rate in a way that benefited Mr. White and his colleagues.Advertisement“As a Libor submitter, Mr. White had an obligation to ensure the submissions he made were proper ones,” Mark Steward, the Financial Conduct Authority’s director of enforcement and market oversight, said in a news release. “By allowing his submissions to be set, in effect, by those with collateral financial interests in the outcome, Mr. White recklessly disregarded the risk — the obvious risk — that his Libor submission might corrupt Libor’s integrity.”AdvertisementIn a series of electronic messages with a broker at another bank, which was not named, on June 22, 2010, Mr. White said the Libor rate should be “unchanged,” but asked the broker, “u want higher?” according to a transcript released by the Financial Conduct Authority.“yah, if not a msve prob,” the broker said.“will c what we can do, maybe up a pip,” Mr. White replied.“nice, much appreciated,” the broker said.Mr. White could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.The regulator said that Mr. White could have faced a fine of 250,000 pounds, about $354,000, but that was waived because of financial hardship.Mr. White is the fourth person to be barred by the Financial Conduct Authority over Libor manipulation. Michael R. Curtler, a former Deutsche Bank trader, was barred in March, and Lee Stewart and Paul Robson, two former traders at the Dutch lender Rabobank, received bans last year.The Libor scandal has led to billions of dollars in fines and has rocked the reputations of some of the world’s biggest banks, including Barclays, UBS and Deutsche Bank as well as R.B.S.In February 2013, R.B.S. agreed to pay a combined $612 million to settle with American and British authorities, and its Japanese unit pleaded guilty to criminal wrongdoing.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.British regulators have had a mixed outcome in bringing criminal cases against individuals related to Libor manipulation.In August, Tom Hayes, a former trader at UBS and Citigroup, was convicted of criminal charges. But a jury acquitted six brokers at other financial institutions in January of helping Mr. Hayes to manipulate Libor.AdvertisementA third trial involving five former Barclays employees accused of plotting to improve their own trading results by “dishonestly rigging” Libor began this month in London.On Tuesday, the Financial Conduct Authority said it first issued a warning to Mr. White in June 2014. But those proceedings were stayed because of a criminal investigation by the Serious Fraud Office of Britain into individuals who formerly worked at R.B.S.The Financial Conduct Authority said that Mr. White had received 68 communications from derivatives traders at R.B.S. for Libor submissions that would benefit their trading positions. He also received oral requests on a weekly basis from a Swiss franc trader who sat next to him from March 2007 to November 2008, it said.The regulator said that Mr. White also took into account requests he received from brokers on behalf of an external yen derivatives trader.According to the Financial Conduct Authority’s final notice in the matter, Mr. White told the regulator that he took trading positions into account as a factor when making Libor submissions but said he would always make a “correct” submission with an acceptable range of figures in accordance with Libor’s definition.Mr. White said that any communications that appeared improper “were merely sent to appease those making requests,” the regulator said.“The authority does not accept Mr. White’s version of events, and considers that Mr. White took trading positions into account, only restricting himself from submitting figures that would not appear plausible,” the regulator said.“Although Mr. White did not know that his behavior was contrary to proper standards of market conduct, he deliberately closed his mind to the risk that it was,” the financial authority said. “He therefore acted recklessly and with a lack of integrity.”A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Barred in Britain.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.