
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

NOV. 22, 2016
The future of financial regulation is murky given the conflicting statements by President-elect Donald J. Trump, congressional Republicans and Senate Democrats. Some may panic, but looking at the whole picture, there may be some cause for optimism, a least when it comes to the big banks and the concept of “too big to fail.”The starting point in all of this is Mr. Trump himself. His campaign rhetoric was hardly bank friendly. He called for breaking up the big banks, as well as for enactment of a 21st century Glass-Steagall Act, the Depression-era law that separated commercial banking from investment banking, a restriction that was repealed during the Clinton administration. Since then, big banks have become bigger. The four largest banks – JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo, Bank of America and Citibank — control more than 33 percent of banking assets, according to the Federal Reserve, and 43 percent of deposits.The House Republicans, led by Jeb Hensarling, who is said to be a candidate for Treasury secretary, have proposed their own financial overhaul in a bill of more than 500 pages. The bill, known as the Financial Choice Act, which was proposed before Mr. Trump’s election, would substantially change the way banks are regulated under the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act.Dodd-Frank established a Financial Stability Oversight Board with power over systemic risk and the ability to designate nonbanks like insurance companies as systemically important. It subjects big banks and other financial institutions to heightened regulation. If those companies fail, Dodd-Frank also established an orderly process for liquidating them. Capital charges were put on big banks, and the Volcker Rule limited trading by them, among a host of other requirements.AdvertisementMr. Hensarling’s House bill does away with much of this regulation. Instead, there is a Chapter 14 inserted into the bankruptcy code to allow these entities to be reorganized in bankruptcy. The Volcker Rule is repealed. Well-capitalized banks have options to avoid the Dodd-Frank restrictions.AdvertisementThese are not unreasonable changes. The orderly liquidation authority was criticized because it required multiple approvals for liquidation with one day for a court to consider the decision, making it unlikely to be used and making liquidation anything but orderly. The existence of an oversight board seems conceptually fine but also adds a layer of bureaucracy where the government has not proved particularly good at spotting financial crises (neither has anyone else, frankly).Of course, the House bill has lots of other stuff. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau would be turned into a normal agency with commissioners appointed by the president. Its rule-making authority would be limited, and it would be barred from limiting consumer arbitration as it is proposing.The House bill also cuts a swath through other financial regulation. It eliminates rules on credit-card fees and the Department of Labor’s fiduciary duty standard. It lowers the compensation disclosure requirements for public companies, including cutting the Dodd-Frank requirement that companies disclose the amount and ratio of chief executive pay to the median employee salary.Will the Trump plan or the House plan win out?The simple Trump plan seems to focus on making banks smaller and taking away the regulatory oversight and safety net. On the other hand, the Republican plan does not do away with financial regulation; it simply makes what the Republicans view as reasonable modifications to allow the banks to operate more effectively.Thrown into this mix are the Senate Democrats. Under the Senate rules, 60 votes will be needed to bring any legislation revising Dodd-Frank to a vote. The Republicans have 51 senators and maybe 52, depending on the results of the Louisiana runoff on Dec. 10. New York’s Chuck Schumer, the leader of the Senate Democrats, has already said that although there are areas of common ground on Republican plans for infrastructure projects, there is no such agreement on financial regulation. So assuming the Democrats hold the line, any legislative repeal of Dodd-Frank is unlikely. And although some Democrats may cross over, getting eight or nine will be almost impossible.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.So where does that leave us?Very likely there will be a muddle. Areas where the president can act without Congress are likely to see the most change. If Mr. Trump adopts the House Republican mantra, things like the Financial Stability Oversight Board will wither. The designation of systemically important financial institutions for insurance companies will also go away.The rest will depend on what Mr. Trump wants and who he picks for Treasury secretary. All three rumored potential candidates would seem to be more in favor of the Republican House bill than the ideas Mr. Trump put forth. They may try a compromise that the Democrats can buy into. However, compromise can only go so far. Dismantling the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is probably a nonstarter. Given that 60 Senate votes are necessary to modify the bureau’s status, it is likely to remain. In fact, the agency’s budget is protected from Congress and the president. It can continue on its current course, at least until Mr. Trump appoints a new director in two years.But there may be more common ground on how to deal with the big banks. This is because the proposals in the House bill concerning bank regulation are worth discussing, and the House’s changes to regulation of the big banks have credible support in reasonable quarters. For example, the bankruptcy option seems more viable than a liquidation authority that will never be used. In an op-ed article in DealBook, Professors David A. Skeel Jr. and Mark J. Roe wrote that “the core concept behind the bill – bankruptcy for banks – is sound,” noting that there it needed some tweaks to be viable, including allowing regulators to force banks into bankruptcy.AdvertisementThe exit ramp from Dodd-Frank may also not be viewed as a watering down of regulations. The financial services law firm Davis Polk & Wardwell stated that the standard “poses a high bar” and its utility was “uncertain” because of this.Even some of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s proposals make sense, despite being unlikely to pass. Reconstituting the agency into one like the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Federal Trade Commission, with commissioners appointed by the president and split among the parties, would make the agency more responsive to democratic government and better able to enact longer-lasting regulation.The ideas to limit public companies’ overly burdensome compensation disclosures, which do not seem to do much but impose substantial costs, would also seem ripe for elimination.Some of these proposals are thought-provoking. Complaints about forced arbitration are real and merit discussion. The elimination of the Volcker Rule or the revival of Glass-Steagall-like restrictions would mean a fundamental restructuring of the American financial system. It is something worth thinking about, despite my skepticism: whether America needs big banks.But one thing is sure. As long as the Democrats hold the filibuster, there will be no wholesale erasure of Dodd-Frank regulation. Despite the controversy and dissensions, the Republican House bill contains provisions that might make sense. It’s worth discussing.The question – which no one has the answer to – is: What will Donald Trump do?A version of this article appears in print on November 23, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Conflicts Exist, but Financial Overhaul Proposals Have Merit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »