By CHAD BRAYNOV. 21, 2016
LONDON — Michael S. Sherwood, a Goldman Sachs vice chairman and co-head of its European division, will retire from the Wall Street firm at the end of the year.Mr. Sherwood, who is also known as Woody, had previously been seen as a potential successor to Lloyd C. Blankfein, the Goldman Sachs chairman and chief executive. Mr. Blankfein revealed last year that he had what he described as a “highly curable” form of lymphoma.Mr. Sherwood’s departure came as Goldman tries to navigate the political uncertainty following Britain’s decision this year to leave the European Union.The outcome of the British referendum has raised questions about whether Goldman and other American banks may be forced to shift operations out of London to continue to serve some European clients.AdvertisementRichard J. Gnodde, who oversaw the bank’s European operations with Mr. Sherwood, will become the sole chief executive of Goldman Sachs International after Mr. Sherwood’s departure, according to an internal memorandum reviewed by The New York Times.“Over the course of his career, Michael has played a vital role in establishing and growing our franchise in Europe and around the world,” Mr. Blankfein and Gary D. Cohn, Goldman’s president, said in the memo on Monday.Advertisement“His expertise and knowledge across a range of markets, as well as his passion and commitment to our culture, have influenced a generation of professionals at Goldman Sachs,” they added.Mr. Sherwood has been with Goldman for 30 years, joining the bank in 1986. He previously headed its fixed-income, currency and commodities division in Europe and served as global co-head of its securities division. He has been co-chief executive of Goldman Sachs International since 2005 and a vice chairman since February 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He is one of the firm’s highest-paid employees, earning total compensation of $21 million in 2015, according to its proxy statement.His departure came just over a month after Mark Schwartz, who is chairman of Goldman’s Asia Pacific region and a vice chairman of the firm, announced plans to retire at the end of the year.This year, Mr. Sherwood was one of several Goldman executives called to testify before Parliament over the collapse of BHS, one Britain’s best-known retailers. Goldman served as an informal adviser to Philip Green, the chain’s former owner, in its sale.The department store chain, which employed 11,000 people, was liquidated following its collapse in April just a year after it was sold by Mr. Green to a consortium led by Dominic Chappell, a former racecar driver and businessman who had previously declared bankruptcy multiple times.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on November 22, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Goldman’s Co-Head of Europe to Step Down.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.