By REUTERSMAY 12, 2016
The department store operator Nordstrom reported a drop in first-quarter sales at established stores and cut profit expectations for the year, adding to the gloom in the department store sector.Shares of the company, which sells apparel and cosmetics from premium brands like Armani, Stella McCartney and Valentino, tumbled 16 percent in after-hours trading on Thursday.“Our first-quarter results were impacted by lower-than-expected sales,” said Blake Nordstrom, the co-president. “In response, we have made further adjustments to our inventory and expense plans.”Macy’s and Kohl’s, among Nordstrom’s chief rivals, have also posted dismal first quarters, with sales falling short of forecasts. Shares of Kohl’s fell more than 9 percent. Shares of Macy’s, which reported results on Wednesday, declined by half a percent.AdvertisementDepartment store operators have been hit in the last year as consumers choose to spend on smartphones and electronics, dining out and travel, and invest in assets like vehicles and homes.AdvertisementNordstrom said it resorted to heavy discounts to clear out unsold inventory in the first quarter.The company cut its adjusted profit forecast for the year ending January 2017 to $2.50 to $2.70 a share from $3.10 to $3.35.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.For the first quarter, which ended April 30, Nordstrom said net income fell by nearly two-thirds to $46 million, or 26 cents a share. Total revenue rose 1.1 percent, to $3.25 billion.Sales at Nordstrom stores open at least a year fell 1.7 percent.Macy’s and Kohl’s said weather was a factor behind weak sales. However, Kohl’s, considered the most weather-sensitive among department store operators, said macroeconomic issues seemed to have dented sales more than cool weather.At Kohl’s, same-store sales fell 3.9 percent. Over all, sales fell for the first time in six quarters, declining 3.7 percent, to $3.97 billion. Net income fell about 87 percent, to $17 million, or 9 cents a share, in the quarter that ended April 30.J.C. Penney will report its earnings on Friday.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Nordstrom Sales Fall, And Outlook Is Weaker.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.