By STACY COWLEYAPRIL 8, 2016
At Purdue University, some undergraduates will have a new option to help finance their degrees: pledging to pay a percentage of their future incomes in return for funds today.Starting this fall, juniors and seniors will have access to the school’s  Back a Boiler program, an alternative financing arrangement known as an income-share agreement.Such programs are not loans. Instead, students get funds to cover current education expenses, and, in return, they agree to pay a percentage of their future income over an agreed-upon period of time. When that repayment term ends, so does the student’s obligation, even if their total payments are less than the amount they received.Though an emerging corner of the educational finance industry, such programs help ease the often crushing debt many American college students face after graduation, proponents say. A small number of lenders have tested the model in recent years, but Purdue is the first American university to officially embrace the concept.Advertisement“It looked to us like it was interesting enough that somebody ought to try it,” said Mitch Daniels, the university president and a former governor of Indiana. “For some students, this may be a very preferable option to some of the private loans that are out there.”AdvertisementPurdue, in West Lafayette, Ind., has 30,000 undergraduate students. Indiana residents pay annual tuition fees of $10,000, while students from other states pay nearly $30,000. Its average graduate with debt emerges owing $28,000.The income-sharing program will offer terms based on students’ majors and the projected salaries in those fields. A comparison tool on Purdue’s website lets students estimate how their own offers might look.A senior studying mechanical engineering, one of Purdue’s most popular majors, could get $15,000 in return for a commitment to pay 4.23 percent of his or her income for a bit less than eight years. Purdue estimates that the engineer would have a starting salary of about $56,000, and will be making monthly payments of $200. In that hypothetical situation, the student would eventually repay a total of $20,647.But an English major can anticipate a starting salary of $34,000, by Purdue’s calculation. For that student, the school would offer a different package, which might require a higher percentage of income over a longer period.Advocates of income-sharing agreements, sometimes called human capital contracts, see them as a way to spread risk and prevent students from being locked into dangerously high debt payments. “Affordability is built in,” said Robert M. Whelan Jr., the chief executive of 13th Avenue Funding, a nonprofit company that ran a small pilot test of the income-sharing model with 11 students in California in 2012 and 2013. “Student debt is a crisis, and this is an opportunity to approach it in a different way.”The idea also intrigues some politicians. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who introduced legislation two years ago to clarify the legal framework around the agreements, and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey both spoke in favor of them on the Republican campaign trail. Lawmakers in Oregon have been working for three years to develop a test program called Pay It Forward.Income-sharing agreements operate in a legal gray zone, however. No major regulators have drafted rules specifically to address them, and Senator Rubio’s proposed guidelines never made it out of committee. Financing firms are left largely on their own to tailor their products, fees and disclosures to consumer-protection laws that are designed for traditional loans.AdvertisementThe Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, the federal overseer that many view as the industry’s likely regulator, said it was keeping an eye on the offerings.“It is important that consumers know up front the costs and risks of financial products,” said Seth Frotman, the agency’s student loan ombudsman. “This generally isn’t the case for income-sharing agreements, which can create challenges for borrowers trying to navigate their repayment options.”Advocates say they think the concept will gain popularity, and they point to successes in places like Australia, where university students have long repaid their educational costs through income-tax surcharges.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Obama administration has been more wary. President Obama has focused on making federal student loans more affordable by expanding their income-based repayment options. In December, new rules took effect allowing all federal borrowers to choose a plan that caps their loan payments at no more than 10 percent of their monthly income after graduation. After 20 years of payments — or 10 years for those who work for government organizations or most nonprofits — any remaining balance for undergraduate loans will be forgiven.The economist Milton Friedman is generally credited with originating the concept of an income-sharing model to fund educational costs. In a 1955 essay, he proposed that the government or private lenders could “‘buy’ a share in an individual’s earning prospects.”The success of real-world attempts to carry out Mr. Friedman’s vision has been mixed, at least in the United States. Two finance firms, Upstart and Pave, caused a brief stir in 2012 when they began offering private income-sharing loans for individuals linked to their future earnings. Both ended their programs two years later and switched to making more conventional loans instead.Paul Gu, one of Upstart’s founders, said the income-sharing deals were “a product that was almost equally unpopular among borrowers and investors.” Lenders were reluctant to put money into contracts with such unpredictable returns, and borrowers struggled to figure out a fair price for their future labors. In the end, most preferred to stick with the borrowing option they better understood: traditional, interest-bearing loans.In the two years it offered income-sharing agreements, Upstart did 141 deals, totaling $2.7 million. Since changing models, it has originated loans of nearly $370 million for 27,000 borrowers.Only a few hundred students in the United States have received money through income-sharing arrangements, and there is no long-term data yet on the results, but some participants say they are happy with how their deal has worked out for them.AdvertisementAlex Jasiulek, 24, a 2013 graduate of Columbia College in New York, got $25,000 for his studies from Lumni, an organization that has funded 8,000 income-sharing loans in five countries, mainly in Latin America. He used the money to supplement his grants and government loans, which did not stretch far enough to cover all of his costs for tuition, room and board.He now works in Los Angeles on program development for an education nonprofit and pays Lumni $160 a month, about 4.5 percent of his income. His repayment term is 10 years.“To me, it’s totally worth it, even if I end up paying triple or quadruple what they actually gave me,” he said. “I wouldn’t have been able to go to Columbia if I didn’t get that source of funding, and that experience was priceless to me.”Purdue is holding information sessions for students this month to explain its Back a Boiler program, which was established by the Purdue Research Foundation. About 200 students have requested information and application forms, which the school will begin accepting in May, Mr. Daniels said.“Maybe Purdue will be the Pied Piper,” said Mr. Whelan of 13th Avenue Funding, who is trying to recruit partners and investors to expand his organization’s financing. Mr. Daniels said he viewed his school’s program as an experiment — and he’s sanguine about the possibility that it will fail.“It may prove to be too novel, or other options may emerge that obviate the need, but that’s for the students and their families to decide,” he said. “It may or may not ever become a real phenomenon, but it certainly catches people’s interest.”Mr. Jasiulek said he hoped more students would have the opportunity he did to take advantage of the unusual funding model — but even more than that, he wishes it were not necessary.“Let’s be real; it’s sad that a thing like this has to exist,” he said. “Why is school so expensive? I think our whole educational system is broken, and it’s an exploitative situation, however you cut it.”An article on Saturday about a novel student loan program at Purdue University described the debt level of Purdue graduates incorrectly. The average graduate with debt emerges owing $28,000; that is not the debt level of average graduates over all.A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Getting a Student Loan With Collateral From a Future Job.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.