By BARRY MEIERAPRIL 12, 2016
The noted defense lawyer Alan M. Dershowitz and two lawyers who had sued him claiming defamation have dropped court actions against each side, ending  a prominent dispute that included accusations of sexual misconduct against Mr. Dershowitz.The settlement, announced on Friday, included a financial arrangement. But a lawyer involved in the case would not say who had paid.“The contractual terms of the settlement prevent me from saying anything,” said the lawyer, Jack Scarola, who represents the two lawyers who had sued Mr. Dershowitz in a circuit court in Florida about a year ago claiming defamation, Bradley J. Edwards and Paul G. Cassell.Mr. Dershowitz, who has represented such celebrities as O.J. Simpson and Leona Helmsley, said he was traveling. However, a spokesman for him, Richard Simpson, declined to discuss the agreement’s financial arrangements saying they were confidential.AdvertisementThe dispute traces back to Mr. Dershowitz’s representation of Jeffrey E. Epstein, a money manager who was accused a decade ago of paying underage girls for sexual services. Mr. Epstein subsequently pleaded guilty to two charges and was sentenced to 18 months in jail, though he was allowed to spend many days working on the outside.AdvertisementIn 2014, one of Mr. Epstein’s accusers, Virginia Roberts Giuffre, claimed in court papers filed in a lawsuit seeking to have his plea agreement thrown out, that Mr. Dershowitz had sex with her while she was a teenager. Mr. Dershowitz adamantly denied the assertions and described her lawyers, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Cassell, as “villains” who had fabricated the charges.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The two men subsequently sued Mr. Dershowitz claiming defamation, and he responded with a counterclaim. Meanwhile, a judge struck Ms. Giuffre’s comments from a court filing.Under the settlement, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Cassell acknowledged making what they described as a “tactical mistake” in filing the sexual misconduct accusations against Mr. Dershowitz as part of a lawsuit in which he was not a party.However, they issued a statement saying their client, Ms. Giuffre, stands behind her claims.Mr. Dershowitz has said he has travel records and other documents to prove that he was not in same place as Ms. Giuffre when she claims they had encounters.On Friday, he released a statement by Louis J. Freeh, the former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, whom Mr. Dershowitz hired to investigate the matter.“Our investigation found no evidence to support the accusations of sexual misconduct,” Mr. Freeh’s statement said.A version of this article appears in print on April 12, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Dershowitz and 2 Other Lawyers Settle Legal Fight.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.