
Common Sense By                     
 JAMES B. STEWART
 
MAY 12, 2016
Like many sophisticated investors, the nation’s largest insurers drank the hedge fund Kool-Aid, pouring billions into the high-fee investment funds and helping drive hedge fund assets to over $3 trillion.Now comes the hangover.Steep losses in hedge fund investments during the last quarter damaged many insurance company earnings, reinforcing decisions to rethink the premises that led them to follow the Pied Pipers of finance in the first place.The American International Group said it would cut its hedge fund exposure in half, to $5.5 billion by the end of 2017 from $11 billion at the end of last year. MetLife said it would slash its hedge fund portfolio by two-thirds, to $600 million from $1.8 billion.The pain from the last quarter has shown up most visibly in recent insurers’ results, but it is also spreading to pension funds, endowments and other giant investment funds. Last month, New York City’s largest pension fund said it was abandoning hedge funds entirely, and the Illinois State Board of Investment voted to reduce its hedge fund portfolio by $1 billion.Advertisement“They’re finally getting the mediocre results they deserve,” said Simon Lack, an early skeptic about hedge funds and author of ”The Hedge Fund Mirage: The Illusion of Big Money and Why It’s Too Good to Be True.”Advertisement“I imagine you’ll see more and more institutional investors re-examining their commitment to hedge funds,” Mr. Lack added, “as they see what they’re getting for those outrageously high fees they pay.”Listen to the chorus of recent hedge fund criticism. Warren E. Buffett blasted their high fees and mediocre performance at his recent investors’ conference in Omaha. The activist investor and hedge fund manager Daniel Loeb called their recent performance “catastrophic” in his latest letter to investors.Even the legendary hedge fund manager Steven A. Cohen, whose fund averaged 30 percent annual returns before Mr. Cohen’s close brush with insider trading charges, complained this month: “It’s very hard to maximize returns and maximize assets.”Apart from industry experts, most people probably didn’t realize that insurance companies, which belong to one of the most heavily regulated industries in the country, were big investors in hedge funds, one of the most lightly regulated of all investment vehicles. Then again, before the financial crisis, hardly anyone realized A.I.G. was exposed to trillions of dollars in derivatives tied to mortgage-backed securities until catastrophe struck and the company had to be bailed out by taxpayers for more than $180 billion.Luckily, there’s little danger of that now with hedge funds, because they make up only a small fraction of insurers’ vast investment portfolios. Even at A.I.G., the $11 billion hedge fund portfolio represented just 3 percent of its approximately $340 billion in total investments. At MetLife, hedge funds account for less than one half of a percent.Still, losses from even these small percentages can have a big impact on earnings. A.I.G. reported pretax hedge fund losses of $537 million for the first quarter, which wiped out operating profit and led to an overall loss of $183 million. MetLife reported a 19 percent drop in operating earnings for the quarter, in part because of what Steven J. Goulart, its chief investment officer, said were “negative” results from hedge funds.Insurers strive to match their liabilities to their assets, which generally means low-volatility United States Treasuries, along with other bonds and fixed income positions. But they are allowed to invest their excess capital any way they see fit.AdvertisementTo be sure, those investments are subject to stiffer capital requirements: generally 30 percent in the case of stocks and equity-like investments, which include hedge funds and other so-called alternative investments.Hedge funds promised to provide high equitylike returns, with less volatility, that were uncorrelated with the ups and downs of the stock market — in other words, a variation on the age-old siren song of higher returns with lower risk.Hardly any of that turned out to be true, at least for insurance companies.What went wrong? Pretty much every everything, based on conversations I had this week with chief investment officers at several insurance companies. “Their marketing skill proved to be much better than their investing ability,” Mr. Lack said of hedge fund managers.For starters, hedge funds didn’t deliver equitylike returns. Hedge funds have trailed the benchmark Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index every year since 2009, often by significant amounts. Even ordinary investors can earn very close to that simply by buying a low-fee index fund.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.To some extent, that was to be expected in a strong bull market. But the volatile market of the last year was exactly the environment in which so-called long-short hedge funds were supposed to thrive. They didn’t.A major culprit, everyone I spoke to agreed, was the sheer size of assets managed by hedge funds.“We thought a lot about what’s wrong with the hedge fund space,” said Mr. Goulart, who also serves as an executive vice president at MetLife. “One problem is that there are just too many funds, roughly 10,000 with almost $3 trillion invested. There’s too much money chasing a limited number of attractive trades.”Many hedge funds found themselves crowded into positions in the same handful of stocks — such as the controversial drug maker Valeant Pharmaceuticals International — and found they couldn’t exit positions without causing further big losses even while being hit with investor redemptions.“The last quarter showed there were a lot of guys in the same trades,” said Douglas Dachille, A.I.G.’s chief investment officer. “They all looked good until the trade turned against them. Then the exit door turned out to be very small. The result was a lot of bad performance.”Mr. Cohen, speaking at the Milken Institute in Santa Monica, Calif., made a similar point: “One of my biggest worries is that there are so many players out there trying to do similar strategies.” Noting that his fund lost 8 percent in February, he added, “My worst fears were realized.”AdvertisementHedge funds’ lack of transparency was another problem. Investment officers had trouble matching investment assets to their existing balance sheets when they didn’t know what was in a hedge fund’s portfolio.This was especially true for so-called activist hedge funds, which take large equity positions, hoping to shake up management or otherwise influence corporate strategy. A.I.G., for example, discovered it was invested in hedge funds that were making opposite bets on the same company.And with so many managers — at its peak, A.I.G. had more than 100 hedge funds — due diligence was time-consuming and distracting. Mr. Dachille said it took months to review A.I.G.’s positions after he arrived last year.“It’s no wonder A.I.G. experienced weak performance,” Mr. Lack said. “With that many funds, you get the average, and the average is mediocre. If you aren’t highly skilled in picking hedge funds, there’s no point in being there.”Given their weak performance, hedge funds’ high fees — the so-called two-and-20 formula that characterizes the industry (2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of any gain) — were increasingly hard to swallow. “I have no trouble paying great people,” Mr. Dachille said. “But I get upset when I pay mediocre people great compensation.”Hedge funds aren’t about to disappear. A few hedge fund managers continue to post sterling returns, and both A.I.G. and MetLife said they planned to retain some hedge funds that fit their investment strategies and met performance targets.But the hedge fund fever that gripped the investment world for the last decade — minting scores of billionaires — may have broken.Over all, hedge fund assets dropped by $14.4 billion during the first quarter of this year after a $26.8 billion decline in the last quarter of 2015.“There is no doubt,” Mr. Loeb wrote in his letter to investors, “that we are in the first innings of a washout in hedge funds.”The Common Sense column on Friday, about insurance company losses on their hedge fund investments, misspelled the given name of a hedge fund manager who commented on the difficulty in making profits. He is Steven A. Cohen, not Stephen. The article also omitted part of the name of a drug company that was a favorite of hedge funds. It is Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, not Valeant International. And the article rendered incorrectly part of the name of a pension fund. It is the Illinois State Board of Investment, not the Illinois State Board of Investments.A version of this article appears in print on May 13, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: With Insurers Fleeing, Hedge Funds Face Reckoning.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »