AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Kevin AllisonEnergy Transfer investors are in another tangle. The pipeline partnership Sunoco Logistics Partners wants to buy Energy Transfer Partners for $21 billion, based on Friday’s closing prices. Energy Transfer Partners’ parent, Energy Transfer Equity, tied itself in knots trying to buy rival pipeline operator Williams Companies last year, before walking away on a technicality. The sour reaction to the latest deal suggests E.T.P. may also be headed for trouble.The companies — both of which are effectively controlled by Energy Transfer Equity — argue that uniting will give them bigger scale and a broader geographical footprint. That could be an advantage considering the recent controversy over Dakota Access Pipeline, which is owned by Energy Transfer Partners and has been the scene of clashes between protesters and the police. The industry as a whole also looks set to benefit from President-elect Donald J. Trump’s promises to build infrastructure and cut red tape, especially for traditional energy companies.If only it were that simple. In classic fashion for master limited partnerships, these two concerns are already heavily intertwined. Energy Transfer Partners owns around a fifth of its would-be acquirer’s common units — the equivalent of shares. It also exerts control over Sunoco through its 100 percent ownership of the general partner that staffs and runs Sunoco’s pipelines. Sunoco lists itself as an Energy Transfer Partners subsidiary in its regulatory filings.Energy Transfer Equity, which had extreme buyer’s remorse with Williams and was only able to get out of that $33 billion acquisition because of a legal loophole, controls Energy Transfer Partners through ownership of its general partner. Kelcy L. Warren, chief executive of Energy Transfer Equity, runs that company and Energy Transfer Partners. But he needs the approval of other Energy Transfer Partners unit holders for the Sunoco transaction to go through.The initial reaction does not look promising. Shares of Sunoco and Energy Transfer Partners fell nearly 10 percent on Monday shortly after the opening bell, pushing the value of the deal below $20 billion, before recovering some of their losses. Shares of Energy Transfer Equity rose more than 3 percent, suggesting its shareholders may benefit the most from all the deck chair shuffling. With the Energy Transfer Equity-Williams debacle fresh in investors’ minds, the market’s reaction looks like a bad omen.Advertisement