
Breakingviews By                     
OLAF STORBECK and


KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 12, 2016
Bayer could swallow Monsanto, but the taste could easily prove bitter. The German chemical giant, worth $94 billion at Wednesday’s market close, may be mulling a bid for the $39 billion American seed maker, according to media reports.Monsanto’s chief executive, Hugh Grant, last month swore off big deals after failing to buy a rival, Syngenta, which is now being sold to ChemChina. Mr. Grant argued that his company, based in St. Louis, could thrive without a partner during the latest wave of industry consolidation.That suggests only a serious premium would get his attention. An offer pitched at a 30 percent markup to Monsanto’s closing share price on Wednesday would value the enterprise at nearly $60 billion, including $7 billion of net debt. That’s around 15 times estimated 2016 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, according to Thomson Reuters, close to the frothy 15.3 times ChemChina is paying for Syngenta.Bayer would need leverage. By borrowing up to 3.5 times the combined forecast Ebitda for 2016, the enlarged Bayer could take on just over $30 billion of new debt — enough to cover less than two-thirds of the cost of Monsanto’s equity. For the remaining $20 billion or so, Monsanto shareholders might take Bayer stock. At more than one-fifth of the German group’s market capitalization, though, if the company instead had to raise cash through new stock issuance and asset sales, it could be a stretch.Even if the new Bayer chief executive, Werner Baumann, were up for all that, he would need to scrutinize value creation. To cover a $12 billion premium would take cost savings worth at least $1.6 billion a year, assuming a tax rate of 25 percent and a multiple of 10 times. That’s a chunky 6 percent of the annual revenue of Monsanto and Bayer’s crop science unit combined. Researchers at Sanford C. Bernstein reckon $1.5 billion might be achievable.While the numbers may just stack up, a merger would also set up a culture clash. Beyond the usual differences, Bayer would be buying a company at the center of the fight against genetically modified crops in Europe. Investors bid Monsanto’s shares up nearly 10 percent on Thursday morning in New York, while Bayer’s fell about 5 percent. That’s just the beginning of what could happen if Mr. Baumann gets serious about Monsanto.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »