
Vocations As told to                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

NOV. 19, 2016
Ain Chiké, 34, is an operations manager at the Captain Planet Foundation in Atlanta.Q. What is the Captain Planet Foundation, and what is your role there?A. We help students learn about the world they live in. Our Project Hero program helps save endangered species and ecosystems. Project Learning Garden, my program, works with students to assemble gardens and grow fruits and vegetables at their schools. Besides that, we try to expand students’ palates so that they eat healthier food. I also work with the teachers to coordinate classroom and garden lessons.What did you do before this?Originally, I thought I’d work in the medical field. I left college after two years to join the Army and served as a medic at Fort Sill, Okla. Afterward, I returned to Atlanta and became a certified E.M.T. We visited nursing homes and rehabilitation centers, and when I saw the amount of medication people were taking, I became interested in herbal remedies and natural food. After that, I attended an urban gardeners’ program in Atlanta and learned about growing food.What’s it like working with children?Children have so much energy, and their faces light up when I enter the classroom like I’m a rock star. They know they’re going outside.You have a link from childhood to the Captain Planet Foundation.When I was 9 or 10, I used to watch a cartoon focused on raising environmental awareness called “Captain Planet and the Planeteers.” The main character was a superhero who often told the Planeteers, a group of teens who worked with him, “The power is yours.” Ted Turner and Barbara Pyle co-created the cartoon, and the foundation is an outgrowth of that. I wanted to be a Planeteer when I grew up, and in a sense, I’ve done that.How have some of your students reacted to gardening?Once I was harvesting radishes and carrots and Swiss chard with a third-grade class. Initially the students were unimpressed because the vegetables were covered with dirt when we pulled them out of the ground. But when they washed them and one boy saw they were ready to eat, he said, “Wait. Are you telling me we can grow grocery store food out here?” Another little boy asked me what my real job was and I said, “This is my real job.” He was entranced and asked his teacher, “Why didn’t you tell me I could play in the dirt for a living?”Vocations asks people about their jobs. Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.A version of this article appears in print on November 20, 2016, on Page BU8 of the New York edition with the headline: Growing Up to Be a Planeteer.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »