By SEI CHONGOCT. 7, 2016
Jon S. Corzine has been through numerous lawsuits in recent years.Since he presided over the brokerage firm MF Global when it collapsed in 2011, Mr. Corzine, 69, has been the target of federal investigations, including one filed by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission over the misuse of $1 billion in customer money.That may all be coming to an end, however, as he nears a settlement with the federal regulatory agency, according to people briefed on the matter.In recent weeks, Mr. Corzine and the agency have struck a tentative settlement, which would include $5 million in penalties that he would have to pay out of his own pocket. That figure would be more than what the agency could expect to win at trial if he were found liable, the people briefed on the matter said.Mr. Corzine would also accept a lifetime ban from personally trading other people’s money in the futures industry.AdvertisementA settlement, which has not yet been completed, would avert a trial for Mr. Corzine, a former Democratic senator and New Jersey governor. Had it gone ahead, it was originally scheduled to begin this month.AdvertisementWells Fargo has heard from disgruntled customers, fired employees and angry lawmakers over the fake accounts scandal.Now, it’s Lacy Harber’s turn. Mr. Harber, 80, a wealthy businessman and philanthropist from Texas, took out advertisements in four major newspapers, including The New York Times, to berate the bank’s investment brokers.In an interview, Mr. Harber said that on Aug. 24, 2015 he placed orders for about $34.8 million worth of stocks “on margin” (which usually requires putting down some money and borrowing the rest from the broker).But given the extreme volatility in the market at the time, Wells Fargo demanded that he pay for the stocks in full, he said.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.At the end of the day, Mr. Harber said, Wells sold all the shares he had bought that day, resulting in a $5 million loss. He was also charged about $480,000 in broker fees. The bank said in a statement that it was “strongly defending” against his complaints.Though his case is different from that of the thousands of Wells customers who had illegal bank accounts and unauthorized credit cards issued in their name, it has one crucial similarity.Mr. Harber’s lawsuit is being heard in private arbitration — Wells forces many of its customers to agree to settle any dispute in arbitration as a condition of doing business with it.AdvertisementThe pound is dropping. Fast.Two minutes of chaos in early Asian trading sent the British currency falling sharply.A sudden drop like the one it suffered — down as much as 6 percent at one point — is often called a flash crash, and is sometimes caused by computer-driven automated trades or a simple misplaced keystroke (a fat-finger error, as it is known on trading floors). In the case of the drop in Asia for the pound, experts said they were hard-pressed to identify a single cause.But over all, they pointed to a general area of unease: Britain’s vote in a referendum in June to leave the European Union, or “Brexit.”The pound dropped as low as $1.1841 before recovering.The speed of its decline comes a few days after Bank of America Merrill Lynch warned about liquidity in the currency markets, The Financial Times reports.• The Labor Department will report on hiring and unemployment in September. Here is what you can expect.• The annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group open in Washington. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will join a panel discussion and will hold a news conference.• Loretta Mester, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, will speak at the Shadow Open Market Committee fall meeting in New York and will appear on CNBC at 8:30 a.m.• The annual membership meeting at the Institute of International Finance in Washington will feature speakers including: Stanley Fischer, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve; Lael Brainard, a Fed governor; Esther L. George, the Kansas City Fed president; Jamie Dimon, JP Morgan Chase’s chief executive; Michael L. Corbat, Citigroup’s chief executive; and James P. Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chief executive.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.