

      By MICHAEL CIEPLY

APRIL 10, 2016

 It might be easier to trace the genealogy of an alley cat than that of the typical Hollywood studio: Over the last century or so, most have accumulated a tangled list of owners and corporate forebears — and none more so than Paramount Pictures. Paramount is currently owned by Viacom Inc., which is in turn controlled by Sumner Redstone and his daughter, Shari, through their privately held National Amusements Inc. But the studio’s family tree will become more complicated if Viacom succeeds in its plan to sell a minority stake in Paramount to an outside investor, yet to be identified. That new partial parent will expand a corporate ancestry that has been growing since 1912, when Adolph Zukor, a nickelodeon king, allied with Daniel and Charles Frohman to start what was then called the Famous Players Film Company. The founding fathers started a new feature film studio, Famous Players Film Company, in 1912. Mr. Zukor, born in Hungary, was an upholsterer and furrier before getting into the entertainment business, partly via nickelodeons, the little theaters that charged a nickel for admission.The Frohmans, who joined Mr. Zukor in the venture, were Ohio-born theater entrepreneurs and brothers, operating mostly in New York. Daniel, the older of the two, helped round up talent. Charles was skeptical, but provided rights to his plays. An early production was “The Prisoner of Zenda” (1913) with the stage star James K. Hackett in a starring role.Also in 1912, Mr. Lasky, a San Francisco-born vaudeville performer and Broadway producer, with backing from his brother-in-law, Samuel Goldfish, a glove salesman who later became known as Samuel Goldwyn, started the Lasky Feature Play Company.By Neal Gabler’s account in “An Empire of Their Own,” Mr. Goldfish pestered Mr. Lasky about starting the movie venture during a vacation in Maine, and later persuaded him with some help from a friend, the stage director Cecil B. DeMille. Mr. DeMille made his feature-length “The Squaw Man” for release by Lasky in 1914.  W.W. Hodkinson was a theater owner based in Utah, where he sometimes gazed on a mountain in the Wasatch Range that inspired the logo for his Paramount Pictures Corp. The company was founded in 1914 and became a national film distributor, through which Famous Players and Lasky released movies—but not happily. “I was not entirely satisfied with that arrangement,” Mr. Zukor wrote in his autobiography, “The Public Is Never Wrong,” referring to the standard deal under which Paramount received 35 percent of the receipts from each film. Paramount’s early output included Jack London-inspired films like “An Odyssey of the North.”  Mr. Zukor began buying up stock in Paramount. And in 1916, Famous Players, Lasky and Paramount merged to form what was called the Famous Players-Lasky Corp., with Paramount Pictures as its increasingly famous film brand. Mr. Goldwyn left amid internal conflicts, some provoked by his belief that Mr. Zukor was overpaying stars like Mary Pickford. “The Knickerbocker Buckaroo,” a 1919 comedy with Douglas Fairbanks, soon to become Ms. Pickford’s husband, was among its many star-laden films.Something like a “Dutch uncle” in the corporate family, Mr. Balaban joined Paramount Publix Corp., as the company was then known, when it acquired the Balaban & Katz theater chain in 1926.  The Chicago-based chain was known for opulence, and for Mr. Balaban’s willingness to pay off mob-run unions, as Peter Bart tells it in his “Infamous Players.” Mr. Balaban became Paramount’s president in 1936, while Mr. Zukor became chairman, in the wake of a bankruptcy filing. Renamed Paramount Pictures Inc., the studio weathered the Depression with the help of films like “Duck Soup,” a 1933 release that starred the Marx Brothers. In 1966, Gulf+ Western Industries Corp., headed by Mr. Bluhdorn, acquired a rump version of Paramount: The studio had been depleted by the forced sale of its theaters after a 1948 Supreme Court decision split film production and exhibition, and by failed experiments in television broadcasts.With Mr. Bluhdorn came Robert Evans, a struggling actor and producer (he played Irving Thalberg in “Man of a Thousand Faces”) who caught Mr. Bluhdorn’s eye after Mr. Bart wrote about him in The New York Times. Mr. Bluhdorn put Mr. Evans in charge of Paramount’s film production; and, against all odds, he succeeded with films like Francis Ford Coppola’s “The Godfather,” released in 1972.After Mr. Bluhdorn died in 1983, a successor, Mr. Davis, sold many of Gulf + Western’s operations, and by 1989 he had turned it into a media company called Paramount Communications. Mr. Davis clashed with Paramount’s studio chief, Barry Diller, who was initially one of his supporters.  Mr. Diller eventually left to run 20th Century Fox. But corporate turmoil did nothing to stop the success of high-concept films like the Eddie Murphy comedy “Beverly Hills Cop,” released in 1984.Under its chairman, Mr. Redstone, who was then 70 years old, Viacom bought Paramount in a deal valued at about $10 billion. The sale followed a bruising fight with a rival bidder, QVC Network Inc., which was run by the former Paramount top executive, Mr. Diller.“Here’s to us who won,” Mr. Redstone said in toasting the purchase at a family dinner.Even before the purchase formally closed, Mr. Redstone had a major hit in Paramount’s “Forrest Gump,” which was directed by Robert Zemeckis and starred Tom Hanks. Ms. Redstone, 61, who is a major shareholder in National Amusements, is expected to wage a fight for control of Viacom upon the eventual death or disability of her father, who is now 92. She does not want to run the company herself, but wants to change the leadership structure. Mr. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, has begun to search for an investor who will take a stake in Paramount, and perhaps help to reinvigorate the film operation.  Last year Paramount ranked last among Hollywood’s major studios, according to Boxofficemojo.com, with only 5.9 percent of the domestic box office, notwithstanding a lift from its biggest hit, “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation,” which had about $195 million in North American ticket sales. Which person, company or combination thereof next joins the Paramount ownership family will now be up to Mr. Dauman, Mr. Redstone and the Viacom board. The new part-owner can presumably look forward to the premiere of “Star Trek: Beyond,” set for release in July. Sources: “The Public Is Never Wrong,” by Adolph Zukor with Dale Kramer (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1953); “An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood,” by Neal Gabler (Crown Publishers, 1988); “Infamous Players: A Tale of Movies, the Mob (and Sex),” by Peter Bart (Weinstein Books, 2011); Wikipedia; Boxofficemojo.com; Imdbpro.com; The New York Times. Additional production by KEVIN GRANVILLEAdvertisement