
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JULY 29, 2016
The long, sad saga of TXU may finally be heading toward a conclusion. The power producer NextEra Energy is buying the bankrupt company’s 80 percent stake in the power transmission group Oncor Electric Delivery, valued at $18.4 billion.The $45 billion leveraged buyout of the TXU Corporation, now called Energy Future Holdings, ran into trouble soon after its 2007 completion. Most creditors will have to be satisfied with a slice of the former TXU’s other assets.The deal, the largest-ever leveraged buyout, essentially involved the backers Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, TPG Capital and Goldman Sachs taking a huge chance on the price of natural gas. If it rose, the utility’s coal-powered generators would become highly profitable. With largely fixed costs, the power they produced could be sold at a relatively high price set by the cost of gas. The bet misfired as gas prices plummeted.Regulators, however, insisted that Oncor be ring-fenced and a 20 percent stake sold to outside investors before agreeing to the TXU buyout nearly 10 years ago. That proved sensible, saving Oncor from going bust. NextEra is taking control of the company, along the way repaying $9.5 billion to creditors and assuming additional debt.NextEra’s purchase is subject to approval from the bankruptcy court and regulators. With the rest of Energy Future’s business, including power generation and retail services, set to be spun off, the court and creditors may be on its side. But watchdogs are not always a pushover. NextEra’s $4.3 billion plan to buy a utility in Hawaii was rejected this month. Its promises to keep Oncor’s Dallas headquarters, retain employees and maintain pay should help, as presumably will the prospect of an end to uncertainty over Energy Future’s fate.Assuming Oncor goes, holders of the remainder of what was once $40 billion worth of debt will be left owning chunks of Energy Future’s less-regulated operations. These were the great hopes at the time of the TXU buyout, but their prospects are uncertain and depend on how the volatile electricity markets evolve. That could mean the story is not quite over for battered creditors. But they will hope it is at least the beginning of the end.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »