
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 3, 2016
Defendants often point to the collateral consequences of a prosecution and civil enforcement action when arguing that they should not be punished too severely. The settlement by the hedge fund Och-Ziff Capital Management and its founder, Daniel S. Och, for paying bribes to obtain natural resource deals in Africa tests how much they will endure beyond the settlement’s fines and disgorged profits.Och-Ziff entered into a deferred prosecution agreement with the Justice Department for dispensing millions of dollars in bribes in Libya, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Chad and Niger in violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. That law prohibits giving anything of value to a foreign official to “obtain or retain business,” and has been used recently to police Wall Street firms seeking investment opportunities overseas. The firm will pay a fine of about $213 million to the Justice Department and must avoid any violations during the three-year term of the agreement.Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, proclaimed that “despite knowing that bribes were being paid to senior government officials, Och-Ziff repeatedly funded corrupt transactions.” The source of those funds came at least in part from money that investors gave the firm to manage, putting them at risk when the deals soured.As part of the settlement, OZ Africa Management GP, a Delaware limited liability company, pleaded guilty to a charge of conspiracy to violate the overseas bribery law. That will have little direct impact on Och-Ziff because it avoided having to admit guilt while its wholly owned subsidiary can simply cease operations – if it has not done so already.AdvertisementOch-Ziff also agreed to retain a compliance monitor for three years to ensure it stays within the law and promised to strengthen its internal controls to guard against future violations. That means continuing costs for the firm as the monitor digs into its operations and makes demands that cannot be resisted, lest it appear to be uncooperative and put the settlement at risk.The firm agreed to pay an additional $199 million in a parallel administrative action with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which shares oversight responsibility for F.C.P.A. violations with the Justice Department. Andrew J. Ceresney, head of the enforcement division, used strong language to describe the case, pointing out that “Och-Ziff engaged in complicated, far-reaching schemes to get special access and secure significant deals and profits through corruption.”In 2013, Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the S.E.C., announced that in certain cases, the regulator would extract an admission of wrongdoing from a defendant, such as “where a large number of investors have been harmed or the conduct was otherwise egregious.” Apparently the type of brazen bribery undertaken by Och-Ziff that resulted in criminal charges was not egregious enough to call for such an acknowledgment.AdvertisementTo be sure, the Justice Department and Securities and Exchange Commission are continuing the investigation of other individuals involved in the bribery.The firm may face collateral consequences for its future funding and investment activities because of the case. Och-Ziff will have to seek a waiver from the S.E.C. from the automatic “bad actor” bar that would disqualify it from offering securities without having to go through the full disclosure process, and could be ineligible for the “well-known seasoned issuer” status that lets a company register its securities for sale more easily. The Labor Department will have to clear the firm to continue managing certain pension and retirement funds.There has been some controversy within the S.E.C. about the seemingly routine grant of waivers after resolution of a criminal investigation. Commissioner Kara M. Stein dissented last year from waivers granted to banks that had settled cases over fixing the benchmark interest rate known as Libor, or the London interbank offered rate. “We have the tools, and with the tools the responsibility, to empower those at the top of these institutions to create meaningful cultural shifts, yet we refuse to use them,” Ms. Stein argued.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Och-Ziff’s use of client funds to pay some of the bribes may give the commissioners pause in agreeing to any waivers, but in the end, it is likely that the firm will be allowed to avoid the consequences.The reputational impact of the case may be the greatest harm to the firm, rather than the total payment to the government of about $413 million, one of the largest penalties ever assessed for violating the F.C.P.A. The New York Times reported that investors had withdrawn more than $5.5 billion from its hedge funds this year, and settling criminal and civil cases is not going to make them any more confident in how the firm will perform.Despite a push by the Justice Department to hold individuals accountable for corporate violations, no one from Och-Ziff’s management has been charged at this point. Mr. Och settled with the administrative case with S.E.C., as did the firm’s chief financial officer, Joel M. Frank. The complaint goes out of its way to state that “neither Och nor Frank knew that bribes would be paid” even though they “ignored red flags and corruption risks and permitted these transactions to proceed.”At one point, Mr. Och rejected a recommendation by one of the firm’s lawyers that it not go forward with a transaction because of questions about one of the government officials involved the deal. Turning a blind eye to potential misconduct in the name of making a profit is the core of the F.C.P.A.’s prohibition because businesses can view any consequences from being involved in corruption as a cost of doing business.The S.E.C.’s administrative order did not take a hard line, however, limiting the violations for the two executives to just failing to maintain proper books and records and adequate internal controls at the firm. Mr. Och will pay $2.2 million while a penalty has not yet been assessed against Mr. Frank. Forbes estimates Mr. Och’s net worth at $2.7 billion, so his payment will not make much of a dent in his pocketbook.One tool the S.E.C. has to police corporate managers is the authority to seek a bar from serving as a director or officer of a public company. But that is not available for the two executives because it requires a violation of the antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws, and their settlement did not involve a claim of such misconduct. And, like the resolution for the firm, neither was required to admit to a violation, although Mr. Och did state that “this has been a deeply disappointing episode.”A persistent criticism has been the lack of individual accountability for corporate misconduct, especially among senior executives who are far enough removed from day-to-day decisions that proving they engaged in the actual violations, like paying a bribe, is often impossible. At Och-Ziff, executives appear to have taken the notion of willful blindness to its outer limit by approving an aggressive investment strategy in the face of explicit warnings about the risks involved.AdvertisementYet, they still avoided the more significant consequences from their actions: no criminal charges, nor an admission to violating the securities law in a civil action.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »