AdvertisementSupported byBy Victoria FinkleWASHINGTON — A prominent Republican lawmaker on Wednesday laid out his agenda for restructuring the financial system in the next Congress, including his plan to roll back major portions of the Dodd-Frank Act.Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, has long been a vocal opponent of the 2010 financial reform law. But he now has an ally in President-elect Donald J. Trump, who has repeatedly called for taking apart Dodd-Frank, and he has Republican majorities in both chambers of Congress.Mr. Hensarling introduced his blueprint for reform, the Financial Choice Act (“Choice” stands for Creating Hope and Opportunity for Investors, Consumers and Entrepreneurs) last summer, and he said he was “cautiously optimistic” that a version of the bill could come up for a vote on the House floor early next year.“There has been a fairly constant dialogue with the Trump transition team about the Choice Act,” he said on Wednesday during a lunch meeting of the Exchequer Club in Washington. “There’s also been dialogue with our speaker and our leader in the House.”Mr. Hensarling’s remarks came on the same day that Neel Kashkari, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, proposed new rules for banks and nonbank lenders to end “too big to fail.”Mr. Trump’s transition team has said on its website that it “will be working to dismantle the Dodd-Frank Act and replace it with new policies to encourage growth and job creation.”Mr. Hensarling’s bill seeks to revamp the oversight of financial institutions and how big banks are wound down in times of trouble, as well as make structural changes to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the broader rule-making process. It would also repeal the Volcker Rule, which is intended to stop banks from making risky bets with their own money, and call for stronger penalties for bankers who break the law, among other provisions.Mr. Hensarling introduced the plan in June, and the Financial Services Committee approved it in September with a vote largely along party lines.Still, he conceded that Senate rules, which require 60 votes to avoid a filibuster, will still demand some amount of compromise with Democrats, which could significantly curtail his plans for sweeping changes. After last week’s elections, Republicans will have 51 seats in the Senate, and Democrats will hold 48, including two independents who caucus with the Democrats. (The remaining seat depends on a runoff election in Louisiana on Dec. 10.)“Even though Republicans will be nominally in charge of both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue soon, I remain painfully aware of the Senate’s cloture rules,” Mr. Hensarling said. “That means there will continue to be a need to work with members of the other party.”He added that his team was “re-examining our legislation” since the committee approved it and that he was “interested in working on a 2.0 version.”But whether Democrats will offer support is another matter.Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, one of the most outspoken supporters of Dodd-Frank, has already vowed to protect core tenets of the law, including her brainchild, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.“If Trump and the Republican Party try to turn loose the big banks and financial institutions so they can once again gamble with our economy and bring it all crashing down, then we will fight them every step of the way,” she said in a Nov. 10 speech.This week, she warned lawmakers on Twitter that any votes to weaken the consumer agency, from either side of the aisle, “will declare loud & clear they represent giant banks, not working families.”Mr. Hensarling was rumored to be on the shortlist for Treasury secretary in the days after the election, though he has said he is not seeking a cabinet position. Instead, it appears he hopes to make inroads in Congress.“A hard-fought election may be over, but our work is just beginning,” he said during his remarks.In addition to undoing large parts of Dodd-Frank, Mr. Hensarling noted that he planned to pursue reforms to the Federal Reserve and an overhaul of the housing finance system, including the unwinding of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Those efforts would most likely build on previously introduced legislation.“It’s not easy — it’s the very definition of a ‘heavy lift,’ but our committee looks forward to working with the Trump administration, to finally build a housing finance system that is sustainable for homeowners, for hard-working taxpayers and for our economy,” he said.Of the Federal Reserve, the chairman added, “our economy would be healthier — and more Americans would have the opportunity to achieve success — if our Federal Reserve did not wander into fiscal policy and if our Federal Reserve conducted monetary policy in a more transparent, rule-like fashion.”Advertisement