By JOHN KOBLINMARCH 1, 2016
CBS announced on Tuesday that it had hired the former ABC and NBC anchor Josh Elliott to work for its streaming service.The hiring of Mr. Elliott, who was a prominent face on ABC’s “Good Morning America,” signals that CBS News is prepared to meaningfully invest in its streaming service, which is called CBSN.“This is a serious effort,” David Rhodes, the president of CBS News, said in an interview. “It’s not extracurricular.”The service, which started in 2014, runs 24 hours a day and has given CBS an opportunity to broadcast when the news division otherwise doesn’t have airtime on television. The streaming access is free, and has been a crucial priority for Mr. Rhodes in the last year.AdvertisementThe hiring of Mr. Elliott may also start speculation that CBS has found a would-be successor for Charlie Rose on the network’s morning show, “CBS This Morning.” When Mr. Elliott was at NBC Sports, many people in the industry thought he might be groomed as a successor to Matt Lauer on “Today.” But nothing materialized during a fitful year-and-a-half at the network, in which his on-air time was limited. Mr. Elliott left NBC at the end of last year, after the network let him out of his contract early.Mr. Rhodes emphasized that Mr. Elliott’s hiring was about CBSN but acknowledged that the network needed to think about succession plans for the morning show.“That’s an area of interest,” he said. “It’s certainly something we need to be thinking about. But that’s not what this is about.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Rhodes said that there was no agreement in place that would bring Mr. Elliott to the morning show.“The only agreement we have with Josh is to come here as anchor of CBSN,” he said.After years of failed experiments and difficulty finding any traction in the morning hours, “CBS This Morning” has shown signs that it is working. This season to date, “CBS This Morning” has been drawing 3.6 million viewers, an increase of 10 percent. But Mr. Rose, who joined the show in 2012, is 74, and CBS has no obvious candidate to replace him.Mr. Rhodes said that Mr. Elliott’s primary duties would be to serve as anchor for CBSN but that he would be allowed to do work on the network, similar to the situation with current CBSN anchors.AdvertisementIt’s not entirely clear what hours constitute “prime time” for the streaming service, but Mr. Rhodes said that Mr. Elliott would most likely take on the late-morning to midday shift. He will begin this month.Mr. Rhodes also said there would be additional off-camera hirings for the streaming service, which reaches a younger audience than the television network.“I feel like he needs an outlet,” Mr. Rhodes said of Mr. Elliott. “He needs this outlet. We’re going to need from him as much as he can bring in these different areas of reporting and anchoring. It’s another reason it’s the perfect place for him because it’s kind of unlimited. We have some really hard-working people at CBSN, but we don’t have enough of them.”A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: CBS Hires a ‘Good Morning America’ Host for Streaming Service.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.