By LESLIE PICKERJAN. 26, 2016
In a market that has scared off potential initial public offerings of stock, one company whose purpose is to manage risk is taking steps toward a market debut.Octo Telematics, an Italian company, makes technology for cars that allows insurance companies to monitor customers’ driving patterns and charge them according to their safety profiles. The company is preparing for an I.P.O. in the United States that it expects to generate $350 million in proceeds, according to people briefed on the planning discussions.Octo is aiming for a valuation of at least $2 billion in the offering, said these people, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the government requires a quiet period leading up to the first day of trading. JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup and Credit Suisse are advising and underwriting the offering, these people said.The I.P.O. market has been rife with pain, as the broader gauges slumped this year and volatility spiked. Those conditions have made pricing an initial offering more difficult, as investors become much pickier and the risk that deals will flop becomes higher.AdvertisementFurther challenging the I.P.O. market is the performance of recent debuts, such as that of Square, the mobile-payments provider, whose stock has declined more than 25 percent since its first day of trading. As investors struggle with previous I.P.O. investments, they become less inclined to buy more.AdvertisementSo far this year, not a single company has been willing to make its market debut amid the rockiness, with the only one on the calendar — Elevate Credit, an alternative lender — ultimately postponing its deal.But companies preparing for initial offerings now are doing so with the hope that the second half of the year will be better.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A representative from Octo declined to comment, as did representatives for the four banks.Fabio Sbianchi founded Octo out of frustration over paying a high insurance bill for his wife’s car, which had not been used in a few years. Mr. Sbianchi, now the chief executive of Octo, wanted to find a way for insurance companies to customize their plans based on drivers’ habits and behavior. In 2002, Mr. Sbianchi, along with Giuseppe Zuco, the company’s chief information officer, created the first prototype.Octo developed the software, while its first investor, MetaSystem, made the hardware. In 2010, MetaSystem sold most of its stake to three private equity firms; it sold the remainder two years later. The Renova Group, a Russian private investment firm, acquired Octo in April 2014 and then sold a 27.8 percent stake to Equity Fund Pamplona in September of that year.Insurance telematics involves devices that are installed in cars to collect data about driving behavior. Insurance companies then monitor things like where customers go, the miles they drive, how quickly they tend to accelerate and how hard they brake. This data then helps determine the rate insurers charge drivers for coverage.Octo’s partners include automakers like Fiat and General Motors, as well as rental car companies.The industry in which Octo operates is nascent but growing. According to estimates published in December by MarketsandMarkets, sales from insurance telematics will be $2.2 billion by 2020, compared with $857 million in 2015.Octo Telematics said it commanded about 36 percent of the market in terms of active policies. The company just reported that it had four million active users of its technology.A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: I.P.O. Is Planned for Provider to Car Insurers of Tech That Monitors Driving.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.