By JOHN F. WASIKAPRIL 9, 2016
Target-date funds are intended to be all-in-one investing solutions capable of getting you all the way to retirement. They typically don’t try to produce market-beating returns, but can provide an appropriate mix of stocks and bonds based on your age and planned retirement date.That may be enough for you. Yet you still may want to scrutinize these vehicles, because they don’t guarantee returns and may not provide the precise blend of investments that you want.Target-date funds have been popular for a good reason. They keep things simple: You designate the approximate year that you think you will be leaving the work force, and fund managers will provide a preset portfolio, gradually increasing the proportion of bonds and cash as you age, while reducing stock fund holdings.Although their growth rate has slowed, target-date funds held more than $763 billion in assets through December, according to Morningstar. The Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade association, reports that more than 70 percent of all 401(k)’s offer them, and about four in 10 401(k) participants own shares. Fidelity Investments, T. Rowe Price and the Vanguard Group collectively manage more than 70 percent of target fund assets.AdvertisementThe “one size fits all” nature of target-date funds is an intrinsic part of their appeal. But the risks in the portfolios are often not vetted or even understood by investors, which has led several industry watchdogs to call for better disclosure and education. Luis A. Aguilar, then a Securities and Exchange Commission member, last year called “the relentless growth” in these funds “troubling.” Only one-third of investors in these funds understood what was in them or realized that the funds did not guarantee retirement income, an S.E.C. study found. Investors “do not fully appreciate the risks” of the funds, Mr. Aguilar said.AdvertisementOne key to divining risk in a target-date fund is understanding its “glide path,” the changing proportion of stocks, bonds and other investments held in the fund from year to year. For individual investors, there may be too much or too little risk. It’s also worth knowing whether you have a “to” or “through” fund. The former will take you to a retirement date and hold a majority of investments in bonds and cash when that time nears. A “through” fund, on the other hand, will keep investing in stocks after retirement, which may help you manage inflation and longevity risk.Target-date funds don’t necessarily mirror the performance of the larger stock and bond markets. Instead, their returns depend on the mix of their individual portfolios, and in some years, their returns may be disappointing. Last year was a case in point: In every date range, the average target-date fund produced a negative return, according to Morningstar.Year-end losses ranged from 1 percent for the 2000-10 cadre of funds to 2 percent for the 2046-50 group and beyond. But there was a 1 percent total return for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index average and 0.37 percent for the Vanguard Balanced index fund — a basic, low-cost 60 percent stock, 40 percent bonds portfolio.In better years, such as 2014 when the S.&P. 500 rose nearly 14 percent, target-date funds outperformed actively managed funds, and did so over longer periods as well, according to Morningstar.See how the largest, leading and lagging funds compare.Find funds by their type, performance, risk or expenses.For more fund information, search morningstar.com.What’s more, investors in target-date funds tend to buy and hold them for long periods. That has produced better results than those for people who try to time the markets by jumping in and out of funds.Yet because target-date funds are diverse, there can be wide variation in returns, depending on the company that operates them, the portfolio mix and internal expenses. Only two companies scored top “gold” ratings in Morningstar’s overall evaluation of 25 target date groups: BlackRock’s LifePath Index Series and Vanguard’s Target Retirement Series, according to Holt.These two companies provided some of the lowest-cost target-date funds. In December, the average asset-weighted expense ratio for BlackRock’s funds was 0.18 percent, according to Morningstar; for Vanguard it was 0.17 percent. That compares with 0.73 percent for the overall category.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Here’s an example of how much returns can vary: Including the 5 percent sales charge, State Farm’s LifePath 2050 Fund, lost more than 7 percent last year, while Vanguard’s Target Retirement 2050 fund lost only about 1.6 percent.AdvertisementIn bad years, target-date funds can be horrendous. The Fidelity Advisor Freedom 2050 A, for example, lost more than 42 percent in 2008.Of course, you don’t need to restrict yourself to target-date funds. If you want to go further afield, you can pick other funds from your employer’s 401(k) line, or make investments outside your plan, either on your own or with an adviser’s help.If you want an adviser, choose carefully. If you want to be sure that your adviser is legally required to put your interests first, choose a fiduciary. These people are usually certified financial planners, registered investment advisers or chartered financial analysts. Under new Department of Labor rules, those who provide retirement advice must be fiduciaries.Francesca Federico, an investment adviser and fiduciary in Boston, says that while target-date funds may be fine, some people “may be better off in alternatives.” That may mean a portfolio that includes downside protection on stock and bond losses, managed futures, precious metals and emerging markets — investments typically not found in most target-date funds.Customized portfolios can be expensive, though, and that could hurt your returns. Conventional money managers typically receive 1 percent annually of assets under management. And individual fund expenses need to be factored in on top of that.For many people, target-date funds remain a comfortable and intelligent choice. Whether you stick with them exclusively or as part of a broader mix, you may want to do some homework. Customizing a portfolio might help you better address specific risks and needs but if you do mix investments, you will need to calculate your overall asset allocation carefully, something that an exclusively target-date fund portfolio will do automatically.In any case, lives, careers and even retirement realities can be as volatile as markets. A target-date fund may be fine for you but, as always with investing, the final responsibility remains with you.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU18 of the New York edition with the headline: Simple Solutions That Can Miss the Bull’s-Eye.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.