By ALEXANDRA STEVENSONMARCH 1, 2016
Argentina’s offer to pay billions to settle a dispute with a group of hedge fund investors led by the billionaire Paul E. Singer may have been a victory for both the South American nation and the hedge funds, but it has left many small bondholders out in the cold.Lawyers for bondholders that were not included in the $4.65 billion deal Argentina made with the holdout hedge funds have argued that they will get far worse terms if they agree to a separate $6.5 billion proposal that Argentina made on Feb. 5.Mr. Singer’s NML Capital will have made about 369 percent, or $2.4 billion, on defaulted bonds whose principal value was $617 million, according to data from the finance ministry of Argentina that was filed to the court on Monday. Bracebridge Capital, another holdout hedge fund, will be paid $1.15 billion, representing a 952 percent return on bonds with principal worth $120 million, according to the data.On Tuesday, the Federal District Court in Manhattan heard from the lawyers of individual investors, most of whom bought Argentine bonds before the country’s colossal debt default in 2001.AdvertisementOne lawyer, Jessica J. Sleater, spoke of a 90-year-old client who bought Argentine bonds in the 1990s for “patriotic” reasons and has still not been repaid. Her client, who is partly paralyzed, had planned to use money from the interest to pay for costs associated with his disability, she added.AdvertisementThese investors, like the big hedge funds, are known as holdout investors because they have refused to take part in two debt restructurings by Argentina after the country defaulted in 2001.“We stand ready, willing and able” to negotiate with Argentina, Ms. Sleater said. She was referring to the fact that while Argentina has participated in several intense negotiations over the last month with lawyers and principals of six of the biggest holdout hedge funds, it has not sat down with other holdout investors. Instead, it has made a blanket offer in a take-it-or-leave-it manner that has some investors angry.At the 11th hour of what many have called a historic deal involving Argentina and its holdout investors, it seems that those investors who were once united in their dispute against Argentina are turning against one another.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We haven’t been intransigent, there isn’t an impasse,” said Michael Spencer, a lawyer who represents another group of individual bondholders and small funds contesting Argentina’s offer. Mr. Spencer said most of his clients bought their bonds before Argentina defaulted for full value. “We’re not greedy,” he added as he sought to separate his clients from the holdouts that have been at times called vultures for their reputation of buying bonds up for pennies on the dollar and then seeking full repayment.Judge Thomas P. Griesa heard from 15 lawyers representing the holdout investors big and small, Argentina, the banks, and even a group of exchange bondholders investors who agreed to take a so-called haircut during one of Argentina’s two restructurings. The exchange bondholders have not been paid since Judge Griesa ruled that Argentina cannot pay any bondholders without also paying the holdouts.The hearing on Tuesday became messy as lawyers divided into two groups: one group that wants Argentina to be able to pay those who have settled immediately, and another group that is asking the judge to give everyone 30 more days.Judge Griesa wants to lift the injunction that has prevented Argentina from making these payments to all bondholders after a settlement offer and the proposal it made on Feb. 5.“We should no longer be held hostage by other parties who want a better deal,” an animated Christopher J. Clark, a representative of a group of exchange bondholders, said on Tuesday. He said his clients had been denied $3.1 billion in interest payments.After nearly two hours of arguments and rebuttals, Judge Griesa, who has been presiding over the battle for over a decade, adjourned the hearing, deferring a decision for later.Advertisement“This has been a remarkable afternoon,” he said shortly before walking out of the court.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.