By ALEXANDRA ALTERNOV. 17, 2016
Colson Whitehead won the National Book Award for fiction on Wednesday night for “The Underground Railroad,” a hallucinatory novel about the horrors of American slavery and the sinister permutations of racism.The novel, which became a best-seller and was selected for Oprah Winfrey’s book club, follows a young slave named Cora who escapes a Georgia plantation and, in a surreal twist, travels north via a literal underground subway.In his acceptance speech, Mr. Whitehead said he was drawing comfort in these politically uncertain times by focusing on the redeeming power of art.“We’re happy in here; outside is the blasted hellhole wasteland of Trumpland,” he said, referring to President-elect Donald J. Trump. “Be kind to everybody, make art and fight the power.”AdvertisementThe National Book Awards are normally a jubilant moment for the literary world, as hundreds of writers, editors, agents and publishers gather to celebrate some of the year’s best books.AdvertisementBut the mood this year was more somber than celebratory. Many in the liberal-leaning publishing world were stunned and disheartened by the results of the presidential election, and the ceremony reflected their collective angst, as writers issued calls to political action and reflected on the role of artists and writers in tumultuous times.“Many of us in this room and in this nation find ourselves disoriented, disconnected and unclear about what’s to come,” said Lisa Lucas, who was named the executive director of the National Book Foundation in February.The actor and comedian Larry Wilmore, who hosted the ceremony and brought an edgy humor to the otherwise sober event, tried to lighten the mood with gallows humor.“Man, what a week,” he said. “Wasn’t Tuesday night the most surreal night ever?”Mr. Wilmore joked that while Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton had won the popular vote, Mr. Trump’s supporters were more enthusiastic. “Trump had white people racing to those ballots like they were voting for their first white president,” he said, later adding, “I don’t know, is America ready for a white president?”Throughout the night, there were moments of hope and inspiration. Ibram X. Kendi, who won the nonfiction award for “Stamped From the Beginning: The Definitive History of Racist Ideas in America,” described his enduring faith that bigotry could be defeated, even “as the first black president is set to leave the White House and as a man who was emphatically endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan is about to enter it.”“In the midst of the human ugliness of racism, there was the human beauty,” he said in his acceptance speech. “There is the human beauty in the resistance to racism.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The National Book Awards, which were established in 1950 and are presented by the National Book Foundation, have gone to some of the most revered writers in the United States, including W. H. Auden, Ralph Ellison and Flannery O’Connor. This year’s awards were open to American authors who published books between Dec. 1, 2015, and Nov. 30, 2016. The prizes were presented at a black-tie dinner with more than 700 guests at Cipriani Wall Street in Manhattan.As the night wore on, winners and presenters frequently evoked the power of books to inspire empathy and understanding in a country that the speakers said felt politically and culturally polarized.AdvertisementDaniel Borzutzky, who won the poetry award for his collection “The Performance of Becoming Human,” spoke about his fears for the future of the country, particularly for undocumented immigrants.Even the award for young people’s literature took on a political tone this year. The prize was given to “March: Book Three,” the final volume in a graphic-memoir trilogy about the civil rights movement, by Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia; the writer Andrew Aydin; and the artist Nate Powell.In an emotional speech, Mr. Lewis, a revered civil rights activist, teared up as he described how, growing up in rural Alabama with little money for books, he and his siblings were turned away at the public library, told it was for whites only. “And to come here and receive this award, it’s too much,” he said.The biographer Robert A. Caro, the author of “The Power Broker,” a biography of Robert Moses, and a continuing, multivolume biography of Lyndon B. Johnson, received the foundation’s medal for distinguished contribution to American letters.The Literarian Award, for “outstanding service to literature,” was given to Cave Canem, a writer’s center that has helped spur the careers of celebrated black poets and whose fellows have included Ross Gay, Terrance Hayes, Robin Coste Lewis and Tracy K. Smith.Mr. Hayes, who presented the award, called on poets to continue their work as advocates of social change at a moment when racial hatred seems to be rising.“We have seen a black president, and we are seeing what kind of president comes after a black president,” he said. “We have seen and are still seeing black men and women being killed by people sworn to protect them.”After drinks and dinner, inspiring words from the winners and more jokes about Mr. Trump, the mood in the room had lifted. Mr. Wilmore concluded the ceremony with a joke about the prominence of black authors among the winners. “This concludes BET Presents the National Book Awards, with special guest Robert Caro,” Mr. Wilmore said. “In the words of Kendrick Lamar, we gonna be all right.”A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2016, on Page A25 of the New York edition with the headline: A Heavy Heart May Have Caused Pluto to Turn Its Back, Studies Find.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.