By THE NEW YORK TIMESNOV. 13, 2016
Here’s a look at what’s coming up this week:FINANCIAL INDUSTRYSome of the richest investors on Wall Street will give the world a glimpse on Monday of how they make their money. Hedge fund managers like William A. Ackman, Larry Robbins, Leon G. Cooperman, Daniel S. Loeb, David Einhorn, Jeffrey W. Ubben and many more will make what is known as a 13F filing to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Filed four times a year, the reports offer investors a chance to see which sectors these traders were betting on when the quarter ended, roughly 45 days ago. Alexandra Stevenson ECONOMYMark Carney, the Bank of England governor, and other central bank officials are expected to appear before a Parliament committee in London on Tuesday to discuss the bank’s latest forecast for inflation and the economy. This month, the central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee held interest rates steady and signaled that it was not likely to cut its benchmark interest rate in the near future as the British economy has performed better than expected since Britain’s vote to leave the European Union in June. The Bank of England also indicated it expected inflation to reach 2.7 percent by the end of 2017 as sterling has decreased in value against the dollar and other currencies since the referendum.The hearing before the Treasury Select Committee will also be the first time for lawmakers to question Mr. Carney since he announced that he would serve an additional year as head of the central bank and step down in June 2019. Mr. Carney said that staying would help contribute to an “orderly transition” as Britain negotiates its exit from the European Union. Chad BrayJanet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, had been expected to use a scheduled appearance before the Joint Economic Committee on Thursday to continue preparing financial markets for the likelihood that the Fed would raise its benchmark interest rate in December. Then came the election of Donald J. Trump. But with markets quickly rebounding after a brief swoon, a rate increase looks like it’s still a possibility. Indeed, Mr. Trump’s plans for fiscal stimulus could increase the Fed’s sense of urgency. Binyamin AppelbaumAUTO INDUSTRYTesla Motors shareholders vote on Thursday on whether to approve the acquisition of SolarCity, a maker of solar panels. Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, is also a large shareholder in SolarCity and serves as the company’s chairman. He has said he believed the deal, worth more than $2 billion, would create an “integrated sustainable energy company,” although it has come under criticism from some investors. It received an important endorsement recently when the influential advisory firm Institutional Shareholder Services endorsed the acquisition. Neal E. BoudetteECONOMYMario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, will be the keynote speaker at the European Banking Congress in Frankfurt on Friday. Mr. Draghi and other prominent speakers are expected to offer clues about how Europe may react to the Trump presidency and how the changes in Washington will affect the eurozone economy. Also on the program are James B. Bullard, the head of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister; and John Cryan, chief executive of Deutsche Bank. Jack EwingA version of this article appears in print on November 14, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Investors Share Top Picks and Yellen Is Set to Testify.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.