AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedUntil last year, John S. Weinberg was a top corporate adviser at Goldman Sachs, a high-powered executive at the firm where his family built a banking dynasty.Now, he is moving to a newer Wall Street firm, taking one of its most senior posts.The investment bank Evercore Partners said on Wednesday that it had hired Mr. Weinberg as its executive chairman and chairman of its board. Roger C. Altman, a co-founder of the firm and its current executive chairman, will take the new role of senior chairman, while Ralph L. Schlosstein will remain chief executive.“I am excited because this is an organization that has done an extraordinary job of focusing on clients,” Mr. Weinberg said in a telephone interview.Mr. Altman added: “We take a very long-term point of view with clients. I don’t know a single banker over my years who better epitomizes that ethos — who isn’t at Evercore — than John.”Mr. Weinberg’s hiring is one of the most prominent by the 21-year-old firm. The Weinberg name has long been closely tied to Goldman Sachs, ever since Sidney J. Weinberg rose from a spittoon cleaner at the firm in the early 1900s to the chief executive who made the bank one of the most powerful on Wall Street, leading the initial public offerings of Sears and Ford Motor.Weinbergs have been at Goldman ever since, including John S. Weinberg’s late father, John L. Weinberg, and late uncle Sidney Weinberg Jr.Still, members of the family have gone to work elsewhere in the financial world. One of Mr. Weinberg’s cousins, Peter A. Weinberg, previously served as Goldman’s head of Europe — and subsequently helped found the boutique investment bank Perella Weinberg Partners.John S. Weinberg spent 32 years at Goldman, becoming a partner in 1992, eventually becoming a co-head of its investment bank and, finally, a vice chairman of the firm. During his tenure, he advised the likes of Ford, where he is a director; General Electric; and Visa.Now he’s joining Evercore, which has become one of the most prominent independent investment banks, dispensing advice but forgoing the lending and trading operations of traditional firms like Goldman or JPMorgan Chase. Still, over the years Evercore has grown to 28 offices across the globe, with research and wealth management arms in addition to its core advisory operations.The firm ranks 10th among merger advisers so far this year, having worked on 144 deals worth $254 billion, according to Thomson Reuters. Among the transactions it helped with are Qualcomm’s $39 billion takeover of fellow chip maker NXP Semiconductor and Samsung’s $8 billion acquisition of the audio company Harman International.And it has been one of the best-performing independent investment banks, its stock having risen 19 percent this year. Evercore shares closed on Tuesday at $64.35, valuing the firm at nearly $3 billion.Evercore had long been led by Mr. Altman, a veteran deal maker at Lehman Brothers who has also been immersed in Democratic politics, including as deputy Treasury secretary in the Clinton administration. He co-founded the firm in 1995 after leaving Washington.Evercore’s leadership began to change seven years ago, when Mr. Altman brought in Mr. Schlosstein, a veteran financier and co-founder of the asset management giant BlackRock, as chief executive. Still, Mr. Altman has remained involved in many of the firm’s biggest transactions.Mr. Weinberg said in the interview that when he retired from Goldman last summer at the age of 58, he had no intention of decamping to a rival and instead wanted to evaluate his career options.“I wanted to go back to work, but I only wanted to go back to work at an organization that had the values and principles that I could really get behind,” he said.One of the earliest and most persistent sets of suitors were Mr. Altman and Mr. Schlosstein, who pitched him on Evercore as a corporate adviser with a deep focus on client relationships.“When we had the opportunity to speak with him and attract him to the firm, it was literally a no-brainer,” Mr. Schlosstein said.Advertisement