By BROOKS BARNESJUNE 28, 2017
LOS ANGELES — As it races to leave behind its days as an exclusive club primarily for white men, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the second year in a row invited hundreds of female and minority professionals to become members.But the academy still has a way to go before reaching its goal of doubling female and minority membership by 2020, a target set in January 2016 after two years of #OscarsSoWhite outrage.The academy said Wednesday that it would increase the Oscar voting pool to 8,427 people — a record high — by extending membership invitations to 774 entertainment industry professionals, including some known mostly for television (Betty White and the “Incredible Hulk” actor Lou Ferrigno) and stars who focus on crowd-pleasing movies (Leslie Jones from “Ghostbusters” and Dwayne Johnson).By the academy’s count, about 39 percent of those invited this year are women, and roughly 30 percent are members of minorities.Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If all the invitations are accepted, female membership would rise to 28 percent, from 27 percent. The percentage of minority members would climb to 13 percent, from 11 percent. Almost everyone invited to join the academy accepts, but the organization keeps exact membership rolls private.Advertisement“It’s up to all of us to ensure that new faces and voices are seen and heard and to take a shot on the next generation the way someone took a shot on each of us,” Cheryl Boone Isaacs, the academy’s departing president, said in a statement.AdvertisementIn reaching for a more diverse membership, the academy tapped film professionals from around the globe. The new members — who include the British actress Naomie Harris, a best supporting actress nominee for “Moonlight” at the most recent Academy Awards — hail from 57 countries. The academy’s increasing globalization is notable because the American film business continues to be overwhelmingly white and male.The academy extended 91 more invitations than last year, when a record 683 people were asked to join. In the previous decade, the academy limited invitations to as few as 115 each year, contending that small classes kept the professional caliber of members high.But running membership like an exclusive country club was no longer sustainable by last year, when, for the second year in a row, the academy did not nominate any minority actors for Oscars and overlooked films that focused on black characters for best picture nominations. The omissions resulted in the #OscarsSoWhite campaign. The resulting outcry prompted Dawn Hudson, the academy’s chief executive, and Ms. Boone Isaacs to set ambitious membership goals.To have any hope of reaching those targets, the academy had to increase the annual class size. For instance, a 2016 analysis by The New York Times of the academy’s acting branch showed that about 80 actors would need to be admitted a year, and three women for every man, to reach approximate gender parity by 2020. About 70 actors were invited last year, roughly half of them women. About 105 were asked to join on Wednesday; slightly more than half were women, including Amy Poehler (“Baby Mama”) and the Chinese actress Fan Bingbing (“I Am Not Madame Bovary”).Given the factors that affect Oscar voting — what films are released, the subjective evaluation of quality, aggressive campaigning — it is impossible to know what impact membership diversification is having on the academy’s awards. A few pundits pointed to the best picture victory in February by “Moonlight,” a film with an all-black principal cast, as proof the effort was working. But most contended that “Moonlight” would have won with or without the push for a more diverse voting pool.The academy said seven of its 17 branches invited more women than men this year, including the units devoted to editors, documentarians and studio executives. Among executives, an invitation went to Shari Redstone, the vice chairman of CBS and Viacom. (Fun fact: The youngest person invited was the actress Elle Fanning, 19, and the oldest was Ms. White, 95.)About 30 percent of the 64 people invited in the directors’ branch are women — no small feat given the shortage of opportunities for female filmmakers in Hollywood, where 85 percent of directors are male, according to a recent entertainment industry study by the University of Southern California’s Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism. U.S.C. researchers said their overall report, released last year, revealed an “inclusion crisis” in Hollywood.A version of this article appears in print on June 29, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Academy, in Push for Diverse Oscars Voting Pool, Sends Record Number of Invitations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »