By REED ABELSONJAN. 27, 2016
A federal regulator has found that a lab run by Theranos, the Silicon Valley laboratory that promised to perform blood tests with a simple finger stick, violated several clinical standards, including one it said posed a threat to patient safety that had to be immediately corrected.The regulator, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, conducted an inspection of the company’s Newark, Calif., laboratory last year, but it issued a letter this week detailing the violations and raising the possibility that Theranos could lose certification for the lab in question.Theranos has 10 days to correct the deficiencies, particularly the one involving its hematology testing for blood cell counts or monitoring patients’ blood that it said threatened patients’ safety, the agency said in the letter.If Theranos fails to take corrective action and document that it has addressed the deficiencies, the lab could lose its certification, according to the letter.AdvertisementIn a statement, Theranos emphasized that more than 90 percent of its testing was currently being handled by its Arizona laboratory, which was not the subject of the federal inspection. The company, which said it was actively addressing the problems highlighted by the agency, said “a full plan of correction will be submitted to C.M.S. within days.”AdvertisementThe most pressing concern involves Theranos’s hematology testing, according the letter, where the company’s failure to meet regulators’ clinical standards could be harmful to patients. Those tests would typically include counts of red and white blood cells or the monitoring of patients who are on blood thinners.The regulatory slap was the latest setback for Theranos, founded by Elizabeth Holmes, the Stanford University dropout who garnered much attention and substantial investments with her promise to upend the traditional laboratory testing industry with her proprietary technology. Her company had an astonishing $9 billion valuation based on the idea that she had discovered how to conduct dozens of blood tests at the local drugstore, using much less blood, for much less money.In recent months, however, Theranos has come under intense regulatory scrutiny as a series of articles in The Wall Street Journal raised questions about the accuracy of its test results and some of the company’s claims.Theranos is now under review by two federal regulators. In addition to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services inspection, the Food and Drug Administration has curtailed its blood tests and analyses for all but one test, for herpes.While Ms. Holmes has been insistent that the company will eventually win the necessary regulatory approvals, the letter from C.M.S. fosters continued skepticism over Theranos’s ability to perform these novel tests with a few drops of blood.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In its letter, dated Jan. 25, C.M.S., which is the regulator responsible for overseeing clinical laboratories, detailed five conditions that it said the Newark lab failed to meet. The deficiencies involve oversight and personnel at the lab and the systems used to analyze the tests, the agency said. It declined to comment further.Much of the agency’s concern surrounded the oversight at the lab. Theranos said the company had made “policy and personnel changes” at the facility, including a new lab director, Dr. Kingshuk Das, a board-certified pathologist.Theranos had been criticized by outside investors and industry experts for a lack of laboratory-trained executives both on its board and in its management of the company.AdvertisementWhile the company must scramble to satisfy C.M.S., it has yet to demonstrate outside confidence in its testing. Walgreens, the drugstore chain that has a pilot program with Theranos in some clinics in Arizona, has not decided whether it will continue the program or commit to expanding the use of Theranos testing outside of Arizona.For its part, Theranos has said that those discussions were still underway.Even more important, however, the company has held out the promise of approval by the F.D.A. for myriad other tests besides the one for herpes that was approved last year.The F.D.A. is also reviewing the company’s analysis machines and processes, and the agency’s approval is required for additional tests. While Theranos is able to use conventional methods to continue its testing, it remains unclear how much of its own technology the company is able to use while awaiting regulatory approval.A version of this article appears in print on January 28, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Regulator Finds a Theranos Lab Violated Some Blood Test Standards.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.