
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
APRIL 8, 2016
They say imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, but is the nation’s top securities cop letting the New York Stock Exchange carry that a bit too far?Consider Investors Exchange, creator of a new kind of stock trading platform, which has been seeking approval from the Securities and Exchange Commission since last August to gain official exchange status.The regulator’s deliberations have been unusually protracted. Hundreds of small and large investors have written letters supporting the application, saying that IEX’s proposed platform will make equity markets fairer.Established exchanges and high-frequency trading shops have opposed the application.Among the objectors is the New York Stock Exchange, which would face a new competitor in IEX if it received approval from regulators. In a letter written last November, a Big Board official said IEX, as proposed, would be “an unfair, complex and opaque exchange.”AdvertisementSo it was striking last month when the Big Board asked the S.E.C. to let it imitate IEX by adopting a new trade type based on a technology invented by the upstart. That IEX innovation provides investors with better prices on their trades when a stock’s price is about to make a move.AdvertisementIn a proposed rule change, the New York exchange said it wanted to create a new order type based on IEX technology. The new order would allow market participants “to serve their customers better, thereby protecting investors and the public interest,” the Big Board told the S.E.C.The IEX technology is a variation on a type of trade known as a discretionary order. Brokers already use such orders to ensure that their customers’ trades are not disadvantaged by big action in a stock. But the kind of order created by IEX, known as a discretionary peg or D-Peg order, is not yet in use on exchanges.Kristen Kaus, a spokeswoman for the Big Board, explained why her organization wants to use IEX’s innovation.“If the S.E.C. supports an expansion of the ways an exchange can innovate with order types,” she said, “the New York Stock Exchange is interested in introducing new offerings to meet our clients’ needs and to respond to changing market structure and regulation.”It’s great that the exchange wants to incorporate a new technology designed to protect both investors and the public. And the invention that it wants to mimic is entirely separate from the aspect of the IEX exchange application that the Big Board considers unfair and problematic.That element is the speed bump that IEX has proposed for its system, which would delay all participants’ trades by 350 microseconds. This prevents participants — such as high-frequency traders — from being able to trade on IEX in reaction to price movements that appear on other venues but that have not yet been recorded on the exchange.But because of the S.E.C.’s delay on the IEX exchange application, the regulator is putting an innovator at a disadvantage that just doesn’t seem right.AdvertisementNot only is the S.E.C.’s foot-dragging preventing IEX from becoming an exchange, now it may let an established exchange copy IEX technology. Even worse, as a result of the delay, the Big Board would be able to attract customers using the IEX technology before IEX could, even if the S.E.C. approves it as an exchange.Some of the delay is attributable to changes IEX has made to its proposal in answer to criticisms. But not all.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.I raised the issue of fairness with the S.E.C. As is its custom, it declined to comment.All this frustrates Brad Katsuyama, who founded IEX with eight colleagues in 2013. “It’s an innovator’s dilemma when an incumbent like the New York Stock Exchange can lobby aggressively to delay a new entrant like IEX, while simultaneously copying our innovations,” he said.For two years, IEX worked on a formula designed to predict, as accurately as possible, the price at which a stock was going to trade next. Having completed that work, it created a new order type using the formula that IEX says is accurate to within 90 percent.Last July, IEX applied for a patent on its innovation, which is still pending. The next month, it disclosed its new D-Peg design as part of its exchange application to the S.E.C.Essentially IEX’s technology ensures that a customer whose buy or sell order has been placed at a certain price won’t lose out by having his or her trade executed at a price that is not yet reflected in the rapidly changing market.Institutional customers on IEX’s existing trading platform are using this technology and applaud it.One is Mehmet Kinak, head of electronic trading at T. Rowe Price. “If the order book is changing,” he said, “we’re not fast enough to see it. But a sophisticated high-frequency trader can dash to any place that is slow and try to take advantage of a move that’s already happened.”That risk diminishes with IEX’s D-peg. “It’s a fantastic order type,” he added, “because it protects us but also allows the stock at times to move in my favor.”AdvertisementAnother believer is Jatin Suryawanshi, head of global quantitative strategies at Jefferies & Company. He studied 900,000 trade executions using IEX’s discretionary peg; he found that they provided cost advantages to investors of $68,000 on $1 billion worth of trades.This is largely because the investors’ orders were executed at prices that were closer to the actual market rather than at the midpoint between the bid and offer on a stock, known as the spread.“We saw a marked improvement in the midpoint orders offered by IEX,” Mr. Suryawanshi said in an interview. “Absent D-Peg orders, customers would be giving up half the spread all the time. That may sound small but all these half-a-spread improvements over a large set of orders really make a big difference.”Many investors are already benefiting from IEX’s invention, and if the Big Board wins the right to create its new order type, those beneficiaries may increase. That’s all to the good.Still, the S.E.C.’s delay is hurting IEX in more ways than one. And as the regulatory deliberations drag on, that only adds to the puzzlement.A version of this article appears in print on April 10, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Board Eyes Rival’s Technology.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »