AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerOuterwall Inc., known for its Redbox movie rental kiosks and Coinstar coin counting machines, agreed Monday to be taken private by Apollo Global Management for about $900 million.Apollo will acquire Outerwall, which is based in Bellevue, Wash., for $52 a share, a transaction value of $1.6 billion when including debt, the companies said in a statement.As more consumers opt to stream movies or rent them “on demand” directly from cable providers, Outerwall’s D.V.D. rental business has suffered. The company’s stock price plummeted between July 2015 and February, after a few years of declining revenue growth. Outerwall’s chief executive, J. Scott Di Valerio agreed to step down in January 2015, with a director, Nora M. Denzel taking over in the interim. Outerwall appointed Erik E. Prusch as chief executive one year ago.The management turnover and depressed stock price encouraged an activist investor, Engaged Capital, to acquire a 14 percent stake and agitate for the company to sell itself or pursue other options to turn itself around. Engaged, led by Glenn Welling, settled with Outerwall in April, obtaining one board seat immediately and the right to name two additional directors by August.On March 14, after the stock price had slumped almost 50 percent from the prior year, Outerwall announced that it had hired Morgan Stanley and the law firm Perkins Coie to evaluate its strategic alternatives. After four months, the company signed Monday’s deal with the private equity firm Apollo at a 51 percent premium to where the shares were trading before Outerwall announced its review.“Outerwall’s board of directors has undertaken a comprehensive review of a wide range of strategic and financial alternatives to maximize value for all Outerwall shareholders,” Mr. Prusch said in the statement. “We are pleased to reach this agreement, which follows a robust process and provides an immediate and substantial cash premium to our shareholders.”Investors applauded the move, sending the stock 11 percent higher in early trading Monday to a level just above the $52 buyout price.Despite Outerwall’s challenges, the company still generates more than $2 billion in revenue each year and remains profitable. The company operates more than 40,000 kiosks in grocery stores, convenience stores and retailers across the United States and Puerto Rico. Outerwall collects a fee for each movie rental, and then pays a portion of that fee to the retailers hosting the kiosks.Outerwall’s Coinstar business operates more than 20,000 machines that take coin deposits in return for a voucher that lists the dollar value, minus a fee that Outerwall collects. The company also operates ecoATMs, which enable consumers to sell certain electronic devices for cash through 2,250 kiosks.In addition to Morgan Stanley and Perkins Coie, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz also advised Outerwall. LionTree Advisors, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Barclays, Credit Suisse and Jefferies provided financial advice to Apollo. Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison advised Apollo on the legal side.Advertisement