AdvertisementSupported byDeal ProfessorBy Steven Davidoff SolomonThe stock market slump has hit activist hedge funds particularly hard, raising the question of whether shareholder activism can survive a down market.Activist hedge funds specialize in taking aim at troubled companies. The core idea is for the fund to push for a new strategy that will turn the company around or, more commonly, to instigate some event that crystallizes value, like a spinoff or a sale. In the rising stock market of the last five years, this was a wonderful strategy.Acquisitions were hot and the exits were easy. Mistakes in picking targets were covered up by gains in the market. Activist hedge funds tend to invest in stocks that are more volatile than the overall market, so these stocks tended to rise more than the market itself. Activism seemed to be a surefire way to mint millions in stock profits.In a down market, this exuberance has come tumbling back to earth. What was volatile on the upside is now shooting downward. And although the downturn is recent, takeover activity — if it follows past patterns — will certainly slow.And those troubled companies will become more troubled and harder to turn around, while the activists beat a hasty retreat.This is what happened in the financial crisis of 2008. The wave of bad news almost overwhelmed the activists, and the number of activist campaigns fell by 35 percent, according to FactSet SharkRepellent.So far this year, history is repeating itself as activist hedge funds have been buffeted by the downturn. Take William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management, which has a publicly traded investment vehicle in the Netherlands, Pershing Square Holdings, that allows individual investors to put their money directly in Pershing Square’s activist funds. The vehicle’s stock price is therefore a good proxy for the performance of Pershing Square, arguably the most prominent activist fund in the world.It isn’t pretty.So far this year, Pershing Square Holdings’ stock is down 12.8 percent as of Friday. Compare that with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, which was down only 6.7 percent. Pershing Square’s main holdings have on average fallen more than twice as much as the stock market index. Among its holdings are Valeant Pharmaceuticals, which has fallen 12.84 percent; Air Products, down 8.56 percent; and Platform Specialty Holdings, down 39.28 percent. The only up stock in Pershing Square’s portfolio is probably Mr. Ackman’s huge short bet on Herbalife, which these days is simply functioning as a hedge.Mr. Ackman’s Pershing Square is known for having a particularly volatile portfolio, so not all funds are doing as poorly. Still, Carl C. Icahn’s publicly traded vehicle, Icahn Enterprises, is down 11.5 percent for the year so far.The destructive effect of a down market is intensified for activist hedge funds because they tend to herd. Witness the decline of Valeant stock, in which Pershing Square, ValueAct and John Paulson’s Paulson & Company, among other hedge funds, all invested.This degree of concentration is one reason 2015 was an annus horribilis for many big hedge funds. Last year, Pershing Square lost 20.5 percent, Jana was down 5.4 percent, and Greenlight Capital fell 20 percent. Even Mr. Icahn, who does not announce results, most likely lost a fair amount of money. This was even before the market downturn in January.All this has come as a shock to investors who have poured billions of dollars into this strategy. In 2014, $14.2 billion was invested in activist funds, and Barrons reported that these funds had more than $130 billion in 2015. This sector was due for a shake-up anyway. New entrants were emerging, and funds were searching ever wider for targets and were willing to take riskier bets. Witness the apex of this with the combination of DuPont and Dow Chemical with a plan for the combined behemoth to then split into three companies in the next year and a half. The transaction may have been driven by the hedge funds invested in both companies and the need to cater to their desires.Stocks could bounce back, of course. Even if that does happen, however, the recent slump is likely to make activist hedge funds more conservative.And if the downturn persists, we’re likely to see a sharp drop in activism. Many activist hedge funds have only one-year lockups. This means that investors can pull their money out after a year. This short lockup period has been a central complaint of hedge fund critics, which they say supports a claim that hedge funds look only at the short term, aiming to meet their yearly return and keep their investors.If these lockups expire when the stock market remains sharply down, the strong flow of money into this strategy will reverse. And this, of course, will not just reduce the number of activist attacks; it may do more.One or two of these highflying funds may collapse as money heads out the door. After all, that is what happens with hot investment strategies on Wall Street. In good times, people herd into bubbling strategies without heed to what the downside may bring. But in this case, we know what is happening — losses far in excess of declines in the market indexes. The upside may support this risk, but in down times, people tend to head for the exits.Some of the stronger funds may survive and buy opportunistically in the wreckage. There is no doubt that is going on now. But not all funds will stay strong or be able to keep enough cash on hand to invest.In the interim, companies may get the breather they have been desperate for after rising activism, which reached a record last year, according to FactSet SharkRepellent.It will also most likely pause the spinoff trend, which has been accelerated by the activist hedge funds, as companies focus on core operations and not financial engineering. And it may also separate the activists who have real skill from the rest of the herd.That’s what downturns do; they purge, something the targets of activist hedge funds over the years can now tell their once-and-future hunters. Wall Street is funny that way.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter. Advertisement