By BINYAMIN APPELBAUMAPRIL 7, 2016
Ben Bernanke, Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan, at a joint appearance with Janet Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, addressed whether we are due for a recession.Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, said on Thursday that she did not regret the decision to start raising interest rates in December.“I certainly don’t regard it as a mistake,” Ms. Yellen said. “I said at the time and continue to feel that the economy had made very substantial progress.”The Fed has put off further increases, but Ms. Yellen said it remained on a “reasonable path” toward higher rates as economic growth continues.She spoke at a joint appearance with her three living predecessors that was billed as a discussion of leadership but inevitably became just another opportunity to ask present and past Fed officials about their economic outlook.AdvertisementThe people in the audience at International House in Morningside Heights, many of whom paid $1,000 for their tickets, got to hear Ms. Yellen reprise the upbeat economic assessment she has offered in other recent remarks.Advertisement“This is an economy on a solid course, not a bubble economy,” she said. “The U.S. economy has been doing well and domestic strength has been propelling us forward despite the fact that we have been suffering a drag from the global economy.”She added that labor market conditions were “vastly improved.”She was joined onstage by Paul A. Volcker, the Fed’s chairman from 1979 to 1987, and Ben S. Bernanke, who served as chairman from 2006 to 2014. Alan Greenspan, who served in between, appeared by video link from Washington, D.C.All three agreed that the economy seemed to be in decent shape. “I certainly don’t think we’re in a bubble economy,” Mr. Volcker said.The economy has grown slowly but steadily for almost seven years, and some commentators have taken to fretting that a recession looms. Mr. Bernanke, however, said there was no evidence that expansions end merely because of old age.“The risk of a recession is more or less constant in every year,” he said. “I don’t see any reason to think a recession is any more likely in 2016 than in 2015 or 2014.”The event was an atypical forum for Ms. Yellen and her predecessors, who last appeared together in public at the Fed’s 100th anniversary celebration in 2013. Mr. Volcker is also a former chairman of International House, a residence for young scholars, and the event inaugurated a new speaker series in his honor.As audience members entered the hall, they were serenaded by a tenor with a guitar, Gonzalo Llanes Mena, who sang “O Sole Mio” and other Italian classics.There were moments of levity. As Ms. Yellen was explaining that the economy was in good shape, Mr. Greenspan sneezed loudly into his microphone.AdvertisementAsked how he would reduce the Fed’s vast bond holdings, Mr. Bernanke, no longer the Fed’s chairman, responded, “Fortunately, I don’t have to.”The moderator, Fareed Zakaria of CNN, asked about having so much power.Mr. Bernanke responded that he saw it as mostly a matter of having a lot of responsibility. Mr. Greenspan joked that he liked the public’s adulation. “I very much appreciated that,” he said. “I got past the embarrassment very easily.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Volcker, by contrast, was the subject of widespread public anger for his efforts to bring inflation under control, which pushed the economy into recession. Mr. Zakaria asked if he worried at the time that he might be doing the wrong thing.“Did I worry?” repeated Mr. Volcker. “I worried all the time.” He said he wore a path into the rug in his office at the Fed.The four leaders did not emphasize their differences.Mr. Bernanke and Ms. Yellen, who worked closely together in shaping the Fed’s response to the financial crisis, presented a united front Thursday, defending the Fed’s stimulus campaign and its ability to return to a more normal footing.The rate increase in December, Ms. Yellen said, demonstrated the Fed had the ability to tighten monetary policy “as we think will be appropriate for the economy.”“There were a lot of fears around this,” she said. “I think people didn’t really understand the economics of this properly. Nothing terrible happened.”The Fed’s job has famously been described as being responsible for taking away the punch bowl before the party gets out of control. Mr. Volcker in other contexts has suggested the Fed is losing its sense of responsibility. But asked whether the Fed had taken to adding more vodka instead, he demurred.Advertisement“I watch all of my successors with great awe,” he said.There was also consensus that fiscal policy needs to play a larger role in promoting economic growth.“Monetary policy should not have the whole load of getting us out of this phenomenon,” Mr. Greenspan said. “It’s fundamentally a fiscal problem.”Mr. Volcker and Mr. Greenspan saw obscurity and confusion as useful tools during their tenures; Mr. Bernanke and Ms. Yellen, by contrast, saw greater value in clarity.On Thursday, they agreed that it’s hard to speak clearly.“I think the real problem is that monetary policy is very largely economic forecasting and our ability to forecast is significantly limited,” Mr. Greenspan said.That, however, has not diminished the public’s appetite to hear them try.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Fed Leaders Past and Present Find Common Ground Onstage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.