By EMILY STEELAPRIL 7, 2016
The framework of a settlement has been reached in the salacious legal battle over the mental competency of the ailing media mogul Sumner M. Redstone, two people with knowledge of the discussions said Thursday.The agreement, which requires approval from a judge, would put an end to the four-month public spectacle that began in November when Manuela Herzer, a former companion and romantic partner of Mr. Redstone, filed a lawsuit challenging Mr. Redstone’s mental capacity.If signed, the deal would make clear that Mr. Redstone, 92, is now making his own health care decisions, one person said. If that changes, Mr. Redstone’s daughter would take over the supervision of his health care in conjunction with a family friend who lives in Los Angeles, where Mr. Redstone also lives, this person said.Other terms include detailed plans for Mr. Redstone’s health care as well as for a payment to Ms. Herzer, which could reach into the tens of millions of dollars, people with knowledge of the deliberations said.AdvertisementThe people spoke on the condition of anonymity because the negotiations were incomplete.While the lawsuit concerned Mr. Redstone’s personal life, it also raised questions about succession planning and the fate of Viacom and CBS, the two media companies he controls.AdvertisementAs the suit progressed in Los Angeles County Superior Court, investors and analysts increased the pressure on Viacom and CBS, questioning whether Mr. Redstone could serve ably in the role of executive chairman. As scrutiny from investors grew, Mr. Redstone ceded those titles in early February, becoming chairman emeritus.Mr. Redstone maintains leadership over the companies through his control of National Amusements, the private theater chain company started by his father.In the suit, Ms. Herzer asserted that Mr. Redstone was not mentally competent in October when he removed her from a directive that would have given her supervision of his health care. On the same day, he removed Ms. Herzer from his personal estate plan in which he had planned to leave her $50 million and his $20 million Los Angeles mansion.Lawyers for Mr. Redstone called the suit meritless and said it was riddled with lies. Ms. Herzer said she was concerned with Mr. Redstone’s well-being. The trial was scheduled to begin May 6.A settlement would prevent the already messy legal battle from exploding onto the public stage with a trial. The suit included a litany of embarrassing claims about what Ms. Herzer described as Mr. Redstone’s sexual appetite, his incontinence and his demands to eat steak while on a feeding tube. In the suit, she called him a “living ghost.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.While a judge had ordered that Mr. Redstone’s medical records remained confidential, evidence introduced during the trial could have been made public.As part of the case, Mr. Redstone underwent a medical examination in January after the judge said that it was necessary so that both sides had all the facts.The evaluation was conducted in late January by Dr. Stephen L. Read, a psychiatrist who had submitted testimony as part of Ms. Herzer’s suit. Before examining Mr. Redstone, Dr. Read declared that Mr. Redstone lacked the capacity to make health care decisions for himself. After the exam, Mr. Read provided a 37-page report, though most of the details were redacted.AdvertisementThe settlement talks this week prompted the suspension of depositions to be given by Philippe P. Dauman, Viacom’s chief executive, and Shari Redstone, Mr. Redstone’s daughter, two people said.Earlier this week, two people briefed on the matter said Ms. Redstone had been named to a directive that would put her in charge of her father’s health care once he is unable to administer it himself. The family friend who lived in Los Angeles was named as a local health care proxy, one person said.Ms. Redstone and the family friend replaced Mr. Dauman, a longtime confidant of Mr. Redstone, and Thomas Dooley, Viacom’s chief operating officer, on the directive.A version of this article appears in print on April 8, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Settlement Is Said to Be at Hand in Redstone Case.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.