By JONATHAN SOBLEMAY 9, 2016
TOKYO — Takata, the Japanese airbag manufacturer at the center of the largest auto safety recall in history, revised its estimates of a profit in the latest fiscal year to a loss of $120 million as the costs of the crisis mounted.The estimate for a loss of 13 billion yen, or $120 million, made public on Monday in a preliminary filing with the Tokyo Stock Exchange, amounted to an admission that Takata had been overconfident in predicting a quick end to its troubles. About 70 million vehicles are now being recalled in the United States to fix Takata airbags that can explode violently when they deploy; tens of millions more have been recalled in other countries. After two straight years of losses, Takata is facing dwindling cash reserves and questions about its future.Until Monday, Takata had stood by a prediction it made a year ago that it could repair the financial damage relatively soon. At the time, the company said it expected to earn a net profit of ¥5 billion for the year, which ended March 31, making a fast rebound from a loss of ¥29.6 billion the previous year.Many analysts had called that projection overly rosy. It became effectively impossible a week ago, when Takata said that it planned to book charges totaling ¥20.1 billion to cover recalls and settlements with consumers who had been injured by the defective airbag inflaters. That figure was four times the size of the profit it had been projecting.AdvertisementExactly how much the recalls will ultimately cost Takata remains unclear. The company is scheduled to report its final earnings for the previous year on Wednesday, along with its first forecasts for the current financial year, which should provide a window into its latest thinking about the impact of the crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Automakers, not the airbag maker, are responsible for carrying out the recalls. They bear much of the initial cost, which they can try to recoup from Takata. But the process involves delicate negotiations and calculations about the extent to which carmakers can squeeze a supplier whose products they still depend on.Many analysts say Takata will never be able to cover its share of the costs. The company has hired an advisory team of lawyers and other specialists in corporate restructuring, which is seeking potential sources of emergency capital, like a major new investor or even a buyer to take over the company, according to news media reports in Japan. Takata needs a cash infusion to avoid bankruptcy and is hoping to secure some kind of rescue by the end of the summer, the reports said.AdvertisementAmerican regulators ordered a major expansion in the airbag recall last week, after Takata announced the ¥20.1 billion accounting charge. In its short filing on Monday, the company did not say what additional financial impact it expected as a result of the expansion, which covered up to 40 million vehicles, more than doubling the size of the recall in the United States.A version of this article appears in print on May 10, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Takata Estimates Losses of $120 Million for Year.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.