
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

JAN. 25, 2016
Johnson Controls’ acquisition of Tyco International is insured against politics.Johnson, an American building-controls specialist, is risking politicians’ ire by shifting its tax headquarters overseas after it combines with Tyco, which is based in Ireland. But with an expected $500 million of yearly savings and a low 11 percent premium for Tyco’s owners, tax reduction is of secondary importance.In a complex deal that smacks of late-cycle merger action, Johnson’s own shareholders are being handed $3.9 billion in cash to reduce the share count to levels that allow a shift of tax domicile to happen. At its center, though, Johnson is in effect paying roughly $1.4 billion above Tyco’s market value on Friday. The modest premium partly reflects a relatively even split of interests, with Tyco owners set to hold 44 percent of the combined company and therefore collect nearly half of any additional upside.Other multibillion-dollar so-called tax inversions have attracted criticism from Washington lawmakers. Johnson’s decision to proceed may reflect a calculated bet on gridlock. Still, even if Congress somehow manages to get its act together and stop American companies from decamping overseas for the tax savings, the financial risk looks manageable in this case.The deal depends far less heavily on slashing the combined tax rate than, say, drugmaker Pfizer’s $160 billion deal to buy the Botox producer Allergan. The companies reckon that adding Tyco’s fire and security systems to Johnson’s heating controls and the like will allow them to save at least $500 million a year in operating costs within three years.AdvertisementTax those at a blend of the two companies’ typical tax rates — call it 20 percent — and put them on a multiple of 10 times, and they’re worth around $3.3 billion after allowing for the delay in realizing them. That’s more than double the capitalized value of $150 million a year of anticipated tax savings.It’s also more than double the premium being paid to Tyco shareholders. Unlike Pfizer, Johnson does not need the tax benefits for the deal to add value if cost reductions work out as expected. Any savings at Uncle Sam’s expense will be gravy, not meat.AdvertisementDealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,” offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »