By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINAPRIL 3, 2016
When Andrew Caspersen sought money for an investment that federal authorities said duped investors out of tens of millions of dollars, one of the people the former Wall Street executive turned to was a college classmate at Princeton University.James McIntyre, a managing director at the hedge fund Moore Capital Management, is the previously unidentified individual who federal prosecutors said last week invested — and lost — $400,000 in Mr. Caspersen’s scheme and also recommended that a charitable trust affiliated with Moore Capital invest nearly $25 million.Mr. McIntyre did not return requests for comment. His identity as a victim in the scheme, however, was confirmed by two people with direct knowledge of the case who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.He and Mr. Caspersen attended Princeton together and graduated in 1999. Each found his own path to work for a Wall Street firm after graduate school: Mr. Caspersen went to Harvard Law School, and Mr. McIntyre received his M.B.A. from Columbia University. Along with their wives, both men shared an interest in Latin America and were donors to Princeton in Latin America, a nonprofit organization that funds projects and fellowships in the region for students, as recently as 2011.AdvertisementIt is not clear whether the two men were close, but last fall Mr. Caspersen contacted Mr. McIntyre with what federal authorities have said was a fraudulent pitch for an investment vehicle that Mr. Caspersen had incorporated last summer. At the time, Mr. Caspersen was well regarded on Wall Street and had built up a reputation for being good at his job raising money for private equity investments.AdvertisementFederal prosecutors said Mr. McIntyre was not aware that Mr. Caspersen was raising money for an investment vehicle that was under his personal control and not for a client of Mr. Caspersen’s former firm — Park Hill Group, a division of PJT Partners, which has been spun off from the private equity giant Blackstone Group.The Moore Charitable Foundation, a $190 million charitable trust that supports conservation causes, invested on the recommendation of Mr. McIntyre, according to a complaint filed by the government last week.Mr. Caspersen’s activities caught up with him in March when Mr. McIntyre and another unidentified employee at Moore Capital suspected something unusual and the Moore foundation asked to redeem its nearly $25 million. On March 26, Mr. Caspersen was arrested on charges of securities fraud and wire fraud.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Federal prosecutors working for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, contend that Mr. Caspersen, 39, had sought to defraud investors of as much as $95 million.Mr. Caspersen’s lawyer has previously declined to comment on the charges against his client.Moore Capital, the $15.5 billion hedge fund led by the billionaire investor Louis M. Bacon, previously confirmed that the Moore Charitable Foundation had invested in the investment vehicle set up last summer by Mr. Caspersen.Federal prosecutors in the criminal complaint filed against Mr. Caspersen simply referred to Mr. McIntyre as “individual one.”The complaint describes “individual one” as being responsible for evaluating and recommending investments for the Moore foundation. Mr. McIntyre eventually told his employer that something did not seem right with the investment in Mr. Caspersen’s vehicle.It is not clear what may have motivated Mr. Caspersen, who comes from a wealthy family. He was well paid at Park Hill, where last year he took home $3.68 million. On Monday, he appeared in court where he was released after posting a $5 million bond, putting up as collateral the homes he and his wife have in Bronxville, N.Y., and Manhattan.His father, Finn M. W. Caspersen, was a prominent philanthropist and the heir to the Beneficial Corporation fortune. The elder Mr. Caspersen was chairman and chief executive of the consumer finance company for nearly two decades before selling the firm in 1998 for $8.6 billion to Household International, which was later acquired by the London-based bank HSBC.AdvertisementIn an unexpected twist to the case, Judge Kimba M. Wood of the Federal District Court in Manhattan, who was assigned to a related civil lawsuit filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission, recused herself on March 31. In an endorsed letter to the court, Ms. Wood disclosed that she had “family members who have had in the past contact with Andrew Caspersen.”An article on Monday about the victims of an investment scheme operated by Andrew Casperson, a former Wall Street executive, misstated the amount of Mr. Caspersen’s bond in some copies. He posted a $5 million bond, not $5 billion.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Victim in Wall St. Scheme Is Classmate of the Accused.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.