By ALEXANDRA STEVENSON and MATTHEW GOLDSTEINMAY 10, 2016
It was a hedge fund portfolio pitched by Hillary Clinton’s son-in-law, Marc Mezvinsky, as an opportunity to bet on a Greek economic revival.Now, two years later, the Greece-focused fund is shutting down, after losing nearly 90 percent of its value, according to two investors with direct knowledge of the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity.Investors were told last month that the fund would close. The fund, Eaglevale Hellenic Opportunity, had raised $25 million from investors to buy Greek bank stocks and government debt.Eaglevale Partners, a Manhattan hedge fund firm founded by Mr. Mezvinsky and two former Goldman Sachs colleagues, raised money for the Hellenic fund at a time when some on Wall Street had hopes for a revival in the Greek economy. For a time, Mr. Mezvinsky appeared at hedge fund conferences promoting the Greece investment thesis.AdvertisementMr. Mezvinsky is married to Chelsea Clinton, the daughter of former President Bill Clinton and Mrs. Clinton, the former secretary of state who is seeking the Democratic nomination for president.AdvertisementBetting on Greece has proved to be tricky — some investors have made huge gains while others have had their fingers burned, depending on the timing of their bets.And the last 17 months have been especially difficult for a number of hedge funds, even ones run by some of the best-known managers.This year, the Eaglevale flagship fund, which manages about $330 million and specializes in making macroeconomic bets, is down 1 percent. So-called macro hedge funds make trades based on global economic and political events. Last year, Fortress Investment Group and Bain Capital had to shutter hedge funds that had made bets on shifting macroeconomic trends.The average hedge fund was down 0.63 percent in the first quarter of this year, according to the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite Index.Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners began raising money in 2011 from investors for the firm’s flagship fund. Since then, that portfolio has posted uneven performance.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A Stanford University graduate, Mr. Mezvinsky worked at Goldman for eight years before leaving to join a private equity firm. He left that job to form Eaglevale with two longtime Goldman partners, Bennett Grau and Mark Mallon. The hedge fund firm is named after a bridge in Central Park.Some of the firm’s earliest investors were Goldman partners, including Lloyd C. Blankfein, Goldman’s chief executive officer, who let Eaglevale use his name in marketing the flagship fund.It is not clear why Eaglevale waited until this year to close the Hellenic fund, which already had lost about 40 percent of its value by early last year.AdvertisementLast year was particularly tumultuous for Greece. The country neared the brink of economic collapse as the country’s leaders and its international creditors engaged in tense negotiations. Ultimately, the Greek government agreed to a number of economic reforms demanded by creditors in return for a new bailout.The economic situation in Greece is still tenuous as the country continues to squabble with other eurozone nations and its creditors about how to reduce its debt burden. Investors on Wall Street continue to promote investment in Greece nonetheless.During a recent Sohn Investment Conference charity event at Lincoln Center in New York, Richard Deitz, of the hedge fund VR Capital Group, told an audience of investors that he was betting on Greek banks and government bonds.In letters to investors in 2014, Mr. Mezvinsky and his partners expressed confidence that Greece would soon be on the path to a “sustainable recovery.” But by the end of that year, Eaglevale’s leaders began to acknowledge that their perspective on the situation in Greece may have been wrong. The fund had earlier stopped taking in new money.The one silver lining for the fund’s investors from all of this is that they will have a somewhat larger tax loss on investments to claim next year.Steve Eder contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on May 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Clinton Son-in-Law’s Firm Is Said to Shut Greece Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.