AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe global banking giant HSBC is back in the news in another tussle with United States prosecutors. This time it involves a charge of wire fraud conspiracy against two of its foreign exchange executives, who are accused of “front-running” a trade by the bank’s client to generate a $3 million profit.The question is whether taking advantage of a client’s decision to engage in a transaction with some dishonest statements is enough to produce a fraudulent scheme. Or was it just the usual sharp practice seen on Wall Street countless times before, which did not violate the law even though it might have been unethical?Front-running is when a firm trades ahead of a customer’s large order that is likely to move the market, profiting off the inside knowledge of the impending change in the price.A criminal complaint filed in the Federal District Court in Brooklyn accuses Mark Johnson, the global head of HSBC’s foreign exchange cash trading desk, and Stuart Scott, the former head of the bank’s currency trading desk for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, of conspiracy to defraud a company, subsequently identified as Cairn Energy, in a $3.5 billion currency exchange in December 2011. The company had just completed the sale of its Indian subsidiary, and used HSBC to convert the proceeds from dollars into British pounds.Amid broad investigations of the rigging of the currency rates by major banks, these are the first charges against individuals. HSBC itself is not accused of any wrongdoing in the case, but it did pay a $275 million penalty in 2014 in a civil settlement with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission for manipulation of benchmark rates used in the foreign exchange markets.The charge is that Mr. Johnson and Mr. Scott engaged in “ramping” the price of the British pound by trading in accounts they controlled for the bank in advance of the large currency conversion, costing its client money because the exchange rate was less favorable while HSBC reaped a nice profit off its trades.Securities firms are prohibited from front-running client block orders by a rule issued by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or Finra.To prove fraud, however, prosecutors must show more than front-running because the trading is not necessarily deceptive, even though it breaks the rules for brokerage firms. And while it sounds like insider trading, the absence of a fiduciary duty means it falls outside that proscription.In United States v. Finnerty, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan upheld the dismissal of charges against a stock specialist for violating Rule 10b-5, the primary antifraud provision, for trading ahead of his firm’s customers. The appeal court found that “the government has identified no way in which Finnerty communicated anything to his customers, let alone anything false,” to prove the deception necessary for a securities violation.HSBC’s currency trading does not involve a security, so the case instead is based on the broad wire fraud statute. The law prohibits any “scheme or artifice to defraud” another person of money or property by means of “false or fraudulent pretenses, representations or promises.”As the Finnerty decision makes clear, fraud requires some form of deception, and not just taking advantage of clients, even if it costs them money. Cairn Energy may have thought HSBC would put its interest first, but the bank was not obligated to so, although the trading certainly does not help build trust with future clients.Establishing deception means finding a lie, so the complaint outlines in some detail how Mr. Johnson and Mr. Scott misled the company about the best way to execute the currency transaction and why the price of the pound seemed to be spiking around the planned time for the conversion.When asked about the increasing price of the British currency, the complaint says that a HSBC supervisor told the company that it was the result of buying by a “Russian name,” failing to disclose that the bank was ramping the value of the pound.When Cairn Energy went ahead with the trade despite the rising price, Mr. Johnson expressed some surprise and told Mr. Scott in a telephone call, “Ohhhh, Christmas!”, also slipping an expletive in there, according to the complaint. Shortly after the currency transaction, Mr. Scott told the company that the bank was “taking action” regarding the increased value of the pound, but never mentioning how its earlier trades affected the price.The details in the complaint paint a picture of Mr. Johnson and Mr. Scott dissembling to keep the customer from learning about how HSBC was taking an advantageous position ahead of the large trade to increase its profit from the $3.5 billion order.An interesting issue is whether any of the statements described in the complaint add up to a fraud, or were intended to ease the mind of a client that decided to go ahead with the currency conversion despite the uptick. There were no misstatements about the price of the pound, and Cairn Energy was paying close attention to the upward movement in the currency market. It could have pulled the plug on the deal at almost any time, but chose to go ahead.Whether anything conveyed actually deceived the company, or was important to its decision to move forward, is something that is sure to be challenged by the defendants. HSBC’s own review of the transaction found no violation of its code of conduct, according to The Financial Times, which is sure to be used by the defendants to argue that they did not commit a crime.Federal appeals courts have been unwilling lately to find that sharp business practices involving sophisticated parties are fraudulent when they can be addressed more appropriately in a civil lawsuit for breach of contract. The decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago in United States v. Weimert earlier this year found that lies told by a bank officer to both side during negotiations for selling a property investment could not be the basis for a wire fraud conviction.The Second Circuit overturned a jury verdict that Countrywide Home Loans committed mail and wire fraud in a mortgage program that resulted in loans being sold to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that fell well below the standards specified in their contracts. The appeals court found insufficient evidence of fraudulent intent at the time of the sales because the firm took advantage of the government enterprises but never actively misled them.The charges against Mr. Scott and Mr. Johnson depend on showing more than just questionable ethics in profiting off a client. Instead, the government will have to prove an agreement to effectively steal from the customer through deception, because fraud is a type of larceny.Questionable comments and dissembling about the reason for a rising market may be bad business, but whether they constitute a crime remains to be seen.Advertisement