By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 24, 2016
This week’s quarterly earnings announcements will include results from three of the technology sector’s most important companies: Apple, Microsoft and Amazon. Investors on Tuesday will try to divine from Apple’s numbers just how quickly the company’s growth is decelerating. Their focus will be on iPhone sales. On Thursday, Microsoft and Amazon investors will want to see strong growth in both companies’ computing services businesses. Although Microsoft is an important software maker and Amazon is one the world’s most successful e-commerce businesses, those companies also run two of the largest cloud services companies, selling remote computing services and information storage. —Katie BennerThe Federal Reserve always planned to pause after raising interest rates in December for the first time since the financial crisis. The looming question as Fed officials gather on Tuesday and Wednesday for their first policy-making meeting of 2016 is how long that pause will last. Investors initially expected that the Fed would raise rates again at its second meeting of 2016, in March. But the downturn in equity markets, the rise of the dollar and the continued weakness of inflation have led some analysts to predict that the Fed may wait months before moving again. The Fed has a chance to update its economic outlook and its plans in the statement it will issue after the two-day meeting. —Binyamin AppelbaumBanco Santander of Spain will report its full-year results on Wednesday as earnings season kicks off for Europe’s largest banks. In a surprise announcement last week, Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest lender, reported an annual loss of 6.7 billion euros, or about $7.2 billion, as it took a charge of €1.2 billion in the fourth quarter because of legal issues. Deutsche Bank is expected to discuss its full-year results in more detail at a news conference on Thursday. —Chad BrayA campaign against corporate tax avoidance picks up again on Wednesday when the European Commission expects to propose plans to remove six loopholes, which various European Union governments offer to companies and subsidiaries. The initiative is meant to complement a separate effort to stop Ireland, Luxembourg and other governments from striking favorable deals with individual companies like Apple and Amazon. The plans, set to be unveiled on Wednesday, are part of a legislative package that would require unanimous approval by the European Union’s 28 governments. But commission officials say they are optimistic about eventual approval because many governments need the revenue to support their budgets. —James KanterAdvertisementRoyal Dutch Shell’s chief executive, Ben van Beurden, above, faces a crucial test this week when his proposed acquisition of BG Group, the British oil and gas producer, for about $45 billion will be put to both companies’ shareholders. Shell shareholders are expected to vote on Wednesday, and BG’s on Thursday. Some investors have been skeptical about Shell going ahead with a big acquisition at a time of falling oil prices, but big shareholders like the Norway oil fund are supporting the deal. —Stanley ReedAdvertisementOn Thursday morning, the Commerce Department will report the latest data on durable goods orders for December. Always volatile, overall durable goods orders are expected to decline by 0.5 percentage points on lower aircraft orders. Core demand, which excludes this factor, is expected to be flat, in line with November data. If the numbers are weaker, it would suggest that the manufacturing sector remained under pressure from a stronger dollar and weakness in major export markets like China and Europe. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe Japanese central bank will decide on Friday whether to expand its economic stimulus program, under which it pumps trillions of yen into financial markets each month to keep interest rates low and to counter consumer-price deflation. Recent volatility in stock and currency markets has increased speculation that the bank, the Bank of Japan, could take action, though most analysts believe it will hold off for now. An upswing in the yen’s exchange rate has been especially worrying for the Japanese authorities: A stronger currency tends to promote deflation and weaken profits in crucial export industries like cars and electronics. —Jonathan SoblePlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Commerce Department on Friday morning will release its initial estimate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2015. In recent weeks, the estimate for the growth rate in the gross domestic product for the period has fallen to about 0.8 percent from nearly 2 percent amid signs of weakness late last year, including lackluster retail sales. The consensus calls for an 0.8 percent rise, but some forecasters think the figure could come in well below that, or even show a contraction in the period. If that happens, it would lower the average rate for growth for all of last year to well under 2 percent. —Nelson D. SchwartzAmerican and European negotiators have until Sunday to reach a new trans-Atlantic data-sharing deal after the current pact was invalidated late last year. Thousands of companies, including tech giants like Facebook and nontech businesses like Pfizer, had relied on the so-called safe harbor agreement to run their daily operations. But because of bickering over how American intelligence agencies have access to Europeans’ data, a new agreement looks increasingly unlikely to be approved by Sunday. —Mark ScottA version of this article appears in print on January 25, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.