By THE NEW YORK TIMESFEB. 28, 2016
Here’s what to look for this week.American and European officials are expected to release details on Monday about a new trans-Atlantic data-sharing deal aimed at allowing companies like Google to move people’s digital information between those regions.While the agreement was completed in early February, policy makers will now outline how the new structure — known as the E.U.-U.S. Privacy Shield — will operate in practice. But some disagreement remains about the level of protection people should be given over their digital privacy.—Mark ScottAutomakers on Tuesday will report February sales of new vehicles in the United States, and they are expected to post significant gains over the same month a year ago. Analysts are projecting industry sales of more than 1.35 million vehicles, which would represent about an 8 percent gain over February 2015.Low gas prices, easy credit and hefty discounts continue to drive sales of pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, which should boost the performance of the three major domestic auto manufacturers — General Motors, Ford Motor and Fiat Chrysler. —Bill VlasicAdvertisementThe British bank Barclays will report its full-year results on Tuesday. James E. Staley, who joined the bank as its chief executive in December, is expected to give investors an update on his plans to turn around the lender.AdvertisementSince joining the bank, Mr. Staley has brought in several executives from his former employer, JPMorgan Chase, as he has sought to put his stamp on Barclays. The bank is expected to scale back its operations in Asia, end its physical presence in several countries and eliminate as many as 1,200 jobs across its global investment banking operations. —Chad BrayThe Swiss-based mining company Glencore will provide the latest glimpse of the carnage in the industry when it reports earnings on Tuesday. Mining companies have seen their earnings plummet as the prices of iron ore, coal and copper have dropped amid slowing economic growth, especially from China.The gyrations of Glencore’s stock price have been remarkable. The company’s shares are down more than 50 percent over the last year, but they are up about 40 percent this year as the company has moved to pare down debt. Glencore’s earnings are expected to be sharply lower from a year ago but may be buffered by profits in the company’s large trading operations, which can still make money in a low-price environment. —Stanley ReedThe Geneva International Motor Show, a premier showcase for European passenger-carmakers, opens to the news media on Tuesday and to the public on Thursday and will continue through March 13.While the European car market has recovered from the severe downturn that began in 2009, the mood in the industry is likely to remain subdued. The Volkswagen emissions cheating scandal has cast a shadow over diesel technology, which accounts for more than half of all cars sold in Europe. Carmakers are asking themselves how they will meet stricter fuel economy standards if diesel sales fall. —Jack EwingOn Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department is scheduled to release its report on the nation’s hiring and unemployment for February. With the presidential candidates and economists arguing about whether the American economy is a resilient bright spot or in danger of falling into recession, the monthly jobs report is certain to be drawn into the debate.Even though the nation’s employers added only 151,000 jobs in January, the labor market in general has shown steady signs of improvement. Wall Street estimates that employers hired about 200,000 workers in February, with the jobless rate remaining unchanged at 4.9 percent. Economists will also be looking to see whether wages — which gained an impressive 0.5 percent in January — maintained their forward momentum. —Patricia CohenPrime Minister Li Keqiang of China is scheduled to present his government’s annual work report to the National People’s Congress in Beijing on Saturday. The report will be accompanied by a draft budget from the finance ministry. Zhu Guangyao, a vice minister of finance, said on Thursday that the budget would call for a widening of the deficit from 2.3 percent last year.AdvertisementThe government is trying to use fiscal stimulus to bridge a gap in economic growth as China’s manufacturing and export sectors cool and consumer spending has not yet caught up to replace them. The big question about the stimulus program is whether it will involve building more steel mills and coal-fired power plants, which are already in surplus but are part of politically powerful industries, or whether the government will take steps to help consumer spending, like lowering value-added taxes. —Keith BradsherA version of this article appears in print on February 29, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.