
Workspace As told to                     
PATRICIA R. OLSEN

JAN. 23, 2016
Convenient crossroadsOur headquarters is at the intersection of highways 75 and 635. I’m on the north campus. It’s easy to get to the Dallas/Fort Worth airport from here, so it’s convenient. You travel a lot in sales.I have a corner office on the first floor of a three-floor building. One wall has a floor-to-ceiling window with a view of a circular drive where employees and visitors are dropped off. If I don’t want to see the traffic, I adjust the blinds so I’m looking at greenery instead.Keeping it minimalI’ve chosen to focus on only a few things in my office. My assistant, Sandie Haynes, and I talked about adding more photos, but nothing came of it. My office provides a sense of the familiar and it’s relaxing, which is important in sales. I can center my energy in this space.1. Parental influenceMy father, who once worked as an electrical engineer and inspired me to become one, painted the calligraphy. It expresses the sentiment that God helps those who help themselves. My wife and I decorated my office, and we thought it looked perfect on this wall. It encourages me to keep learning and continually improve.Advertisement2. Good luck glassThe round sculpture is a type of Chinese glass art. A colleague suggested that I put it in in the corner of my bookcase for good luck and feng shui. I follow feng shui without trying to understand why.AdvertisementBy the numbersA large part of my job is analyzing our sales results, and I like to play music when I’m crunching data and mining trends. I have a speaker behind my door and one under my desk. If the sales numbers are good, I typically play soft rock or pop music like Maroon 5, which my kids like. If the numbers aren’t good, I play classical music or a symphony.3. A fond farewellI was president of our China operations in Shanghai for six years. When I transferred to this position in 2013, the organization gave me a farewell party. One employee drew this caricature of my family and me. The drawing also has Shanghai landmarks, our office building, dim sum and a crab, which is a local Shanghai favorite. The bags around the caricature contain well wishes and blessings.Careful with the caffeineIn the morning when I come in, I greet Sandie, joke with her a bit and get a bottle of water. I’m not a big tea or coffee drinker; I might have a cup of one or the other once or twice a week.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lunchtime routinesFor lunch, half the time I meet with a colleague and the other half I go to a restaurant by myself to take a break and think. I like Italian or American food, or I go to a Taiwanese noodle house.4. Spirit of the tigerI bought the bronze tiger sculpture because it’s vivid and appeals to me as a salesperson. It shows assertiveness and a winning spirit. In a fight, the tiger is probably going to win, except perhaps against a lion. My oldest son, Ryan, did the fish behind it. Fish is pronounced the same way as the Chinese character for abundance in Chinese, so the fish is supposed to bring good fortune and more of everything. In sales, more is better.5. Leadership lessonsLearning has been a big part of my life, especially as I’ve moved around in my career. The books are all from colleagues. When I took this job, a former manufacturing manager gave me “The First 90 Days.” Art George, a retired Texas Instruments senior vice president who’s a friend and a mentor, gave me “Switch.” Our company is making some strategic changes, so it’s relevant.A new eraIn 2014, we added an online Texas Instruments store where customers can sample and order products. I was excited and wanted to mark the event, so I had a replica of the first order framed.Inspirational inventorA photo of Jack Kilby, a former Texas Instruments employee who invented the integrated circuit, hangs outside my door. Kilby’s invention laid the foundation for the electronics industry. A line on the photo reads “September 12, 1958: The Day the Future Began.” Kilby inspires me and many others.Interview conducted and condensed by Patricia R. Olsen.A version of this article appears in print on January 24, 2016, on Page BU3 of the New York edition with the headline: Simplicity and a Sense of the Familiar.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »