By FRAN HAWTHORNEMARCH 1, 2016
While watching the sunset on the Big Island of Hawaii after a romantic dinner on the beach, Tyler Tepe proposed to his longtime girlfriend, Lindsey Fennen, in July 2007.Then the two, college juniors at the time, walked back to their vacation house, where Mr. Tepe’s grandparents, parents, two aunts, two uncles, sister and two cousins were waiting with Champagne.Mr. Tepe’s entire family shared this special moment in 2007. That was the second year in a row that his grandparents, Ronald and Ginny Cropper Kuntz of Lebanon, Ohio, had taken all their offspring on a vacation together. Today those trips also include the Tepes’ 2-year-old daughter, Quinn.“I could give them money Christmas morning,” said Ms. Kuntz, 72. “But I want to make a memory.”AdvertisementRelatives have been sharing major holidays like Thanksgiving for as long as holidays have existed. Over the last half-decade, however, families have increasingly been going on vacations together, heading to theme parks, national parks and beach resorts, according to numerous surveys and interviews with travel experts.With two working parents and generations living far away from each other, “the opportunity to spend quality time with family members becomes more important than ever,” said William J. Sutherland, senior vice president for travel and publishing at AAA. “Travel offers an excellent opportunity for these multiple generations to share experiences.”About one-third of the 1,000 people surveyed by AAA in 2013 and 2014 said they planned to take multigeneration trips in the next 12 months. Road Scholar, an educational tour group intended for travelers age 50 and older, has been running grandparent-grandchild excursions since the 1980s and added a three-generation version in 2013.The key to keeping everyone entertained and avoiding fights, Mr. Sutherland and other travel experts advise, is selecting a site with a wide range of activities. The activities should include solo time away from the group.One relatively common problem, said Seth Dunn, a clinical social worker in Northampton, Mass., who specializes in family therapy, arises when a person from what he called a “more formal” family marries into a “fused” family that has a tradition of getting together for group vacations.Advertisement“Everybody’s talking, visiting, kids everywhere and the son-in-law can’t stand it,” Mr. Dunn said. “He has to go for a walk on the beach. Then everybody is saying, ‘What’s wrong? Doesn’t he like us?’”Finding a range of activities was the main issue when Lauren Ford’s 13-member extended family took a 10-day trip in 2014 to Antelope Canyon, Bryce Canyon National Park, the Grand Canyon and Zion National Park. “We wanted it to be outdoors for the kids, but also accessible” for her father-in-law, who uses a cane and wheelchair, she said.They rejected a cruise (not enough physical activity for the five youngsters) and an amusement park (too wild for the seniors).Sometimes, like during a bus tour along the rim of the Grand Canyon, the whole group stayed together. At other times they separated, the grandparents resting while the younger generations hiked deeper into the canyon. “Then we met up for ice cream,” said Ms. Ford, 44, an architect who lives in Arlington, Va.The need for individual downtime was one lesson the Kuntz family learned from its first multigeneration excursion, to Kiawah Island off the South Carolina coast. “They said to me, ‘you have this too structured,’” Ms. Kuntz recalled.“I am an adventurer and was so eager for them to experience so many different things,” she acknowledged, noting that she had scheduled more than a dozen group activities in less than a week’s span, and meals.Now the whole family spends only alternate days together during a five-to-seven day stay at a luxury house that the grandparents rent each year through Exclusive Resorts, a vacation club. On their independent days, various relatives pair off to play golf, fish, swim and shop.The mixing and matching extends to logistics. Travelers may share a house, as the Kuntzes do, or stay in separate hotel rooms. The four Ford subfamilies — the grandparents and three siblings with spouses and children — rented three cars, not four, to ensure a steady change of seating arrangements as they drove from one destination to another.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The one consistent gathering point for most families is meals.With so many people to call on, parents also get a babysitting break. “The kids entertain each other, and we don’t have to,” said Jennifer Gelder, 48, vice president for marketing at her father’s rental car franchise in Atlanta and the mother of two boys. Her extended family has been taking vacations together for a dozen years.Advertisement“The best part is to see the cousins interact,” said her father, Roger Gelder, 72. His 10- and 12-year-old grandsons, who live in New York and Atlanta, play basketball, soccer and other games in the backyard of the rental house, Mr. Gelder said, while the older generations watch, and the 7-year-old granddaughter “follows the boys around,” he said.Ah, yes: sibling rivalry. Feeling left behind. Do these vacations bring out longtime family tensions or resentments?On annual vacations with her parents, two siblings and the grandchildren, one client of Mr. Dunn — a middle sister — told him she felt “the conversation always gravitated to the achievements of the older brother, what his career is about, his kids or the younger sister and her kids,” he said.“She’s trying to get a sense of being validated,” Mr. Dunn added. “That’s an old tape, and they haven’t shelved it yet.”But many travelers say such problems rarely appear, in part because of the excitement of exotic surroundings and activities.“In five days, I think we can stand each other,” Ms. Kuntz said with a laugh.The situation might be more strained if people went to one family’s house, suggested Stephanie Miles, AARP’s vice president for member value, products and platforms. “They’re in your environment. You’re the host at that point, rather than a shared guest,” with the prime responsibility for cooking and cleaning.Experts say such trips need not be much more expensive than a two-generation vacation, especially if people rent a house and cook most of their meals. The average cost of a Road Scholar three-generation trip in the United States is $195 a day for each person, compared with around $190 for a single traveler. Ms. Ford said her multicanyon excursion cost her and her husband, Jonathan, 45, a marketing director, about $3,000.Often, the grandparents pay most of the bill for the whole group.The biggest problem is often coordinating school, camp and work schedules. That usually means traveling in summer, although the Gelder clan will let their four children skip school for a day or two.AdvertisementSometimes, the trips are planned around a major family event. After taking only their four grandchildren on Road Scholar excursions for three years, Carol and Charles Hildebrand of Lock Haven, Pa., decided to invite their two sons and daughters-in-law when they went to Yellowstone National Park in 2014 to celebrate their 50th wedding anniversary.Kay Belin, 62, a retired teacher from Valparaiso, Ind., has been going on multigeneration trips to Walt Disney World for more than 30 years. Her son proposed to his future wife at the amusement park in 2002. Her daughter was married there a year later. Both times, the entire family was there.“We just feel blessed that our kids want to be together and want to be with us,” Ms. Belin said.A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2016, on Page F4 of the New York edition with the headline: 3-Generation Vacations.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.