By LESLIE PICKERAPRIL 6, 2016
A collective sigh — and most likely some profanity — echoed across Wall Street on Wednesday after Pfizer and Allergan terminated the biggest deal in 15 years and federal regulators sought to break up another large deal on antitrust grounds.Forget the time the negotiators spent working on the two deals. Bankers may be forgoing hundreds of millions of dollars in fees.Pfizer’s $152 billion agreement with Allergan had been in the works since last year, while the other deal, Halliburton’s $35 billion acquisition of Baker Hughes, was signed in 2014.Had the merger between Pfizer and Allergan closed, their bankers would have raked in more than $200 million in fees, according to estimates by Freeman & Company, a merger advisory and consulting firm. The bulk of the fees are paid when a transaction is completed.AdvertisementAllergan’s advisers, including JPMorgan Chase and Morgan Stanley, would have shared $142 million in fees, according to Freeman’s estimates. Pfizer’s advisers, including Guggenheim Securities, Goldman Sachs, Centerview Partners and Moelis & Company, would have split $94 million.AdvertisementNow that the deal is dead, the banks will receive about 10 percent of those amounts. Allergan’s bankers may get a cut of the $150 million breakup fee, according to Freeman.Pfizer and Allergan terminated their deal early Wednesday morning after the Treasury Department instituted new rules that made the merger untenable, Pfizer said in a statement. The rule change was aimed at so-called serial inverters, such as Allergan, that used a foreign domicile to combine with multiple United States-based companies for tax advantages.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Hours after the statement from Pfizer, the Justice Department announced that it was suing to block the merger of the oil field services providers Halliburton and Baker Hughes. The lawsuit argued that the combination would hurt competition in an industry that is already struggling with low commodity prices.Halliburton’s adviser, Credit Suisse, hoped to receive about $41 million in fees from that deal, while its co-adviser, Bank of America, expected about $15 million, according to Freeman. Baker Hughes’s adviser, Goldman Sachs, anticipated about $54 million in fees. About $4 million of Credit Suisse’s expected fees and $10 million of Goldman Sachs’s were not contingent on the deal closing, Freeman said. Bank of America would also get about $1 million.The rankings that determine the bragging rights over which bank was last year’s “king of the deal” were not changed by the removal of the Pfizer-Allergan deal.Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and JPMorgan Chase retained the top three spots among mergers and acquisitions bankers last year, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters.The forfeiture was felt more severely at the smaller, independent banks that advised Pfizer. Guggenheim Securities dropped to 18th from 12th, and Moelis sank to 20th from 13th, Thomson Reuters data showed. Centerview Partners dropped one rank to 11th.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.