By DANIEL VICTORAPRIL 5, 2016
A judge in Virginia ruled Tuesday that a former University of Virginia student whose account of a gang rape on campus was the basis of a retracted Rolling Stone article must give a deposition on Thursday in a defamation lawsuit against the magazine.Lawyers for the former student, identified in the magazine only as Jackie, argued that having to relive the ordeal could traumatize her again. But the woman is a key figure in the lawsuit by Nicole P. Eramo, an associate dean, who says she was portrayed as the “chief villain” in the 2014 article.The ruling, by Chief Judge Glen Conrad of the Western District of Virginia, will require Jackie to be available for questioning by lawyers for Rolling Stone and Ms. Eramo, according to the Washington radio station WTOP. Recordings and transcripts will be made confidential.Ms. Eramo is seeking nearly $8 million in damages from Rolling Stone, its parent company and Sabrina Rubin Erdely, the author of the article. A review of the article by the Columbia School of Journalism found a sweeping series of missteps, including a failure to verify Jackie’s account independently.AdvertisementIn a statement Tuesday, Ms. Eramo’s lawyer, Libby Locke, said that Rolling Stone “was dead set on portraying Dean Eramo as a callous administrator who discouraged Jackie from reporting an assault to police, when, in fact, Dean Eramo took Jackie to the police, and it appears that Jackie knew that her tale of rape would not have stood up under real scrutiny and investigation.”Advertisement“Had Rolling Stone done the fact-checking and digging that they were legally and ethically required to do as journalists, Dean Eramo would not have been so wrongfully targeted,” Ms. Locke said.Rolling Stone did not immediately respond to an email Tuesday seeking comment.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.