AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Alter and Brooks BarnesThe forthcoming film “Coin Heist” — the tale of four prep-school students who try to rob the United States Mint — will present the first big test of a new studio with an unusual business model.Its approach? Buying other studios’ abandoned scripts, and recycling the scraps into new franchises.“We’re basically rummaging through studio trash for stuff that’s been discarded,” said Perrin Chiles, a founding partner and chief executive of Adaptive Studios.Mr. Chiles is exaggerating only slightly.Hollywood movie studios are renowned for buying up scripts that never see the light of day. They are warehoused for years, even decades. Four years ago, Mr. Chiles founded Adaptive to go Dumpster-diving through these neglected screenplays, searching for the best of the worst. Adaptive turns the scripts into novels — which it then adapts into films or TV shows.“We want the stuff where you have lost all hope,” Mr. Chiles said. “We will take the crumbs off anyone’s table.”One executive’s crumbs can be another’s all-you-can-eat buffet, apparently.Adaptive has acquired 50 scripts, 25 from Miramax, and the rest from other studios, agencies and production companies. (Mr. Chiles declined to say what Adaptive pays for bundles of scripts.)Through its publishing arm, Adaptive Books, the company has released a dozen books and plans to publish 18 more over the next year and a half. The novels include “Pasta Wars,” a romantic comedy for foodies; “The Silence of Six,” a teenage technology thriller; and “DC Trip,” Sara Benincasa’s raunchy adult comedy about a high school trip to Washington that goes horribly wrong. Eight of the books are in development for film and television.Adaptive is producing some projects on its own, like “Bleeding Earth,” a postapocalyptic young-adult novel that is being turned into a low-budget indie horror movie, and “Coin Heist,” made for less than $5 million. Others have been picked up by outside producers, including an adaptation of “Air,” a young-adult novel by Ryan Gattis, which the musician-turned-producer John Legend has signed on to produce. Budgets range from indie (a few million dollars) to midrange ($40 million or more).The company has also snapped up defunct TV properties. It recently revived Matt Damon and Ben Affleck’s series “Project Greenlight” for HBO. The show received two Emmy nominations this month.Adaptive executives say their scavenging approach gives them an advantage over bigger studios that are competing for fresh scripts from writers who are in demand, or wrestling over the same picked-over comic book franchises.Adaptive controls the intellectual property across all media, and uses the books to promote the films, which it hopes in turn will help book sales. The novels also offer a relatively inexpensive way to market-test high-concept stories — those with a simple, basic hook — and build an audience for a new franchise, Adaptive’s executives say.Booksellers have warmed to the concept. The company recently announced an unusual partnership with Barnes & Noble, which is giving prominent placement to Adaptive’s titles in its 640 stores and has exclusive rights to sell the books for the first six months.With the release of “Coin Heist,” which is now in postproduction, Adaptive faces its first big trial with audiences and critics.The project has a long and tortured history going back to 1998, when a screenwriter, William Osborne, wrote a script titled “The Hole With the Mint,” an action-comedy about a British schoolteacher who recruits his former students to rob the Royal Mint. He sold the idea at the first pitch meeting and wrote three drafts, only to have it languish in the studio vault for 15 years.Then, in 2013, Adaptive bought it as part of a bulk deal for 25 moribund Miramax scripts.Adaptive executives took the script apart. They changed the setting and condensed it into a five-page narrative blueprint. They auditioned five writers before hiring Elisa Ludwig to reimagine the story as a young-adult novel set in a Philadelphia prep school.After the novel was published, they brought in a new screenwriter, Emily Hagins. She adapted it into a movie about four students who team up to rob the Philadelphia Mint. (Producers are describing it in Hollywood-speak as “The Breakfast Club” meets “Ocean’s Eleven.”)The company paid Mr. Osborne, whose screenwriting credits include “Twins” and “The Scorpion King,” a small fee of about $1,000, and mentioned him in the book’s acknowledgments.“It was never going to go anywhere, and I thought, how great that it gets another life,” said Mr. Osborne, who said he had 12 unproduced screenplays scattered at various studios. “So many of one’s scripts just sit at the bottom shelf. It’s a colossal waste.”A similar insight gave Mr. Chiles the idea for Adaptive four years ago, when he was working as a documentary film producer. Many of his friends in Hollywood were busy writing and selling screenplays, but very few ever got made. The screenplays, which were obviously promising enough for studio heads to buy them, seemed like a vast, untapped resource in an industry where intellectual property is the chief currency.Mr. Chiles teamed up with two partners with producing backgrounds, T. J. Barrack and Marc Joubert, to start Adaptive. Both had worked as consultants at Miramax, where Mr. Joubert was tasked with combing through hundreds of unproduced screenplays to see what, if anything, could be salvaged.They raised money from several investors, including the Silicon Valley venture capitalist Roger McNamee; Todd Wagner, the co-owner of Magnolia Pictures and Landmark Theaters; and Mr. Barrack’s father, Thomas J. Barrack Jr., a real estate investor and executive chairman of Colony Capital.Adaptive still has a lot to prove in Hollywood. The movie business is littered with companies that arrived with what sounded like a promising idea and never managed to gain traction. Making its job harder, Adaptive lacks a distribution partnership with a major studio.Much of its executives’ time is spent trying to wrangle the legal rights for unloved projects that remain in limbo.And the company faces enormous pressure not to let projects fall by the wayside. “The last thing we want to do is pick up these projects we’re calling orphaned or abandoned I.P., and have them stay that way,” Mr. Joubert said, referring to intellectual property.At first, Adaptive’s creative process seems like every screenwriter’s nightmare: Executives sit in meetings at the company’s shabby-chic headquarters in Culver City, Calif. — an open office with concrete floors and mismatched midcentury modern furniture — and decide how to rip apart and reassemble failed scripts. These sessions result in a narrative blueprint, or “spark page.” The spark page then goes out to prospective authors, who audition for the job by submitting a sample chapter or two.At a recent Adaptive meeting, six people debated the merits of the fourth draft of a blueprint for “Mary Rose,” an eerie story about a girl who vanishes and reappears with no memory of what happened to her. It was written roughly a century ago by the Scottish playwright J. M. Barrie, the author of “Peter Pan.” Although multiple filmmakers, including Alfred Hitchcock, tried adaptations over the decades, it has never been made into a feature film.Adaptive is now taking a stab at it, starting with a book.“I think this version addresses your notes, especially in terms of making the character motivations more succinct and clear,” Stephen Christensen, an Adaptive executive, said. “We’re very close.”Marshall Lewy, an Adaptive partner, still had some reservations: “It does get dark. Maybe too dark? Do we want her committing suicide?”Everyone fell silent.After a moment, Mr. Christensen responded. “Maybe the whole thing gets flipped, like in the movie ‘The Others,’ where you think it’s real the whole time but it turns out they are already dead?”Finally, Mr. Barrack offered a solution. “I think that we simply share this concern with potential authors — we’re starting to select an author, right? — and tell them that we’re not dictating the ending, that it’s up in the air,” Mr. Barrack said. “They might very well come up with a better idea.”Everyone agreed.“Good, I’m excited,” Mr. Barrack said. “Let’s get this thing going. Let’s get it out there to authors.”There are drawbacks for writers who work with Adaptive. The studio holds the intellectual property rights, so novelists give up any claim to characters they create.There are creative trade-offs too. E. C. Myers, the novelist brought in for “The Silence of Six” project, said he struggled to keep the studio’s vision for the film from interfering with his ideas for the book.“The Silence of Six” started as a dark political thriller by Stephen Hauser that Miramax bought in 2003. Adaptive transformed it into a young-adult novel about a teenage hacker who is investigating a friend’s suicide. It’s now in development as a film.“They were thinking about the movie version while I was working on the book,” Mr. Myers said. “That’s a tricky thing to balance.”But Mr. Myers liked the arrangement well enough. He has already written a sequel and is under contract to write a third book in the series.Advertisement