By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSNOV. 11, 2016
It was perhaps the most surprising trade in a record-setting week on Wall Street: how quickly investors swapped presidential pre-election jitters for enthusiasm at Donald J. Trump’s victory over Hillary Clinton.That enthusiasm ultimately propelled the Dow Jones industrial average to consecutive highs this week and gave the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index its biggest weekly gain in two years. The rally lost some steam on Friday, pulling the S.&P. 500 slightly lower.The Dow rose 39.78 points, or 0.2 percent, to 18,847.66. The S.&P. 500 fell 3.03 points, or 0.1 percent, to 2,164.45. The Nasdaq composite index gained 28.32 points, or 0.5 percent, to 5,237.11.For months, investors viewed Mr. Trump and his proposed agenda as a riskier bet for the economy and the markets than his rival, who had been widely perceived as the candidate most likely to keep the status quo in place.AdvertisementBut then the billionaire won. And, more important, Republicans retained majorities in the House and Senate, ensuring that the president-elect’s party will be in control when he takes office on Jan. 20.Advertisement“I don’t think people planned on a straight Republican sweep,” said J. J. Kinahan, TD Ameritrade’s chief strategist. “All of a sudden you realize some of the things that the markets have been wishing for have a chance to be done. That’s why we’ve rallied so much. This scenario was such a low probability, nobody was planning for it.”Investors are now betting that Mr. Trump and a Republican-controlled Congress will have a clear pathway to increase infrastructure spending, cut taxes and relax regulations that affect energy, finance and other businesses.That agenda flipped investors’ priorities this week away from defensive assets like bonds, utilities and phone companies, which traders had favored for much of this year, to health care, industrial and financial stocks, which had their best week since 2009.
            Position of the Dow Jones industrial average at 1-minute intervals on Friday.        18,850Previous close18,807.8818,80018,75018,70010 a.m.Noon2 p.m.4 p.m.NOV. 11, 2016
The trades are a reversal from the last couple of years, when investors coped with government gridlock, sluggish economic growth and low interest rates by prizing less risky assets and stocks like phone companies and utilities with high dividends.Health care stocks are perhaps the best example of how investors’ mind-set has changed in just a few days.The sector had been one of the worst performers this year in anticipation that Mrs. Clinton, who had mostly maintained a lead in the polls, would push to expand the government’s role in health care and curb price increases by drug makers. That began to turn around this week, as investors bid up shares in pharmaceutical companies.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Banks also were seen to be potentially hurt by a Clinton win. But this week they went from being a laggard to one of the biggest gainers. The sector is benefiting from the expectation that the Trump administration will remove some of the regulations imposed on banks after the 2008 financial crisis.Investors also are betting that Mr. Trump’s policies will lead to higher interest rates, which benefit banks by making it more profitable to lend money.AdvertisementThe anticipation of higher interest rates fueled the sell-off in bonds this week that sent bond prices lower and drove up the yield on the 10-year Treasury note to the highest level since January. On Monday it was 1.83 percent. It hit 2.14 percent as of late Thursday. Bond trading was closed on Friday in observance of Veterans Day.The move away from bonds, utilities and other safe-play assets is likely to continue as long as investors think that Mr. Trump’s economic policies will lead to growth in the economy and usher in higher interest rates.In energy futures trading on Friday, benchmark crude fell $1.25, or 2.8 percent, to close at $43.41 a barrel in New York. Brent crude, used to price international oils, slid $1.09, or 2.4 percent, to close at $44.75 a barrel in London.In currency trading, the dollar fell to 106.78 yen from 106.83 yen late Thursday. The euro slid to $1.0845 from $1.0890. The Mexican peso continued to drop, as investors worried about Mr. Trump’s promises to scrap trade deals and build a wall along the border. One dollar bought 20.94 pesos on Friday, more than the 19.61 pesos it bought late Thursday.A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Investors Embrace Trump to Send Indexes Higher.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.