AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonTwo prominent law firms, Arnold & Porter and Kaye Scholer, winding up months of talks, announced on Thursday that they would combine to become a firm with more than 1,000 lawyers effective Jan. 1. The new firm will be called Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer.The combination was not a surprise. Each firm brings complementary expertise — Arnold & Porter is a litigation and regulatory issues powerhouse in Washington, and Kaye Scholer, based in New York, which is almost half the size of Arnold & Porter, is best known for its financial services and life sciences work. At each firm, however, the revenue and profit per partner has been buffeted in the changing legal landscape.In that respect, the linkup seems logical. But the legal trade press reported that some Arnold & Porter partners were unhappy to be tied to what they viewed as the less-prestigious firm.Kaye Scholer was founded in 1917 by Benjamin Kaye, a noted tax lawyer and playwright.Arnold & Porter came in 1946. It was founded by Thurman Arnold, a former federal judge and Yale law professor, and Paul A. Porter, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. (Another principal, Abe Fortas, became a Supreme Court justice, but his tenure was marred by a scandal.)But pedigree aside, modern-day financial considerations appeared to win the day. Last year, Arnold & Porter’s revenue fell 6.4 percent, to $650 million, and the bellwether metric — profit per partner — fell 12.6 percent, to $1.21 million. Kaye Scholer’s revenue also dipped last year, by 1.3 percent, to $370 million, and its profit per partner fell 2.1 percent, to $1.38 million, according to figures from the American Lawyer legal publication.In announcing the combination, Richard M. Alexander, the chairman of Arnold & Porter, noted that it would be “creating substantial economies of scale that will accelerate our investments in talent and technologies and enable us to pursue innovation in the efficient delivery of legal services.”There was no word from either firm about layoffs resulting from the merger, although redundant support staff is often a target in such mergers. The bulk of Arnold & Porter’s nearly 700 lawyers are in the nation’s capital, where Kaye Scholer has fewer than two dozen lawyers. About 100 of Arnold & Porter’s lawyers are in New York, where many of Kaye Scholer’s approximately 375 lawyers work.Over all, the two firms will have offices not only in Washington and New York, but also in California, Chicago, Denver, Houston and West Palm Beach, as well as several international locations.The merger may herald a new round of mergers, which in recent years have been clustered at the end of the calendar year. Only 12 combinations were announced in the third quarter, and they were mostly smaller firms, according to the legal services firm Altman Weil.Yet in recent years, law firm mergers have kept up a steady pace, as firms seek ways to keep on even financial footings.Advertisement