
Another View By                     
STEVEN B. KLINSKY

JULY 15, 2016
Many politicians want to close the carried interest tax loophole for private equity managers. The only problem is, no such loophole exists.For 100 years, since federal taxation of partnerships began, the rules have been the same.Let’s say a father and a son go into business together to buy the local lawn mowing company for $1,000. The father puts up the money and the son does all the work of having the idea, managing the partnership and so on. They agree to split the partnership’s future profit 80 percent for the father (as the passive, money limited partner) and 20 percent for the son (as the active, hands-on general partner). If years later, the partnership is sold for a profit, there would be long-term capital gain on that profit. The father would own 80 percent of the profit and pay 80 percent of the capital gains taxes. The son would own 20 percent of the profit and pay 20 percent of the capital gains taxes.Private equity works the same way, under the same tax rules, with no special rule or loophole. Institutions like pension funds are the passive, money-only limited partners, and teams of managers (working collectively as private equity firms) are the hands-on general partners. If the original partnership ownership is split 80-20, then the taxes due on a long-term capital gain sale are also split 80-20.Carried interest is just another way of saying the son, or the private equity partners, retain some starting ownership for their ideas and effort, as well as for their dollars. Carried interest is just another term for sweat equity or founder’s equity, a concept that is widely accepted in every type of traditional partnership, private equity or not.AdvertisementSome people argue that if you do not put up dollars for your ownership, you must be working for a bonus or a salary, and that carried interest means you are just an investment banker working for a fee.AdvertisementHowever, private equity firms are not transaction bankers; rather, we own and control entire companies over many years. My own firm, New Mountain Capital, is a growth-oriented private equity firm whose motto is “building great businesses.” We have 106 people at New Mountain headquarters, including an investment team of 64, with more than 20 from nonfinancial backgrounds as chief executives, chief operating officers, management consultants and information technology experts. We have started, or acquired and built, more than 30 companies since 2000. We bring capital and management to these companies. We choose the company’s operating team, set the strategy, lead the board and are responsible for the results.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Private equity as “business building” is very socially beneficial when done right. New Mountain publishes a social dashboard on our website every year. At the end of 2015, we had added or created over 23,000 jobs at our private equity portfolio companies while we owned them, net of any job losses. We have spent $3.1 billion on research and development, software development and capital expenditures. We have created an estimated $15 billion of shareholder gains. We have never had a private equity bankruptcy or missed an interest payment.Private equity tax rates are also far higher than frequently understood. Federal taxes on long-term capital gains (at a 23.8 percent rate) are just one of the many taxes we pay. We also pay ordinary income-tax rates on salary and fees, city taxes, state taxes and unrelated business taxable income taxes.I am an active private equity professional living in New York City, and my own marginal tax rate has been about 70 percent for each of the last 10 years. This is a 40-to-50 percent effective tax rate each year all in (city, state and federal), and the estate taxes I will owe on the remainder. The people and institutions who are famous for low tax rates – Warren E. Buffett, Mitt Romney, Donald J. Trump and the Clinton Foundation – are not active private equity professionals. Mr. Buffett is in insurance; Mr. Romney was long retired from private equity; Mr. Trump is in real estate; the Clinton Foundation is a 501(c)(3) tax-favored organization.There is a lot of blind and unthinking anger in the world. Wall Street is an easy political punching bag, and carried interest is an easy issue to be a demagogue over. The fact, though, is that there is no special loophole for private equity and never has been. Private equity with strong social metrics and a 70 percent tax rate should at least be allowed to pay the same high taxes that all other traditional partnerships have paid for the last century.Steven B. Klinsky is the founder and chief executive officer of New Mountain Capital, a private equity firm.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »