AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinWilbur Ross, the contrarian billionaire investor, stood in a sea of red caps early Wednesday morning at the New York Hilton Midtown hotel in Manhattan as Donald J. Trump took the stage.Mr. Ross, who played a role in raising money from Wall Street executives for Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign, was celebrating the New York billionaire’s surprising election victory over Hillary Clinton.“I got home in the wee hours of the morning,” Mr. Ross, 78, said.But there was not much time for sleep as Mr. Ross, an economic adviser to Mr. Trump, was busy juggling interviews with various news outlets later that morning to discuss the president-elect’s legislative plans for the early days of the new administration.Carl C. Icahn, another Wall Street titan and Trump supporter, chose to leave the same party early. Mr. Icahn, 80, told Bloomberg News he went home to set up around $1 billion in stock trades as market futures indicated a sharp sell-off would happen when the markets opened. Last year, Mr. Trump named Mr. Icahn a possible candidate for Treasury secretary, but the billionaire investor has said he is not interested.Across Wall Street, Mr. Trump’s victory took many by surprise. Despite being a local businessman, he was not a Wall Street favorite, raising far less money from bankers and hedge fund managers than did Mrs. Clinton, a former senator from New York and secretary of state under President Obama.Futures for the Dow Jones industrial index plunged as much as 800 points overnight as it became more apparent that Mr. Trump would win. Earlier on Election Day, the world’s biggest hedge fund, Bridgewater Associates, put out an investor note that said the Dow Jones index could plunge as much as 2,000 points if Mr. Trump were elected.But predictions of rattled equity markets proved short-lived. Stocks traded modestly higher in the United States on Wednesday.Still, there is a high degree of uncertainty on Wall Street about what Mr. Trump will do as president and whom he will appoint in his administration — especially in top Treasury jobs and other financial regulatory posts.Mr. Ross, who could be hoping for a job in a Trump administration, said he expected a tax overhaul to be high on the agenda, given that it was a priority of the Republican-controlled Congress as well.“The tax one will go very smoothly,” Mr. Ross said. “It is important he get some things accomplished very quickly.”Even in the big-bet world of hedge funds, few investors were willing to wager on an outcome in a presidential election. With Britain’s surprise vote in June to exit the European Union still fresh in many minds, managers sold off some of their riskier positions and sat tight. Until Monday, American stock markets had fallen for nine consecutive days, and Wall Street’s so-called fear gauge — the Vix — blew out, in an ominous sign to traders.But market reaction on Wednesday after Mr. Trump’s victory was decidedly calmer. “This ain’t Brexit,” Ben Hunt of Salient Partners said, adding that the markets were already reacting positively to the news overnight. “There is a positive narrative around Trump taking place. You’re not even seeing that initial fear stage that you had with Brexit.”Jason Ader, another Wall Street investor who usually votes Republican, said he would have preferred “more gridlock” — as opposed to Republicans controlling both houses on Capitol Hill. He opted to stay at home and watch the election returns with his young children and called the result surprising.It is the uncertainty that Mr. Trump’s election will mean for markets that worried Sahm Adrangi, a hedge fund manager from Canada.“He’s never really been a specific sort of guy, so I just don’t really know,” Mr. Adrangi said. “It’s just unclear.”But, he added, Mr. Trump did not win votes because of any specific policy position. “He got voted in on his personality,” Mr. Adrangi said.Even some Democrats on Wall Street could find a silver lining in the long election campaign coming to an end.James S. Chanos, the well-known investor who makes bearish bets on stocks, once again hosted a party for guests to watch election returns at his Upper East Side home. Mr. Chanos, who was a big supporter of Mr. Obama, largely stood on the sidelines in this year’s presidential campaign, but he did support candidates running for other offices.Speaking a day after the election, Mr. Chanos quipped: “Well, the good news is — thinking about all the money I won’t be spending on political contributions going forward.”Advertisement