By THE NEW YORK TIMESAPRIL 3, 2016
Five former Barclays employees are expected in court in London on Monday as their trial begins over criminal charges that they conspired to manipulate the London interbank offered rate, a global benchmark interest rate known as Libor. —Chad BrayOn Tuesday, at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will release the latest data on the country’s trade balance in February. The strong dollar, along with weakness in Asian and European markets, has been hurting American exporters lately. Economists are looking for the net trade deficit to hit $46 billion, up from $45.7 billion in January, since imports increased slightly more than exports.Later on Tuesday will come two other economic indicators: the Institute for Supply Management’s reading on nonmanufacturing activity in March, and the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, or Jolts, for February from the Labor Department. The survey on nonmanufacturing activity is expected to show a slight decline, while traders and the Federal Reserve will be eyeing the Jolts data to see if it tracks last week’s jobs report and other recent positive indicators for the labor market. —Nelson D. SchwartzThe Reserve Bank of India is scheduled to hold its bimonthly monetary policy meeting on Tuesday, after which its governor, Raghuram Rajan, will decide whether to change policy. (Technically, he alone decides, although he first consults his deputy governors; there is not a vote, as there is among members of the Federal Reserve in the United States, although introducing such a procedure is under consideration in India.)AdvertisementThere is some speculation that he might move to ease policy slightly in response to signs that inflation is well under control and the economy is growing strongly but, apparently, not at full capacity. But the details of how that easing might be conducted were unclear. —Keith BradsherAdvertisementThe Obama administration is expected to introduce a new rule on Wednesday that would require financial professionals to put their customers’ interests ahead of their own when handling retirement money. The so-called fiduciary rule has been in the works for about five years.Though the proposed regulation has faced strong opposition from the financial services industry, it has managed to survive because of strong support from the White House. The new rules are expected to save investors $40 billion over 10 years, according to estimates the administration released last April, when the rule was formally proposed. —Tara Siegel BERNARDIf the Federal Reserve were a traffic light, it would be yellow. The Fed did not raise interest rates at its most recent policy-making meeting in March, and it said future rate increases would probably come more slowly than previously expected. The Fed will provide some context for that sense of caution on Wednesday, when it releases an account of the March meeting.Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s chairwoman, has explained that the Fed’s economic outlook remains relatively upbeat, but that the central bank thinks rates need to remain a little lower to keep growth on track. The Fed also sees an increased risk that global economic problems will disrupt domestic growth. Some of Ms. Yellen’s colleagues, however, have suggested that they are worried about moving too slowly. The account of the March meeting may shed light on these internal disagreements. —Binyamin AppelbaumPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Republican members of the House Committee on Natural Resources are expected to issue a revised plan on Wednesday for rescuing Puerto Rico from its financial crisis. A first draft, made public last Tuesday, elicited a range of responses — from bondholders saying it would expose them to large losses that they could not accept, to top Puerto Rican officials saying the plan’s federal oversight provision would infringe on the island’s right to self-determination.Representative Rob Bishop, the Utah Republican who is leading the drafting process in consultation with Democrats, said that he had issued the first draft “to encourage feedback,” and that the revision process would involve “input from all stakeholders.” —Mary Williams WalshOn Thursday, the European Central Bank will provide clues to the thought process that led it to deploy a range of stimulus measures last month to avert deflation — a downward price spiral that can be poisonous to growth and employment. The E.C.B. will publish an account of the March 10 meeting in which the measures were approved.The account should provide insight into what future measures might be in the offing if inflation in the 19 countries of the eurozone remains near zero. In addition, Peter Praet and Benoît Coeuré, members of the E.C.B.’s executive board, will speak that day in Frankfurt at a conference of economists who study monetary policy. Mr. Praet and Mr. Coeuré are expected to explain the rationale for the decisions, which included offering to pay eurozone banks to lend money to businesses and consumers. —Jack EwingFans of monetary policy — and of monetary policy makers — are in for a rare treat this week. The four people who have headed the Federal Reserve since 1979 will appear together for a group interview on Thursday evening at International House of New York. Janet L. Yellen, the Fed’s current chairwoman, will be joined by her three immediate predecessors: Ben S. Bernanke, Alan Greenspan and Paul A. Volcker.AdvertisementThe topic? “How the chairs’ philosophies and personal beliefs impact decision making with international implications.” The event kicks off a new speaker series named for Mr. Volcker, who is also a former chairman of International House, a residence for young scholars from around the world. The bad news? Tickets cost $1,000. The really bad news? The event is sold out. —Binyamin AppelbaumA version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Libor Trial  and Fed Leaders Onstage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.