By BENJAMIN WEISERMAY 9, 2016
Carrie H. Cohen, a former federal prosecutor in Manhattan who helped win the corruption conviction of Sheldon Silver, the former New York State assembly speaker, has joined the law firm Morrison & Foerster as a partner, the firm said on Monday.Ms. Cohen, who spent nearly nine years in the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York, will represent financial institutions, corporations and individuals in white-collar criminal investigations and handle complex civil litigation, among other things, the firm said.Ms. Cohen, 48, joined the federal prosecutor’s office in Manhattan in 2007 after working in the New York attorney general’s office from 1999 to 2006, where she became the chief of the public integrity unit. In the 1990s, she had worked as an associate at the law firm now known as Vladeck, Raskin & Clark and later at Morrison & Foerster. Ms. Cohen is a graduate of Cornell and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.In the attorney general’s office, Ms. Cohen helped prosecute Alan G. Hevesi, the state comptroller who pleaded guilty in 2006 to a charge stemming from his use of state workers to drive his ailing wife and resigned from his office.AdvertisementIn the federal prosecutor’s office, Ms. Cohen also prosecuted securities fraud cases, including one involving an $80 million Ponzi scheme.The five-week corruption trial of Mr. Silver ended on Nov. 30 with his conviction on charges of honest services fraud, money laundering and extortion. Last week, Mr. Silver, who also forfeited his Assembly seat upon his conviction, was sentenced to 12 years in prison.AdvertisementMs. Cohen also prosecuted Hiram Monserrate, a former New York City councilman and state senator who pleaded guilty in 2012 in a corruption case and received two years in prison. And she handled the prosecution of Dinesh D’Souza, the conservative author and filmmaker who pleaded guilty in 2014 to a campaign finance violation. He was sentenced to probation.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.