By AMIE TSANGNOV. 8, 2016
It’s Election Day. Pleas have been made. Closing pitches have been delivered.For market watchers, that means one mystery will soon be solved (who won) and another one created (how will they lead).So far during the campaign, the pattern has been clear.Markets rallied on Monday after the F.B.I. announced that its review of newly discovered Hillary Clinton emails found no evidence that warranted charges. And analysts generally agree on the likely direction of markets after the votes are counted. A win for Donald J. Trump would lead to a drop in stocks, while a win for Mrs. Clinton would lead to a gain.What about the long term, though? That is more complicated.If Mr. Trump wins and the stock market sinks, the Federal Reserve might be less likely to raise interest rates at its next meeting. Low rates tend to strengthen asset prices.Some companies also stand to gain from Mr. Trump’s promises of a lower corporate income tax rate and lighter regulation, while some would suffer from the reduced availability of immigrant labor.AdvertisementSo among the questions for the long term are:• Would a President Trump be more of an angry populist or a pragmatic dealmaker?• Would a President Clinton face steadfast resistance from Congress?AdvertisementUntil we find out, you can follow our coverage here.**We are offering unlimited access until 11:59 p.m. E.S.T. on Wednesday, so you can check out all our reporting, election-related or otherwise.How much punishment is enough, if a person poses no physical threat to the community and has an otherwise spotless record?Case in point: Andrew Caspersen, the disgraced scion of a wealthy Wall Street family, has been sentenced to four years in prison. He seemed to have it all before he bilked his family and friends out of more than $38 million.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.White collar offenders, who are usually more likely to be members of the middle class, have more resources to try to diminish their violations by painting them as aberrations from an exemplary life.They can argue that the loss of prestige and income should be a mitigating factor in a sentence. That rarely gains much traction, however, since judges are fearful of fostering the perception that offenders with greater wealth and social standing can expect better treatment.What judges really want is an expression of contrition, Peter J. Henning writes. This way, the defendants avoid the perception of trying to get away from something or planning the next crime.It’s an art, not a science, and it’s the system that the United States has.Economic growth is slowing and people are beginning to demand higher standards from their leaders and from big companies.AdvertisementThis has made corruption a more pressing issue in South Korea, where a string of scandals have implicated prosecutors and judges.Opposition parties are calling for the establishment of an independent agency to investigate graft among senior public servants.A new law bans public servants, schoolteachers and journalists from receiving meals worth more than $27 as gifts. Prosecutors are increasingly examining the conduct of corporate executives.But the country is making slow progress in its efforts to empower whistle-blowers. That is partly because of political gridlock and partly because of entrenched attitudes toward whistle-blowers. Whistle-blowing is still regarded as an act of betrayal.“The world is closely watching how all actors involved will deal with the situation, including the banks that provide financial support to the project.”— A letter from environmental groups urging banks to halt further loan payments to the Dakota Access pipeline project. Environmentalists have increasingly focused on the financiers behind the fossil fuel industry, with some success.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.