By JONATHAN SOBLESEPT. 20, 2017
TOKYO — The board of the Japanese conglomerate Toshiba has approved a plan to sell its lucrative microchip business to a group of American and Japanese buyers, bringing the company closer to a deal it may need to survive.Details of the sale must still be finalized, Toshiba said in a statement on Wednesday, leaving open the possibility of another turn in a drawn-out bidding process marked by reversals, acrimony and confusion. But a person with knowledge of the deliberations, who asked not to be identified because the talks were not public, said Toshiba was no longer negotiating with other bidders.The Japanese company said the microchip unit would be sold for 2 trillion yen, or roughly $18 billion. The structure of the deal is complicated, and Toshiba said it would retain partial control of the business. It was not clear on Wednesday how much would end up being owned by outside investors.Those investors primarily include Bain Capital, the American buyout firm, and two organizations controlled by the Japanese government, the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan and the Development Bank of Japan.AdvertisementWhile they were the only buyers identified by Toshiba on Wednesday, others, including Apple and the South Korean semiconductor company SK Hynix, are negotiating to potentially purchase smaller stakes, the person close to the deliberations said.AdvertisementThe business, Toshiba Memory Corporation, is an important manufacturer of flash memory chips, which are used in millions of smartphones and other digital devices.Toshiba needs money from the sale to repair its tattered finances. A gaping hole in its balance sheet caused by bad bets on American nuclear power projects has threatened the future of the technology company, one of Japan’s biggest and most storied.The deal’s more convoluted elements appeared to stem from Toshiba’s desire to retain a significant degree of control over the chip business.One way that will happen is that Toshiba said it would join Bain and its partners in creating the special purpose company that will buy the unit. In effect, that means it will keep a portion of the unit for itself, though it did not say how much. Many analysts expect it to be a minority stake.The shareholding structure could give Toshiba even more control, however.Toshiba said buyers would receive a mix of regular shares, preferred shares — which normally do not carry voting rights — and bonds that could eventually be converted into shares. Depending on how the various securities are distributed, Toshiba is likely to end up with a decisive say in the way the business is run, though its partners would take a sizable share of the profits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.There are obstacles to the deal.A Toshiba business partner, the American storage company Western Digital, has been pursuing legal action against the sale. Western Digital contends that Toshiba cannot sell the chip business without its approval because the companies share ownership of a flash memory production operation in Japan.Western Digital was itself bidding to invest in the microchip unit, whose assets include the joint venture. The complexities of the relationship had thrown a wrench into the sale process.The American company reiterated its opposition to the sale on Wednesday. It said in a statement that it was “troubling that Toshiba would pursue this transaction” and expressed confidence that the International Court of Arbitration, a tribunal for commercial disputes that is reviewing the case, would take its side.AdvertisementFoxconn, an Taiwan-based electronics manufacturer with extensive operations in mainland China, also sought to invest in the Toshiba chip business. Though people close to the talks have said that Foxconn was offering plenty of cash, Japanese officials worried that selling to the Taiwan group might hasten a transfer of Japanese technology to China.Toshiba pioneered NAND flash memory and remains a powerhouse in that sector, but rivals have eroded its market share. Toshiba is the second-biggest NAND producer by volume, behind Samsung Electronics of South Korea.The Japanese company makes products as diverse as rice cookers and industrial turbines, but microchips have earned the biggest profits for Toshiba in recent years. By selling off a big part of the chip unit, Toshiba is, in effect, sacrificing future earnings for a short-term cash infusion.The company, once a symbol of Japan’s technology-powered economic rise, warned this year that it might go out of business because of losses from Westinghouse Electric Company, its nuclear power unit in the United States. Toshiba paid billions for Westinghouse a decade ago, but disappointing sales and huge cost overruns turned it into a financial albatross. Westinghouse filed for bankruptcy protection in March.Toshiba’s banks have been keeping the company afloat, but it needed to secure new capital by March to avoid being expelled from the Tokyo Stock Exchange, which would have cut it off from a broad group of public investors.Toshiba has been trying since June to forge a deal with Bain and its partners, but resistance from Western Digital prompted it to reopen talks with other potential bidders.Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter: @jonathan_soble.A version of this article appears in print on September 21, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Toshiba Closes In on Deal To Sell Its Microchip Unit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.