
Breakingviews By                     
GINA CHON

JULY 15, 2016
Call it the “Yahoo rule.” The internet company’s failure to spin off Alibaba to shareholders could be a boon for future separations. The Internal Revenue Service has proposed modified regulations on when such splits can qualify for tax-free treatment. The move occurred after the I.R.S. declined to bless Yahoo’s carve-out of its Alibaba stake last year. Similar deals have been delayed since.Yahoo did not know it was crossing the line in its proposed Alibaba deal. After years of wrangling over what to do with its valuable stake in Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce company, Yahoo decided to spin off 15 percent and combine it with another small Yahoo operating unit. The government had given similar transactions a pass. But, recently, the Treasury Department has been cracking down on deals structured largely to avoid paying capital gains taxes.The I.R.S. declined to clear Yahoo’s Alibaba transaction in September 2015, but it did not detail why. Tax officials were concerned about companies with small active businesses, like a hot-dog stand, being used to pursue larger asset spinoffs that were tax free. The I.R.S. also did not like the large nonbusiness assets of one company to be paired with smaller assets of another to distribute payouts.As a consequence, any companies considering similar transactions have been in limbo since the Yahoo ruling. Companies did not want to be caught in the same position as Marissa Mayer, the chief executive of Yahoo, who abandoned her Alibaba plans in December to avoid risking a $10 billion tax bill.The new rules set specific parameters for when certain spinoffs would not qualify for tax-free treatment. For the hot-dog stand example, an active business of five years would have to make up at least 5 percent of a company to receive that benefit. Nonbusiness assets that make up two-thirds or more of the company’s value could not be combined with much smaller assets of another to distribute earnings to investors.Companies now know what lines they should not cross, and they have time to plan, especially because, for the most part, the rules will not apply until they are completed. This reasonable approach finally provides some much-needed clarity – if belatedly for Ms. Mayer’s purposes.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »