By AMIE TSANG and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 28, 2017
Where does President Trump’s big tax push, unveiled yesterday in Indiana, go from here?What It Means for Corporate America• Owners of pass-through businesses — which include partnerships like law firms — would see their tax rates fall to 25 percent from 39.5 percent.• NYT’s Neil Irwin: “How do you reduce the rate on these pass-through businesses without also creating a wide-open lane for wealthy Americans to drastically reduce what they owe the government?”• Private equity could be worried about any cap on deductions for debt interest payments.• Businesses can immediately write off the full costs of capital investments for at least five years, a provision known as full expensing.• From Mr. Trump's speech: “Under our framework, we will dramatically cut the business tax rate so that American companies and American workers can beat our foreign competitors and start winning again.”Advertisement• The bottom line, from the FT’s Barney Jopson:Coming from a Republican party torn between populist hostility toward big business and a mainstream appreciation of companies as engines of economic growth, the pledge signaled that the business-friendly wing is in the ascendancy.The Economic ImpactNYT's Julie Hirschfield Davis and Alan Rappeport:Administration officials did not provide a cost estimate for the plan. Members of the Senate Budget Committee have agreed on a budget resolution that would allow for a $1.5 trillion tax cut over 10 years. Studies of similar plans produced by Mr. Trump and House Republicans have been projected to cost $3 trillion to $7 trillion over a decade.WaPo’s Damian Paletta, Mike DeBonis and Carolyn Y. Johnson:The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated that the nine-page framework would equate to a $2.2 trillion tax cut, with $5.8 trillion lost to lower rates and other changes, and another $3.6 trillion recouped by eliminating deductions.Republicans are considering limiting or eliminating deductions for state and local taxes as well.AdvertisementWill It Pass?Vox: “But while Republicans are unified in their goal to cut taxes, there is still debate in the party about how deeply to cut rates and which deductions to get rid of — or whether to offset those changes at all.”Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee: “Tax reform is going to make health care look like a piece of cake. If we do it the right way, it hasn’t been done in 31 years.”JPMorgan Chase's Jamie Dimon: “Today’s announcement is an encouraging step forward in our shared goal of a tax system that delivers higher economic growth, job creation and wages that our country desperately needs.”Chamber of Commerce's Thomas J. Donohue: “Today’s announcement is good news for American families and employers. Tax reform will help families who are struggling to make ends meet and employers who want to grow their business and create new jobs.”NYT’s editorial board: “It would instead provide a windfall to hedge fund managers, corporate executives, real estate developers and other members of the 1 percent. And can it be just a happy coincidence that Mr. Trump and his family would benefit ‘bigly’ from this plan?”WSJ’s editorial board: “The G.O.P. has offered an outline that will enhance U.S. competitiveness and simplify the code — if the final product isn’t diluted by the class-warfare brigades and K Street lobbyists.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tax Policy Center's Steve Rosenthal: “Where is the substance here? Just like health care, we have cheerleading, but we don’t have ideas from the administration.”AdvertisementTwitter takes its turn in the hot seat today, with briefings for the Senate and House intelligence committees.NYT's Dai Wakabayshai and Scott Shane:There is evidence that Twitter may have been used even more extensively than Facebook in the Russian influence campaign last year. In addition to Russia-linked Twitter accounts that posed as Americans, the platform was also used for large-scale automated messaging, using “bot” accounts to spread false stories and promote news articles about emails from Democratic operatives that had been obtained by Russian hackers. Facebook said that it taken significant steps to combat misinformation on its site before the German elections.NYT's Mike Isaac and Melissa Eddy:“These actions did not eliminate misinformation entirely in this election — but they did make it harder to spread, and less likely to appear in people’s News Feeds,” Richard Allan, Facebook’s vice president of public policy in Europe, said in a company blog post.Mark Zuckerberg also hit back against Mr. Trump’s attacks on Facebook:Trump says Facebook is against him. Liberals say we helped Trump. Both sides are upset about ideas and content they don’t like. That’s what running a platform for all ideas looks like.The Daily Beast’s Ben Collins, Kevin Poulsen and Spencer Ackerman: “Russians impersonated real American Muslims to stir chaos on Facebook and Instagram.”Next for the Government’s Investigations• The House Intelligence Committee is to hold a public hearing on the topic next month.• Facebook, Google and Twitter have been invited to testify at a Senate Intelligence Committee hearing on Nov. 1.Ms. Tilton was well known for her flamboyant personality and her defense of turnaround investing. But she had also been fighting accusations that she had misled investors.Bloomberg’s Bob Van Voris and Matt Robinson:In a 57-page decision, [S.E.C. administrative judge Carol Fox] Foelak said the S.E.C. failed to prove that Tilton overvalued loans to her portfolio companies in order to charge her investment clients higher management fees. The judge found that Tilton didn’t conceal material information, including the interest rate and principal on the loans, and the amount of interest that was actually being paid.The Japanese firm has agreed to block any attempts to elevate Travis Kalanick back to the top ranks at the company.Bloomberg’s Eric Newcomer, Caroline Hyde and Giles Turner:Venture capital firm Benchmark, which led Kalanick’s ouster in June, has sought a guarantee in writing from SoftBank that it would reject reappointing Kalanick as chief executive officer and block his appointment as chairman of the board or head of one of its subcommittees.Meanwhile, Uber confirmed that it was shutting down its auto-leasing business in the United States. Just months ago, it found that its losses per vehicle were 18 times higher than previously thought. The company had tried selling the business.AdvertisementWSJ’s Greg Bensinger:Uber has been working to curtail costs after posting at least $4.4 billion in total losses over the past six quarters, particularly as its new chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, eyes an IPO in as little as 18 months. Earlier this year, Uber merged its money-losing Russian operations with its competitor there and last year sold its China unit to a rival.Mr. Hefner, who created Playboy and turned it into a giant of the media and entertainment industry, died at his home, the Playboy Mansion in California.His death comes amid a tough time for the magazine industry. Playboy itself shrunk from an empire that included clothing and casinos to a website without its famous nude pictures and a magazine with a smaller circulation.NYT's Laura Mansnerus:Playboy Enterprises’ chief executive, Scott Flanders, acknowledged that the internet had overrun the magazine’s province: “You’re now one click away from every sex act imaginable for free. And so it’s just passé at this juncture.” The magazine’s website, Playboy.com, had already been revamped as a “safe for work” site. Playboy was no longer illicit.Follow Amie Tsang @amietsang and Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.