

      By KEITH COLLINS

DEC. 15, 2017

AT&T;’s proposed $85.4 billion acquisition of Time Warner would normally have had a good chance of passing muster with antitrust officials in Washington. Disney’s bid to purchase 21st Century Fox for $52.4 billion, on the other hand, would have had a smaller chance.But in a break from the norm, the Justice Department has sued to block the AT&T-Time; Warner deal, and has so far remained silent on the Disney-Fox deal. On Friday, Amy Klobuchar, the ranking Democrat on the Senate subcommittee on antitrust matters, called for a hearing on Disney’s proposed merger. Here is what the government is weighing on the antitrust front.When assessing a deal, officials tend to ask a basic question: Will there be the same number of competitors in an industry? If the answer is “yes,” the government has tended to bless the acquisition, in what’s known as a vertical merger, meaning that the two companies do not really compete in their primary lines of business. The Justice Department appears to be taking a different approach to these two deals.AT&T-Time; WarnerThis would be traditionally be considered a vertical merger. AT&T; is a telecom company, one that specializes in the delivery of content; Time Warner is a media company, the maker of the content.Disney-21st Century FoxThis would typically be called a horizontal merger, because the companies compete in a number of media endeavors, including television and film.Concentration matters in the media business. As Hugo Black, a Supreme Court justice, wrote in a landmark opinion in 1945, “The widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public.”AT&T-Time; WarnerAs a vertical merger between companies within different industries, the deal is likely to have little effect on the media landscape.Disney-21st Century FoxDisney owns ESPN, which is dominant in cable sports. Combining ESPN with Fox’s vast regional sports network would traditionally have the potential to set off an antitrust review. And combined, Disney and Fox’s movie studios made up nearly 40 percent of box office revenue in 2016, according to Box Off Mojo, an industry site.Box office market share, 2016Disney26%The combined box office market share of Disney and 20th Century Fox was 39 percent in 2016. Fox13%WarnerBros.17%Universal12%Sony /Columbia8%Every otherdistributor24%Disney26%The combined box office market share of Disney and 20th Century Fox was 39 percent in 2016. Fox13%WarnerBros.17%Universal12%Sony /Columbia8%Every otherdistributor24%Sony /ColumbiaWarner Bros.UniversalDisneyFoxEvery other distributor26.3%12.9%16.7%12.4%8.0%23.7%The combined box office market share of Disney and 20th Century Fox was 39.2 percent in 2016. Deals are usually judged by whether they will harm consumers, either by resulting in higher prices or less choice.AT&T-Time; WarnerOne of the government’s concerns is the risk that AT&T; would withhold Time Warner content from rival paid-television providers, thus hurting choice and availability.Disney-21st Century FoxDisney announced in August that it would end a distribution partnership with Netflix in 2019, and has already begun withholding content from third-party content distributors as it prepares to start its own video streaming service.Antitrust decisions are supposed to be free from politics. But President Trump has already weighed in on the deals and has come to opposite conclusions.AT&T-Time; WarnerMr. Trump called AT&T;’s proposed acquisition of Time Warner “too much concentration of power.” Time Warner owns CNN, which the president has often called out as a purveyor of fake news.Disney-21st Century FoxRupert Murdoch, executive chairman of 21st Century Fox, is one of Mr. Trump’s closest allies. The president said the Disney-Fox merger “could be a great thing for jobs,” according to the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders.Top image by Brendan Smialowski/AFP, via Getty ImagesAdvertisement