
Breakingviews By                     
LAUREN SILVA LAUGHLIN

DEC. 12, 2017
Exxon Mobil’s climate-change U-turn deserves some wary investor cheers. The $350 billion oil firm is finally planning to comply with shareholder demands — approved more than six months ago — to disclose how global warming will affect its business. That’s to be welcomed. But Exxon’s reputation regarding such concerns means investors need to not just trust, but verify.The world’s largest independent, publicly traded oil company said in a filing Monday night that it would comply with a request — approved by more than 60 percent of shareholders in May — to improve disclosure surrounding climate change. In a follow-up letter to New York’s comptroller, Exxon elaborated: New disclosures to investors will include “energy demand sensitivities, the implications of two degree Celsius scenarios, and its positioning for a lower-carbon future.”It’s an important step. Though the proposal approved in May was nonbinding, shareholder pressure has ratcheted up recently. Walden Asset Management, which voted for more disclosure, sent a letter this week reiterating its request. Exxon’s board, notoriously secretive, risked another proxy fight if it decided not to comply.Exxon’s concession, though, leaves room for creativity. It can base disclosures on its own precarious assumptions. For example, the company could predict that the only fossil fuel the world abandons is coal and address this by making changes to carbon-capture and storage. That doesn’t take into account how global oil and gas demand might change.The company is no stranger to being accused of providing self-serving estimates. Earlier this year, Greenpeace and Oil Change International published a study that said Exxon’s estimates for wind and solar power from 2005 came true nearly two decades early. The study also bashed the company for grossly underestimating how fast electronic vehicles may grow: Exxon reckons just 6 percent of the global car fleet will be powered by batteries by 2040; the Carbon Tracker Initiative estimates more than half of passengers will be traveling in electric vehicles by then.In fact, Exxon could use this opportunity to do the opposite of what shareholders want: prove their current strategy is the correct one.Lauren Silva Laughlin is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »