By CHAD BRAYSEPT. 28, 2017
LONDON — It turns out Angry Birds is a billion-dollar idea.Rovio Entertainment, the company behind the Angry Birds empire that encompasses video games, films and merchandise, was valued at about $1 billion as it prepared to go public on Friday.Rovio helped usher in the rise of smartphone games, with the release of the original Angry Birds in 2009. That original game, where players aimed a flock of birds at an array of evil green pigs, spawned several spinoff titles, all of which have ranked among the most downloaded apps on smartphones and tablets. Overall, Rovio’s titles have been downloaded 3.7 billion times, the company said.But the Finnish company, which initially charged for downloads, struggled financially following its initial Angry Birds success. Consumers gravitated to games offered through a so-called freemium model, in which players download the game for free and pay for additional features.Rovio has since switched from paid apps to free downloads of its games, and its public offering is the latest sign of its changing fortunes. Angry Birds merchandise is widely available, and a sequel to the original Angry Birds film is slated for release in 2019.AdvertisementThe offering was priced at 11.50 euros a share, the top end of the price range announced this month, the company said. The company said that demand for its shares on offer was many times more than the amount available.AdvertisementThe pricing of its shares equates to a market capitalization of 896 million euros, or about $1 billion, when Rovio begins initial trading on Nasdaq Helsinki on Friday. That is below the $2 billion valuation that some had estimated the company could receive earlier this summer.“We are extremely happy and proud of the great interest toward Rovio’s I.P.O., both by Finnish and international investors,” Kati Levoranta, the Rovio chief executive, said in a news release. “I would like to thank all who participated in the I.P.O. for their trust toward our company.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Rovio said it would receive about 30 million euros in gross proceeds from the sale of new shares. Existing shareholders, including the investment vehicle of its vice chairman, Kaj Hed, are expected to pocket 458 million euros from the sale of their shares.The company has said that the aim of the initial public offering was to help it carry out a growth strategy, and that it would use its shares for possible acquisitions and rewards to its employees.The public offering marks the latest step in a tumultuous journey for Rovio.Mikael Hed, a co-founder, stepped down as its chief executive in 2014, and the company announced plans to cut nearly 40 percent of its work force the next year.Mr. Hed is still executive chairman of Rovio Animation, which helped bring “The Angry Birds Movie” to the big screen last year.Rovio returned to a profit in 2016 and reported revenue of 191.7 million euros last year.Its games business, which includes the original Angry Birds and more than a dozen spinoff titles, accounted for 79 percent of its revenue in the 12 months through June.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on September 29, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Rovio, Angry Birds Maker, Is Valued at $1 Billion in I.P.O.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.