By GREGORY SCHMIDTJAN. 17, 2016
Ashley Eckstein, a self-described sci-fi fangirl, believes women like her are often overlooked. So several years ago she started a company to sell apparel featuring brands like Doctor Who, Star Trek and Star Wars to other fangirls. Now, believing those same women need a voice, she is expanding into publishing.“Liking Star Wars is not a trend; it’s part of who you are,” she said, adding that she was disturbed to see women harassed for liking sci-fi and fantasy. “It was troubling to me; it was painful for fangirls.”Mrs. Eckstein started her company, Her Universe, in 2009 after searching for a Star Wars T-shirt at a comic book convention. Unable to find anything suited for women, she instead saw an opportunity to target an overlooked consumer. Her company has since expanded from convention and Internet sales to include retail partners like Hot Topic and, starting in March, Kohl’s, which will sell a line of Her Universe active wear.Now, Mrs. Eckstein sees another opportunity, this time as a publisher of sci-fi novels written by women. She said she got the idea after receiving unsolicited manuscripts at conventions. “Fans would hand me a book and say, ‘I wrote a story and could not get it published,’ ” she said. “I would come home with stacks of books.”AdvertisementMrs. Eckstein wanted to help, but realized she lacked the experience. “The publishing world is completely different from the fashion world,” she said. So she met with Permuted Press, a boutique publisher known for its zombie and post-apocalyptic novels.AdvertisementA growing number of Permuted Press readers were women, said Anthony Ziccardi, the publisher and co-owner, and the company had been looking for an opportunity to branch out into sci-fi and fantasy as a way to attract pre-teenagers and young adults.Sales of children’s books, which include young adult fiction, grew by 12.6 percent in the United States from January to September last year, according to Nielsen. Print sales of adult fiction and nonfiction have dropped in the United States, but the juvenile market has grown 40 percent in the last decade, Nielsen said.Permuted Press has scaled back on its zombie tales to focus on the Her Universe Press imprint, Mr. Ziccardi said. Since the announcement of the partnership in October, he receives three to five submissions a week. Mrs. Eckstein reads every one, along with two other editors at Permuted Press, he said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“There are really a lot of talented authors out there that want to get discovered,” he said. “A lot of Ashley’s fan base trusts her and likes her.”That connection to her fan base has been one of the keys to Mrs. Eckstein’s success. An actress known for her voice-over work on the animated series “Star Wars: The Clone Wars,” Mrs. Eckstein said she tried to meet fans at conventions and through social networks to find out what they wanted from Her Universe. “Our secret is asking the fans,” she said. “When it comes to the stories, we chose the same strategy.”Her Universe Press has six novels lined up for 2016. The first one, “Weirdest,” was written by Heather Nuhfer, who writes for comic books like My Little Pony, Scooby-Doo and Wonder Woman.Despite her success in comic books, Ms. Nuhfer said she was grateful for the opportunity to work with Her Universe Press because of its focus on strong female characters.“I feel like I’ve had a hard time breaking into publishing as a woman,” she said. “I write a lot of ‘girl properties,’ so there are extra steps to get out of ‘Pink Town.’”But her agent was reluctant to take the novel to Her Universe Press and wanted to go to an established publisher instead. “We had talked about taking it to other publishers,” she said, “but for me, it seemed like a no-brainer to push through with Ashley because of her passion for making it a great project.”A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Narrowing a Gap in the Sci-Fi Universe: One Fangirl Giving a Voice to Others .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.