
Fair Game By                     
 GRETCHEN MORGENSON
 
APRIL 1, 2016
In the five months since Valeant’s board established a committee to examine the company’s accounting practices, it has turned up one $58 million error.Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, the besieged drug company, had made a mistake in booking $58 million in sales in 2014 to Philidor Rx Services, a specialty pharmacy the company used to sell its drugs. Those sales should have been recorded later, when the drugs were actually dispensed to patients, the committee said.A $58 million boo-boo is no biggie for Valeant, which reported over $8 billion in sales in 2014.Still, the question lingers: Will other accounting flaws emerge?The company has said they may. In a news release on March 21, Valeant said, “Additional accounting adjustments may be identified that further impact prior periods and additional remediation actions may be recommended.”AdvertisementThe Valeant committee is continuing its analysis of the company’s financial reporting, but this much it has determined. “The tone at the top of the organization,” including demands that its executives meet challenging targets, contributed to the improper revenue recognition involving Philidor.AdvertisementGiven recent events at Valeant, its investors are understandably nervous. The company’s stock closed at $28.10 on Friday. It is down about 90 percent since August. Investors now await the release of Valeant’s annual report for 2015, which was supposed to have been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in March.Improperly booking revenue, as Valeant did with Philidor, is a tactic sophisticated investors stay alert for. They recognize that companies experiencing a bad quarter can be tempted to pull in sales from future periods to help achieve current revenue or earnings targets.This is known as stuffing the channel, and it occurs when a manufacturer pushes out more products than usual into its distribution pipelines.It has not been shown that Valeant has been channel stuffing. But the error at Philidor has raised the question.Channel stuffing is not uncommon. The Securities and Exchange Commission has brought numerous cases against companies that crammed distribution channels as part of fraudulent schemes to inflate their earnings.Regulators view channel stuffing as a problem because it misleads investors about a company’s performance. But there are other drawbacks to the practice. If a company records additional sales earlier than it ordinarily would, that is likely to result in fewer sales in coming months. Another risk is that if a distributor can’t sell all the products it has taken in, it can easily return them to the manufacturer, which is then stuck with the costs associated with the returns.Of course, getting distributors to buy more goods than they think they can sell isn’t always a cinch. But it can be made easier if a distributor knows a product’s price is about to increase. Under those circumstances, a wholesaler is eager to buy more of a product at current prices because it will profit from selling the product soon thereafter at the new, higher price.Advertisement“There is a tremendous interest for a drug company bent on meeting its financial targets to stuff the channel,” said Michael Krensavage, a former health care analyst who runs Krensavage Asset Management and has made a bet against Valeant. “And it’s very easy to do.”Mr. Krensavage pointed to sales of two big Valeant drugs during the fourth quarter of 2015 as possible examples. They are omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate, a drug for gastrointestinal diseases, and Glumetza, a diabetes treatment.In a presentation to investors just over two weeks ago, Valeant reported that sales of both drugs rose significantly at the end of last year. But the number of prescriptions for both of these drugs — actually dispensed to patients, in other words — declined in the fourth quarter, according to Symphony Health Solutions, a health care data and analytics company.Valeant said fourth-quarter 2015 sales of omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate were $62 million, more than triple the $17 million recorded in the third quarter. That pushed the drug to the No. 7 spot among Valeant brands.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Symphony shows that omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate prescriptions declined by 6.3 percent in the last quarter of 2015. Actual figures were 60,880 in the third quarter and 57,060 in the fourth.A similar pattern shows up in Glumetza sales in the fourth quarter of 2015; they were $86 million, up 62 percent from the $53 million reported in the third quarter. This performance made Glumetza Valeant’s third-largest brand.Symphony shows prescriptions for Glumetza actually declined 8.7 percent.I asked Laurie Little, Valeant’s spokeswoman, how sales could balloon when prescriptions were falling.In a statement, she noted that the fourth-quarter sales of omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate had to do with Valeant’s introduction of the drug in October 2015. Before then, a third party had been selling it at a lower price, hence the relatively paltry $17 million in sales during the third quarter.“As a result of this change, Valeant created launch quantities of the product to fill the channel in anticipation of the Q4 launch and those numbers came down over time,” she said.AdvertisementAs for Glumetza’s fourth-quarter sales activity, Ms. Little said it was related to the fact that a new generic was set to enter the market this February. “It is not unusual for the price of a product to increase as it approaches patent expiry and for its volumes to decline as wholesalers and retailers reduce inventory levels in anticipation of a switch to the generic product,” she said.But the last price increase in Glumetza came last July, early in Valeant’s third quarter. So it’s unclear what role that price increase would have played in fourth-quarter sales of Glumetza.Ms. Little said that sales of these drugs by Valeant were entirely proper. Valeant’s accounting committee and PricewaterhouseCoopers, the company’s auditor, may agree.Before they decide, though, let’s hope they look carefully at Mr. Krensavage’s allegations, which he detailed in a letter he sent to both parties about two weeks ago.Mr. Krensavage has been here before. Back in 2002, when he was a pharmaceutical analyst covering aaiPharma, a drug development company, he began to suspect it of stuffing the channel. He downgraded the stock and took abuse for it.Then, in March 2004, aaiPharma restated its financial results for 2003, citing unusual sales of some products. The S.E.C. investigated, identifying fraudulent activities.In May 2005, aaiPharma filed for bankruptcy protection.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2016, on Page BU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Little Goof by Valeant May Grow.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »