By VICTORIA FINKLESEPT. 29, 2017
WASHINGTON — A group of federal regulators voted Friday to no longer classify the American International Group as “too big to fail,” freeing the giant insurer from years of tough government oversight.The vote came nine years after the government rescued A.I.G. in a significant bailout at the height of the financial crisis, making the insurance company a symbol of the financial industry’s recklessness.Since nearly collapsing in September 2008, A.I.G. has sold off numerous business lines and significantly revamped its operations. It also repaid the $182 billion in bailout money it received from the government.In an effort to prevent a repeat of the crisis, the Dodd-Frank law of 2010 empowered regulators to designate certain nonbank financial institutions as “systemically important” and subject them to more intensive supervision. A.I.G. and other companies that received the label have fought to shed it, arguing that they aren’t big or interconnected enough to imperil the broader financial system if they run into problems.AdvertisementA.I.G. was one of four nonbank institutions classified as systemically important. Under Dodd-Frank, banks with more than $50 billion in assets are automatically subject to similar levels of heightened regulation.The Financial Stability Oversight Council, a group of regulators led by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, voted 6 to 3 to release A.I.G. from the designation. A two-thirds majority of the council’s voting members is required to remove the label.Among those supporting the change were Mr. Mnuchin and Janet Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve. Three regulators who were appointed by President Barack Obama voted against relieving A.I.G. of the systemically important designation.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Mnuchin said in a statement that the removal of A.I.G.’s “too big to fail” label “demonstrates our commitment to act decisively to remove any designation if a company does not pose a threat to financial stability.”The government’s action is the latest step by the Trump administration to relax the oversight of major companies. President Trump and his advisers have argued that excessive regulation is stifling the economy, though critics argue that the broad regulatory rollback will set the stage for future problems.After Friday’s vote, Prudential Financial, an insurance company, is the only nonbank to carry the “systemically important” label.AdvertisementThe financial arm of General Electric won the removal of the designation last summer after shedding billions of dollars in assets. The insurer MetLife won a case in Federal District Court last spring to have its “too-big-to-fail” label deleted. The Treasury Department under Mr. Obama appealed the MetLife ruling, and that case is still pending, although it has been postponed until the Treasury Department completes a report examining the designation process. That report is expected next month.Brian Duperreault, A.I.G.’s president and chief executive, said in a statement: “The council’s decision reflects the substantial and successful de-risking that A.I.G.’s employees have achieved since 2008.”In a statement, Prudential called on Friday for the government to “rescind our designation” as systemically important, saying the current situation creates “an unbalanced playing field.”A version of this article appears in print on September 30, 2017, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Panel Declares A.I.G. No Longer ‘Too Big to Fail’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.