By DANIEL VICTORMARCH 31, 2016
About two weeks after a grisly shooting in a Pittsburgh suburb, Wendy Bell, a local news anchor for WTAE-TV, wrote a public Facebook post that focused in part on finding hope and offering kindness.But before the offering kindness part, she swerved into racial commentary that led to her being fired on Wednesday.She was responding to a shooting at a backyard party on March 9 in Wilkinsburg, Pa., that killed five people, including a pregnant woman. No one has been arrested, and the police have not yet publicly identified suspects.Yet in her Facebook post on March 21, which was later edited and eventually deleted, Ms. Bell played detective in a way that some felt relied on damaging stereotypes.Advertisement“You needn’t be a criminal profiler to draw a mental sketch of the killers who broke so many hearts two weeks ago Wednesday,” she wrote. The post continued: “They are young black men, likely in their teens or in their early 20s. They have multiple siblings from multiple fathers and their mothers work multiple jobs. These boys have been in the system before. They’ve grown up there. They know the police. They’ve been arrested.”AdvertisementIn the same post, Ms. Bell mentioned a hard-working, young, black man whom she saw working at a restaurant, praising him in a way that came across as patronizing. “I wonder how long it had been since someone told him he was special,” she wrote.Ms. Bell did not immediately respond to a phone message seeking comment.Station officials moved last week to take her off the air and distance themselves from the remarks. Charles W. Wolfertz, the station’s president and general manager, addressed viewers in a broadcast explaining the move during which he said Ms. Bell showed “an egregious lack of judgment.”In a statement circulated by the station’s parent company, Hearst, WTAE-TV said her comments were “inconsistent with the company’s ethics and journalistic standards.”A Hearst spokesman declined further comment.Ms. Bell, who joined the station in 1998 and has won 21 regional Emmy Awards, apologized last week on her Facebook account, which has since been deleted. “I now understand that some of the words I chose were insensitive and could be viewed as racist,” she wrote. “I regret offending anyone. I’m truly sorry.”
            I have removed a post that I initially placed here on Monday. I sincerely apologize for that post about the... https://t.co/SPdfljNykO But on Wednesday, she told The Associated Press that she didn’t get a “fair shake” and argued that people’s focus should be on “African-Americans being killed by other African-Americans.”“It makes me sick,” she said. “What matters is what’s going on in America, and it is the death of black people in this country.”She continued: “I live next to three war-torn communities in the city of Pittsburgh, that I love dearly. My stories, they struck a nerve. They touched people, but it’s not enough. More needs to be done. The problem needs to be addressed.”AdvertisementCriticism of her Facebook post has spread well beyond Pittsburgh. A Facebook group was formed demanding that WTAE-TV “hold Wendy Bell accountable” and attracted more than 1,000 members.Damon Young, the editor in chief of Very Smart Brothas, a publication targeted at African-American readers, summed up a common sentiment, writing, “Wendy Bell is utterly clueless about race, White privilege, and how her privilege contributes to her tone deaf myopia in regards to race.”But Ms. Bell also attracted supporters, many of whom have been peppering the station’s Facebook page with comments supporting her over what they see as an unjust firing motivated by political correctness.“She spoke the truth, and the people responsible for having her fired should be ashamed for this happening,” one supporter wrote.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Bell had previously been forced to apologize for remarks perceived as offensive to African-Americans, according to the liberal watchdog Media Matters. In 2010, after a segment on sunscreen, Ms. Bell turned to her black co-anchor and said: “I want whatever you’re using.”Apologizing later, she said, “The words I said didn’t come out the right way, and as such, offended some of you, which leaves me deeply troubled. I would never want to offend ANYONE, as my words clearly did. I hope you will accept my sincere apology.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.