By VINOD SREEHARSHAMARCH 31, 2016
Argentina’s Senate has approved measures that will allow the government to pay billions of dollars to American hedge funds, a critical step toward settling a legal battle that is more than a decade old.The vote, 54-16 in favor, took place just past midnight on Thursday after more than a dozen hours of emotional speeches.It was the last hurdle that Argentina’s new president, Mauricio Macri, had to clear inside Argentina to settle with the holders of debt that his country defaulted on in 2001. The lower house approved the measures this month.The country’s Senate voted to allow the government to sell up to $12.5 billion in bonds to pay for the agreements with all the creditors who did not participate in Argentina’s two earlier debt restructurings.AdvertisementIn February, the Macri administration reached a series of agreements with investors including Paul E. Singer’s NML Capital, Montreux Partners, Dart Management and a group of Italian investors, totaling more than $10 billion in payments.AdvertisementThe Senate also revoked laws passed during previous administrations that prevented a new offer from being made, including one that barred the government from making a more attractive offer to the holdouts than the ones that investors accepted in two debt swaps, in 2005 and 2010.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lifting of these laws was a condition set by Judge Thomas P. Griesa of the United States District Court in Manhattan on Feb. 19, when he lifted his injunction that had blocked Argentina from paying bondholders who had agreed to the two debt exchanges. The two sides agreed on a deadline of April 14 to pay the settlement.Argentina is expected to go on a road show in April to court foreign investors.In February, the country’s minister of economy, Alfonso Prat-Gay, a former JPMorgan Chase banker, said that the country would seek to sell up to $15 billion in bonds to pay for the February agreements. Next week, he will attend the Inter-American Development Bank’s annual conference in the Bahamas.Mr. Macri is in Washington this week attending a nuclear security summit meeting. President Obama visited Argentina this month, the first time a United States president made such a trip since 2005.The Senate vote included many supporters of the previous presidents, the late Nestor Kirchner and his successor and wife, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who form the largest block in the chamber. Those who supported the measure said in their speeches that they did so largely because they felt they had no choice.Still, one senator from the Kirchner bloc, Juan Manuel Abal Medina, voted against the measure on grounds that it was inequitable, contending that “Paul Singer is receiving different treatment” than all the other bondholders did.A version of this article appears in print on April 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Argentina’s Senate Votes to Allow Payment to U.S. Bondholders.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.