AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael M. GrynbaumMuch is yet to be determined about the future of Fox News, especially with the contracts of the star anchors Megyn Kelly and Bill O’Reilly soon to run out.But a new prime-time lineup for the 24-hour news network, which is in rebuilding mode after the departure of its longtime chief, Roger Ailes, is starting to take shape.Tucker Carlson, a former co-host of CNN’s “Crossfire” and a prominent conservative writer, is set to take over the Fox anchor chair at 7 p.m., filling the slot formerly held by Greta van Susteren, who left the network in September.As Fox faces competition from scrappier rivals like Breitbart News, Mr. Carlson, 47, is in some ways a throwback to a more genteel era of conservatism. Preppy and jovial, Mr. Carlson founded The Daily Caller, a provocative, if relatively moderate, right-leaning website, and he has often evinced a mischievous streak; in 2006, he agreed to be a contestant on “Dancing With the Stars,” although he was eliminated in the first round.Mr. Carlson, who also hosted a show on MSNBC from 2005 to 2008, will replace Brit Hume, who was temporarily filling in for Ms. van Susteren. The show, which does not yet have a title, begins Nov. 14.Journalists at Fox News are bracing for more change as the presidential campaign winds down. Mr. O’Reilly has signaled that he may be inclined to leave after his current contract ends next year, and Ms. Kelly, whose contract also ends next year, is embroiled in a high-stakes negotiation with Fox about her future.Ms. Kelly is considering offers from several rival networks, according to a person briefed on her plans, even as Rupert Murdoch, Fox News’s executive chairman, has pushed for her to commit to a lucrative new contract.She is unlikely to make a decision until the release of her memoir, “Settle for More,” which is to be published next month, and appears to include startling revelations about her experiences at Fox.In an excerpt posted Thursday on the gossip website Radar Online, Ms. Kelly writes that Mr. Ailes promised to advance her career “in exchange for sexual favors” shortly after she arrived at the network in 2005.Ms. Ailes made sexually charged comments and, during one meeting, tried “to grab me repeatedly and kiss me on the lips,” Ms. Kelly writes, adding that Mr. Ailes implied he might dismiss her if she did not comply. Ms. Kelly writes that she reported Mr. Ailes to a supervisor and that his behavior eventually stopped.Mr. Ailes, through a statement from his lawyer, Susan Estrich, denied Ms. Kelly’s “allegations of sexual harassment or misconduct of any kind.” Ms. Estrich included a link to a television appearance by Ms. Kelly in October 2015, in which she praised Mr. Ailes and said, “I really care about Roger, and he has been nothing but good to me.”Nine months after that appearance, Mr. Ailes was gone from Fox News. Whether Ms. Kelly will stay remains an open question.Advertisement