By AMIE TSANGSEPT. 30, 2016
Remember the echo of doom we mentioned yesterday? You can still hear it.Deutsche Bank shares have been falling, and pulling down financial stocks (and the rest of the market) with them.Deutsche lost as much as 9 percent in the United States yesterday, before closing down 6.7 percent, and has been dropping in European trading. Hedge funds have removed some of their cash reserves from the bank, according to Bloomberg.Some clients still say that they have no problems using the bank and that they are certain the German government would never let it fail.The bank is still, after all, referred to by traders as “a flow monster,” meaning it can still capture a piece of the trillions of dollars of bonds and stocks traded around the world.AdvertisementBut there is political opposition in Germany to helping banks in distress. That could mean things will have to get a lot tougher for Deutsche before it can even think about getting state help.AdvertisementAt $413 million, it’s one of the biggest criminal penalties levied on a United States hedge fund. That’s the price for handing out more than $100 million in bribes.The United States government charged that a unit of Och-Ziff Capital Management had paid bribes to government officials in Libya, Chad, Niger, Guinea and the Democratic Republic of Congo to secure natural resources deals and investments.The hedge fund’s unit pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy.Daniel Och, the founder and chief executive, agreed to pay $2.2 million to settle a record-keeping violation with the Securities and Exchange Commission.Joel M. Frank, Och-Ziff’s chief financial officer, also agreed to settle charges that executives ignored red flags.We saw a flurry of activity in the tech world yesterday, emphasizing the importance of the cloud, business services and artificial intelligence in the tech industry. We also saw the wave of consolidation in the chip industry continue to roll in.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• IBM has bought the prominent and sometimes controversial Promontory Financial Group, a financial consulting firm.Big Blue said Promontory would be expected to help train Watson, its artificial intelligence platform, to help IBM’s financial clients manage their regulatory obligations and reduce costs.AdvertisementSpeaking of which: Microsoft has created a new organization to combine its research group and its products that rely on artificial intelligence, like the Cortana virtual assistant.• Microsoft’s deal to buy LinkedIn is being questioned by Salesforce.com, which also bid on the professional social network.Salesforce has raised its concerns with Europe’s antitrust authorities, say people with knowledge of the matter.• Nutanix, which provides cloud-based data storage for businesses, priced its $238 million initial public offering with a valuation of $2.18 billion.That’s slightly higher than the valuation it received two years ago in private markets. It’s not a huge premium, but at least it avoided having to price shares at a discount.• Qualcomm is in discussions to buy NXP Semiconductors in a deal that could be worth more than $30 billion, according to a person briefed on the matter.John G. Stumpf, the Wells Fargo chief executive, testified before the House Financial Services Committee. Here’s a look at the scandals surrounding the bank, by the numbers.$41 million: The pay being forfeited by Mr. Stumpf.$20 million: The fine issued on Thursday from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency for violating rules on lending to members of the military.$4 million: The amount Wells Fargo agreed to pay to resolve a Justice Department investigation into improper seizures of vehicles owned by soldiers who fell behind on their loans.Advertisement149,857: The number of customers with potentially unauthorized accounts in Texas alone.The Commerce Department will publish data on personal income, consumption and inflation in August. It could affect a decision by the Federal Reserve, which is eyeing a potential interest rate increase this year.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.