By REUTERSMARCH 31, 2016
WASHINGTON — The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits unexpectedly rose last week, but a sharp drop in layoffs in March suggested that the labor market momentum remained intact.Initial claims for state unemployment benefits increased 11,000 to a seasonally adjusted 276,000 for the week ending on March 26, the Labor Department said on Thursday.“Claims remain at a level that is consistent with low rates of involuntary job separation, and this report, similar to other labor market-related releases for March, points to no significant shift in labor market trends at the end of the first quarter,” said John Ryding, chief economist at RDQ Economics in New York.Applications for unemployment benefits have now been below 300,000, a threshold associated with healthy labor market conditions, for 55 weeks, the longest stretch since 1973. With the labor market continuing to tighten, there is probably little scope for further significant declines in claims.AdvertisementThe four-week moving average of claims, considered a better measure of labor market trends because it irons out week-to-week volatility, rose 3,500, to 263,250 last week.
            Weekly number of people who have filed for unemployment benefits for the first time.        400,0004-week moving average300 2001000ONDJFMMARCH 31, 2016
In a separate report, the global outplacement consultant group Challenger, Gray & Christmas said employers based in the United States announced 48,207 jobs cuts in March, down 21.7 percent from February.Advertisement“Job cuts have slowed since surging in the first two months of the year,” said John Challenger, chief executive of Challenger, Gray & Christmas.The jobs market also was bolstered by a third report, from the Institute for Supply Management-Chicago, showing that factory employment in the Midwest region jumped to a near one-year high in March.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The group’s regional manufacturing index surged six points to a reading of 53.6 in March as production, new orders and order backlogs increased.A reading above 50 indicates expansion in the region’s factory activity. The strong increase in the index was the latest indication that the worst of the manufacturing rout was probably over.“The boost to new orders signals growth will continue in the coming months. The bottom in manufacturing may be behind us,” said Jay Morelock, an economist at FTN Financial in New York.Manufacturing, which accounts for about 12 percent of the American economy, has been pummeled by a robust dollar, spending cuts in the energy industry as lower oil prices undercut profits, and weak global demand. Efforts by businesses to reduce excess inventory have also been a drag.A version of this list appears in print on April 1, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Jobless Claims Rise, but a Strong Labor Market Is Seen.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.