By AMIE TSANGNOV. 4, 2016
They just keep coming. Wells Fargo, already reeling from a scandal over fake accounts and a settlement over home appraisal overcharges, has been hit with yet more accusations.The latest? Former employees say the bank used termination notices to retaliate against attempts to blow the whistle on its fraudulent activities.These forms, which must be filed with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority when the broker or financial adviser leaves, can leave a black mark on that person’s career.Three Democratic senators have asked for data on these filings. They said the responses showed that the bank had “ample information about the scope of fraudulent sales practices” long before it reached a settlement with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.AdvertisementThey have asked for more details, to determine whether Wells Fargo used unfavorable filings as a weapon against employees.AdvertisementA spokeswoman for Wells Fargo said that the bank had said in congressional hearings that it had “been working for years to stop wrongful sales practices behavior.”Before you get swept up in a wave of fury aimed at the financial sector, William D. Cohan wants to assure you of something: Not everyone who works in finance is evil.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If anything, the government needs people from Wall Street in its ranks.He points to the accomplishments of Antonio Weiss, the investment banker whose nomination to be under secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance was blocked by Senator Elizabeth Warren.Mr. Weiss went on to be a counselor to Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and has had a leading responsibility in trying to resolve the financial crisis shaking Puerto Rico, as well as trying to make the capital markets operate more smoothly.“What better way to improve the inner workings of the capital markets than by having someone with the authority to regulate them who knows precisely how they work, or how they are manipulated?” Mr. Cohan asks.The stocks in makers of generic drugs tumbled on reports that a federal inquiry into price-fixing was wider than previously believed.Bloomberg reported that the Justice Department’s investigation was looking at more than a dozen companies and two dozen drugs.AdvertisementTeva, Mylan, Endo and Impax have said that they have received subpoenas.The government may bring the first cases by the end of the year, Bloomberg said.Although the inquiry started about two years ago, the possibility that it has become a wider-ranging investigation comes as the industry is under pressure over spiraling drug costs.• The Labor Department releases its last jobs report before Election Day, with both sides in the presidential race eager to use the figures to push their narrative. We look at how the department keeps its statistics politics-free.“The environment in this job is toxic, but they’re trying to create this whole false idea that everything is cheery and bubbly. I think they want us to be not real people.”— Gammy Alvarez, an employee at a Trader Joe’s in Manhattan. Workers at the chain have complained of harsh and arbitrary treatment at the hands of managers, of chronic safety lapses and of an atmosphere of surveillance.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.