
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

NOV. 3, 2016
The latest round of drumbeating has begun to prevent anyone with a Wall Street background from filling the top economic positions in the next administration. Not only is that not right, it hurts the American people by preventing those who have the best understanding of how financial markets work from taking a much-needed role in policing and fixing them. It is a form of discrimination. The time has come for it to stop.The chatter is coming from the usual suspects. “Personnel is policy,” Robert Reich, a former secretary of labor in President Bill Clinton’s administration, correctly told The New York Times last week. He then informed the paper that the discussions had already begun in the Hillary Clinton camp to ensure that no one with a Wall Street background gets to serve in any of the dozen or so cabinet positions or about 200 subcabinet positions that Mrs. Clinton would have to fill if she wins the election.Not to be outdone by Mr. Reich, Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont lawmaker who gave Mrs. Clinton a run for her money during the Democratic primaries, wrote in an email to The Times, “We need a secretary of the Treasury who is prepared to take on the greed and recklessness of Wall Street, not someone who comes from Wall Street.”Of course, as we all know, Mr. Reich and Mr. Sanders are just two of the soldiers in Senator Elizabeth Warren’s army. The senior Democratic lawmaker from Massachusetts, Senator Warren has for years led the charge to prevent anyone with a Wall Street resume from serving in government. In late 2014, she blocked President Obama’s nomination of Antonio Weiss, then a distinguished investment banker at Lazard, to become under secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance.AdvertisementAs I have previously written, Mr. Weiss had impeccable progressive credentials and shared many of Senator Warren’s political views. But that was not good enough for her. That he had Wall Street experience meant he was unacceptable to her. And somehow, she had enough political power in Washington to block Mr. Weiss’s appointment. Senator Warren wouldn’t even deign to meet with Mr. Weiss. In short order, the nomination was withdrawn. (Disclosure: Mr. Weiss and I worked together for a few years as bankers at Lazard, more than 20 years ago.)AdvertisementBut that wasn’t the end of the story. For the last two years, Mr. Weiss has served as a “counselor” to Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew, an appointment that does not require Senate approval. In that role, Mr. Weiss has a leading responsibility in trying to resolve the financial crisis shaking up Puerto Rico and in trying to make the capital markets operate more smoothly. He has accomplished much during his nearly two years in Washington, even without the authority he would have had as a confirmed under secretary, and he remains highly regarded for his work there.Mr. Weiss’s success in Washington makes one wonder just what Senator Warren accomplished by blocking a hearing on his nomination, other than showing us all that she could. Senator Warren’s demagogy is impressive. She has lots of power and is not afraid to use it. Sometimes, she almost gets it right — for instance, when she took down John G. Stumpf, the former chairman and chief executive of Wells Fargo, during his Senate hearing in September about the cross-selling scandal at the bank. She called for his resignation, and he handed it in on Oct. 12. But most of the time, she goes overboard and seems like she is receiving way too much gratification getting headlines and television time for her stern and condescending lectures.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The fact is that many jobs in Washington could be filled by someone with a Wall Street background to the benefit of the American people. What better way to improve the inner workings of the capital markets than by having someone with the authority to regulate them who knows precisely how they work, or how they are manipulated?There has been a long and mutually beneficial history of Wall Street types working in Washington. For instance, Henry M. Paulson Jr., the former chief executive of Goldman Sachs, who was the Treasury secretary before, during and after the 2008 financial crisis.With help from Ben S. Bernanke, then the chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Timothy F. Geithner, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Mr. Paulson had the good sense to realize that what the big Wall Street companies needed eight years ago to prevent further disaster was an enormous infusion of capital to restore confidence to the financial markets at the moment they had stopped working.The resulting emergency legislation, called the Troubled Asset Relief Program, infused billions of dollars into the banks – and made a profit for the federal government too, after the banks paid the money back with interest and an equity kicker. Mr. Paulson helped save our economy from an even worse fate. In part, he was able to do it because he had worked on Wall Street for decades, knew how the capital markets functioned and knew who on Wall Street to call to find out what really was happening. What Mr. Paulson did at the most acute moment of the crisis was government action at its best.Contrary to what Senator Warren and Senator Sanders believe, not everyone who works on Wall Street is evil. Not everyone who works, or worked, on Wall Street or at a private equity firm or at a hedge fund should automatically be barred from government service.On the contrary, we need the best minds in our society working in government to solve our many problems — climate change, the rising cost of health care, our $20 trillion of federal debt and our annual budget deficits — and believe it or not, Senator Warren, some of our nation’s best and brightest work in finance. If they are willing to give up their high-paying jobs to serve in government and can get through a Senate confirmation hearing, why in the world wouldn’t we want them working for us in Washington?We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »