By CHAD BRAYJAN. 19, 2016
LONDON — Steven A. Cohen, the billionaire investor, has returned to London, less than three years after his former firm, SAC Capital Advisors, closed its office in London amid an insider trading investigation by authorities in the United States.Mr. Cohen’s new firm, Point72 Asset Management, has opened a new office in the Mayfair neighborhood of central London, where it has about a half-dozen investment professionals on staff, Douglas D. Haynes, Point72’s president, said in a meeting with reporters on Tuesday.The firm could have as many as 15 people in place by the end of the year and has office space available for as many as 50 to 70 people, Mr. Haynes said.“We think the European market has a lot of opportunity,” Mr. Haynes said, adding the company continued to have “a fair bit of exposure to Europe” even after closing its London office.Advertisement“We believe there is a lot of advantage, if you’re going to have risk exposure to a market, to be local to the market,” he said.AdvertisementThe news came just over a week after Mr. Cohen reached a deal with the Securities and Exchange Commission that will bar him from managing money for outside investors for the next two years, but clears the way for him to eventually return to the hedge fund industry.The S.E.C. had sought a lifetime ban when it first filed an administrative case against Mr. Cohen, one of Wall Street’s richest men, more than two years ago, accusing him of failing to adequately oversee an employee.In 2013, SAC Capital pleaded guilty to insider trading charges and paid a $1.8 billion penalty, which required it to return outside money to investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cohen renamed his firm Point72 and reopened it as a “family office,” which largely manages his $11 billion fortune and the money of some employees.The firm, based in Stamford, Conn., has about 950 employees, making it one of the larger family offices.In addition to its main offices in Stamford and New York, the firm has satellite offices in Hong Kong, Singapore and Tokyo.On Tuesday, Mr. Haynes, who joined the firm in February 2014 as an adviser, said that Point72 had not determined whether the firm would seek to manage outside capital again if the S.E.C. allowed it to do so beginning in 2018.“The only reason we would take in outside capital” was if the firm determined it needed to do so to remain “a premier asset management firm” and attract and retain talent, Mr. Haynes said.“That’s a long time from now to predict whether we’ll make that determination,” he said. “A lot can happen between now and then.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.