AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerThe Houston law firm Bracewell & Giuliani will now be just Bracewell.Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, and Marc L. Mukasey are breaking away from the law firm where they have worked for a decade to join Greenberg Traurig.Mr. Giuliani will be the global chairman of Greenberg’s cybersecurity and crisis management group and a senior adviser to the firm’s executive chairman, Richard A. Rosenbaum.Mr. Mukasey, a former supervisory federal prosecutor and counsel to the star witness in the insider trading case against Mathew Martoma, joins Greenberg as the global co-chairman of its white-collar defense group.Mr. Giuliani founded Bracewell’s New York office in 2005, and he and Mr. Mukasey worked there for more than a decade. His departure from Bracewell, which has 450 lawyers, was by “amicable agreement,” the Texas firm said on Tuesday.Greenberg has 1,900 lawyers in the United States, Latin America, Europe, Asia and the Middle East.“Having reached the goal we set out to achieve 10 years ago in establishing a new law practice in New York, we look forward to joining a global platform that addresses the complex needs of today’s multinational clients,” the former mayor said in a statement released by Greenberg on Tuesday.Mr. Giuliani became a United States associate attorney general in 1981 and United States attorney in Manhattan in 1983. That was on his way to becoming a two-term mayor of New York from 1994 to 2001. After leaving office, he founded the security consulting firm Giuliani Partners and later joined Bracewell.Mr. Mukasey is a former unit chief and deputy chief appellate attorney for the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan and a former staff lawyer at the Securities and Exchange Commission. He is the son of a former United States attorney general and federal judge, Michael B. Mukasey, who is a longtime friend of the former mayor.At Bracewell, the younger Mr. Mukasey has handled the defense of several prominent cases, including being lead trial counsel for executives in the Countrywide Financial mortgage fraud trial and criminal cases involving the Deepwater Horizon oil rig and Major League Baseball’s steroid investigation.Advertisement