AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberWith the future of The Chicago Sun-Times hanging in the balance, a group of investors led by the Chicago businessman Edwin Eisendrath submitted a bid for the newspaper on Monday, setting up a potential battle with the owner of The Chicago Tribune.The Chicago Tribune’s owner, Tronc, whose other newspapers include The Los Angeles Times, announced in May that it had entered into a nonbinding agreement to buy Wrapports Holdings, the owner of The Sun-Times and The Chicago Reader, a weekly. On the same day, the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division announced that it was investigating the possible acquisition — The Sun-Times is The Tribune’s main rival — and invited other prospective buyers to submit bids for the newspaper.Bids were due by Monday night.As part of the effort to make the sale process competitive, The Sun-Times ran a full-page ad announcing that it was looking for new ownership that would continue to publish the newspaper. The newspaper also published a letter to its readers explaining that it had agreed to enter into talks with Tronc “after seeking alternative arrangements with other media companies both locally and outside of Chicago.”“After those efforts were exhausted,” the letter said, “it became clear that a business combination with Tronc made the most sense.”Michael W. Ferro Jr., the nonexecutive chairman of Tronc, was previously a majority owner of The Sun-Times. In March 2016, shortly after Mr. Ferro took a $44 million stake in Tronc, formerly known as Tribune Publishing, the company said he had donated his stake in The Sun-Times to a charitable trust to avoid perceived conflicts of interest. (Wrapports, led by Mr. Ferro, agreed to buy The Sun-Times and other publications in 2011.)Tronc said in May that it would continue to operate The Sun-Times as an independent newsroom if it succeeded in acquiring it.Still, the possibility that Tronc and Mr. Ferro might own The Sun-Times troubled some in Chicago, including Mr. Eisendrath, who put together an investor group that included the Chicago Federation of Labor to bid for the paper and The Chicago Reader. The Chicago Federation of Labor is an umbrella organization that represents about 300 local unions.“No one wants this to be a one-newspaper town,” Mr. Eisendrath said in a telephone interview on Monday. “We’ve been cheered by people who think this is, of course, the right thing to do.”Mr. Eisendrath and Robert G. Reiter Jr., the secretary-treasurer of the Chicago Federation of Labor, said they wanted The Sun-Times, which has won eight Pulitzer Prizes, to continue publishing stories about the city for “the 99 percent” who live there.It is not clear if any other interested parties submitted bids for The Sun-Times. Jim Kirk, the editor in chief and publisher of The Sun-Times, said in an email that the paper had received the bid from Mr. Eisendrath’s group and was “currently evaluating their proposal,” but Mr. Kirk declined to comment further.Advertisement