By RAVI SOMAIYAFEB. 26, 2016
Chris Hughes, the owner of The New Republic, said on Friday that he had sold the magazine to Win McCormack, a publisher and editor based in New York and Portland, Ore., who founded the literary quarterly Tin House.Mr. McCormack will appoint Hamilton Fish, the publisher of The Washington Spectator and a former publisher of The Nation, to be publisher and editorial director, The New Republic said.Mr. Hughes, a Facebook founder whose tenure at the magazine was marked by turmoil, including the resignations of multiple employees protesting his decision to replace its top editor, signaled an intention to sell last month. Mr. McCormack’s and Mr. Fish’s backgrounds in journalism and progressive politics, he said, “make them uniquely qualified to lead such a historic institution. I look forward to watching their progress over the years to come.”The Washington Spectator is a nonprofit liberal publication that, its website says, reports “on the excesses of the public and private sectors that distort our politics and undermine democracy.’’AdvertisementMr. McCormack, an active Democratic fund-raiser, is the author of a book that details the sexual indiscretions of Republican politicians who espouse family values. Mr. Fish, who also produces documentary films, comes from a long line of Republican lawmakers. In 1988, he sought the Democratic nomination for the same Westchester County congressional seat his forbears had held, but was defeated.AdvertisementThe magazine did not make Mr. McCormack, Mr. Fish or Mr. Hughes available for interviews, or disclose the terms of the sale. But Mr. McCormack said in a statement that he intended to stay true to The New Republic’s traditions and preserve “the journal as an important voice in a new debate over how the basic principles of liberalism can be reworked to meet the equally demanding challenges of our era.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The sale caps a troubled four years at the helm for Mr. Hughes. When he bought the magazine many hoped that the combination of his Silicon Valley experience and the storied history of the publication — which has published George Orwell, Virginia Woolf and Philip Roth, and has a reputation for producing talented editors and writers — would prove formidable.Instead, a new chief executive he installed clashed with the magazine’s editor, Franklin Foer. When word got out in late 2014 that Mr. Hughes had decided to name a new top editor, Mr. Foer resigned and was followed by a dozen staff employees and dozens of contributing editors, forcing The New Republic to cancel an issue.In a letter last month announcing his intention to sell, Mr. Hughes said that he had spent more than $20 million on the magazine, but had “underestimated the difficulty of transitioning an old and traditional institution into a digital media company in today’s quickly evolving climate.”Shortly after Mr. Hughes released that letter, the magazine’s current top editor, Gabriel Snyder, posted a message on Twitter saying that the magazine’s staff was “focused on what we do every day: trying to make great journalism.”A version of this article appears in print on February 27, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Buyer Is Found for The New Republic.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.