By AMIE TSANGNOV. 2, 2016
The dust hasn’t even settled on the scandal over fake accounts at Wells Fargo. And now, the bank has even more bad headlines to deal with, with a $50 million payment to settle a class-action lawsuit.The battered lender was accused of overcharging hundreds of thousands of homeowners for appraisals made when borrowers fell behind on their loans.The lawsuit claims that Wells Fargo used one of its own subsidiaries to conduct appraisals on the value of the homes and routinely marked up the cost.The proposed settlement calls for Wells Fargo to automatically mail checks to more than 250,000 customers nationwide whose home loans were serviced by the bank between 2005 and 2010.AdvertisementWells Fargo said it disagreed with the claims but agreed to settle the case to avoid further litigation.AdvertisementIf you’re a chief executive and technology is racing ahead of you, how do you keep growing and offering new products?How do you stay employed?The Deal Professor observes that for some chief executives, the answer is to buy up other companies.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.This was evident in Microsoft buying LinkedIn. You can also look to the pharmaceutical companies that opted to buy up other businesses for their drugs instead of developing products themselves.What’s the likely result? A return to the conglomerates of the 1960s, and oligopolies, where industries are dominated by a few big players.This is particularly evident in media and telecommunications — take AT&T’s push to be among the big content providers.Not everyone has managed to follow the trend, though.Gannett’s effort to be the last one standing against a backdrop of fading advertising income has fallen through.After six months of negotiations and just weeks after agreeing to a price, Gannett dropped its $680 million-plus takeover bid for Tronc, the owner of The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune. The banks financing the deal balked as the advertising market deteriorated.AdvertisementThe upshot for this particular part of the media sector is that the industry is ailing and investors cannot see the appeal of a struggling newspaper empire.Newspapers too may have to look back to a bygone era, when a family or a newspaper mogul might have been willing to sacrifice short-term profit for a longer-term vision, Breakingviews argues.“The government didn’t want to cause embarrassment or give outsiders the impression that China is plagued with corruption. But they’re not thinking like that anymore.”— Jerome A. Cohen, a longtime legal adviser to Western companies. An investigation into GlaxoSmithKline, which resulted in record penalties of nearly $500 million and a string of guilty pleas by executives, upended the power dynamic in China and became a cautionary tale for other international companies. It showed how the increasingly assertive government was determined to tighten its grip over multinationals.• The Federal Reserve issues a statement on monetary policy after its two-day meeting.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.