JAN. 17, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, which will be held Tuesday as the markets will be closed Monday for Martin Luther King’s Birthday. The regular four-week bill auction will be moved to Wednesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.24 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.36 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Transportation Department, $173.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.TUESDAYFlorida Board of Education, $145 million of debt securities. Competitive.Owatonna, Minn., Public School District, $66.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYAdvertisementMinnesota, $121.3 million of school district general obligation bonds. Competitive.Montgomery County, Pa., $55 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementNewton, Mass., $76.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.University of Kentucky, $109.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Washington State, $673 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYAthens, Tex., Independent School District, $59.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Cecil County, Md., $51 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Eastern Carver County, Minn., Independent School District $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.University of Houston, $285 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKForsyth County, Ga., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Harris County, Tex., $265.5 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Hidalgo County, Tex., Drainage District, $53.5 million of unlimited tax refunding bonds. Jefferies.Indiana Finance Authority, $163.4 million of hospital revenue refunding bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lakeland, Fla., $124.5 million of energy system revenue and refunding bonds. Goldman Sachs.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $176.5 million of health care revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $235.3 million of health care system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementMassachusetts, $100 million of health care system taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $68 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, $300 million of general revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Rochester, Mich., Community School District, $128 million of school building and site debt securities. Stifel, Nicolaus.Rockwall, Tex., Independent School District, $111.5 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.University of Southern Mississippi, $58.5 million of revenue refunding bonds. Raymond James.Vermont Education and Health Building Finance Agency, $170 million of University of Vermont medical center debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.Washington, D.C., Water and Sewer Authority, $372.3 million of public utility revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Washtenaw County, Mich., $70.7 million of school building and site unlimited tax general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.A version of this article appears in print on January 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.