AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberTwo news organizations have acknowledged that they knew about the negotiations between the United States and Iran over a prisoner exchange that included a Washington Post reporter before the arrangement was announced. But they chose not to publish information about the talks. The Huffington Post wrote on Saturday that it did not run an article about the prisoner-swap negotiations though it had learned about the talks in the fall from a State Department official who spoke on the record. The Huffington Post also wrote that American government officials had said earlier that reporters from The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal were withholding details about the talks as well.The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post declined to comment on Saturday. CNN said in a statement that it had been “aware of the ongoing negotiations,” adding that it “did not report on this information in order to avoid any possibility of interfering in the negotiations.”The Huffington Post published its article about its decision soon after Iran’s announcement that it had released four Iranian-Americans, including Jason Rezaian, the Washington Post reporter, as part of a prisoner-swap arrangement with the United States.This is far from the first time media organizations have wrestled with the question of whether to report news or hold back to protect the safety of those involved. The New York Times, for instance, withheld information about the kidnapping of David Rohde, then a Times reporter, by the Taliban until after he escaped in 2009. Bill Keller, then the executive editor of The Times, said at the time: “From the early days of this ordeal, the prevailing view among David’s family, experts in kidnapping cases, officials of several governments and others we consulted was that going public could increase the danger to David and the other hostages.”He added: “The kidnappers initially said as much. We decided to respect that advice, as we have in other kidnapping cases, and a number of other news organizations that learned of David’s plight have done the same.”The New York Times declined to comment about the Iran exchange.Joel Simon, the executive director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, said on Saturday that withholding information for any reason goes against journalists’ instincts. But when lives are at stake, he added, “there have to be other considerations.”The Huffington Post wrote that it had become aware of negotiations between the United States and Iran on exchanging prisoners in the early fall from a State Department official, whose understanding was that the talks had fallen apart. The Huffington Post said that although it found that the negotiations had not collapsed, it did not publish a story for fear of jeopardizing the talks.“For years, a journalistic convention has held, more or less, that hostage and prisoner swap talks ought not to be reported on if doing so risks upending the negotiations,” The Huffington Post wrote. Just as other news organizations had not published articles that “would lead to imminent harm for a specific individual,” it added, “we, too, would decline to publish a story that would cause serious harm to specific individuals unjustly held in Iran.”While CNN said in its statement that it had withheld information “following a request from the U.S. government,” The Huffington Post said the decision not to publish an article about the negotiations was its own and was not the result of direct pressure from the American government.The Huffington Post added that it felt it had made the right decision.“All the talk of principle and truth-seeking is only talk until you’re confronted with the very real possibility that your truth-telling could get a colleague executed,” it wrote. “So we held the story, and are writing this one instead. We’re glad we did.”Advertisement