
Street Scene By                     
WILLIAM D. COHAN

JULY 7, 2016
When a professor emeritus at the London School of Economics, who also spent many years as an adviser at the Bank of England, publicly endorses a much-needed – but generally overlooked – overhaul of Wall Street, that is an occasion for celebration.The distinguished economist in question is Charles Goodhart, who, speaking with considerable gravitas and wit last week at a European Central Bank forum in Sintra, Portugal, wondered aloud why prudential regulators of the world’s financial system had spent so much time in recent years worrying about capital ratios and liquidity and so little time worrying about Wall Street governance and pay practices. These issues, he said, “much more fundamentally influence personal incentives and therefore business decisions.”Professor Goodhart was not opposed to making sure banks have enough capital and liquidity. It is just that – my words, not his — the way Wall Street rewards its workers and the amount of money in question are a much more reliable barometer of how bankers, traders and executives behave every day. Financial regulators have not come anywhere near discussing the subject as publicly as they have other regulatory issues. But perhaps the time has come.“Oceans of ink,” Professor Goodhart said in his speech, “have been used to examine and deplore the incentive and moral hazard effect of deposit insurance, whereas much less attention has been paid to the much more powerful and similar implications of limited liability, especially on those in a position to influence a bank’s decision.”AdvertisementOver the last few decades, Wall Street firms have transformed themselves from small private partnerships into the publicly financed behemoths that we know today. Along the way, they lost the old way of doing things, where the operating capital came from the partners, who faced the ultimate liability for anything that went wrong, including losing their entire fortunes.AdvertisementInstead, the old partnership culture was transformed into a bonus culture where bankers, traders and executives have minimal accountability when things go wrong. Crises will continue to happen; Professor Goodhart predicted the next one would hit in 2025. But it is the creditors and shareholders who will pay, and pay dearly, for Wall Street’s mistakes unless something changes. As the mantra of the 2008 financial crisis goes: The risks on Wall Street have been socialized while the profits have been privatized.It does not seem at all a coincidence that since the mid-1980s, there has been a marked increase in the frequency and intensity of financial crises and their effects as Wall Street banks made the transformation into public companies that award individuals bonuses based on the revenue they bring in. From 1987 to 2009, the flawed Wall Street reward system resulted in the crash of 1987, the credit crunch in the early 1990s, the internet bubble in the late 1990s, the Asian crisis, the Mexican crisis and, of course, the pièce de résistance, the Great Recession of 2008.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That needs to change, Professor Goodhart told Europe’s leading banking regulators and academics. His idea is to return the systemically important financial institutions — the so-called SIFIs — to a partnership model, “where the executive decision makers – the partners – have in effect unlimited and much larger liability than is provided by limited liability,” he said. “So that if a bank has to be bailed out, the partners should pay up all, or at least proportion, of what they have.”Of course, it is unlikely that a place like Goldman Sachs could ever return to a private partnership, as it was for its first 130 years in business. Such a move would require a management buyout in the range of $100 billion and would require debt and financial risk well beyond what any sane prudential regulator would permit.But it is still possible to reintroduce an important, new measure of accountability into the Wall Street compensation system, which has became way too good at rewarding bankers, traders and executives for taking big risks with other people’s money and absolutely terrible at penalizing them for their bad behavior.Given that every existing Wall Street firm has a partnership culture in its DNA, it should not be difficult to devise a new compensation system based on the old partnership ethic. What needs to happen, and soon, is for the top 500 or so executives at the remaining Wall Street firms – those people who are responsible for things like pay, promotion, allocation of capital and business strategy – to have their full net-worth at risk again. They should once again know that if their firm takes imprudent risks, chances are good that all the wealth they have accumulated over the years, in the form of salary and bonuses, would be forked over to the shareholders and creditors whose money they have gambled and lost.“My dearly beloved brethren,” Professor Goodhart said last week, “let me start by leading you in prayer: Lord forgive us because we have done those things we ought not to have done and not done those things we’ve ought to have done. Life is full of sins of commission and omission.”Fixing the Wall Street compensation system so that it rewards behavior that does not condemn the rest of us to another financial calamity is one of the major sins of omission to which he was referring. Amen.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »