
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

JULY 12, 2016
Then they came for the lawyers.The roles played by investment banks in billion-dollar buyouts have lately come under fire in the Delaware courts. Now, a complaint arising from the recent $2.2 billion buyout of the ExamWorks Group focuses on a different kind of deal adviser. It contends that lawyers at Paul Hastings, a law firm based in Los Angeles, were in cahoots with management and the investment banks to sell the company at a below-market price, something ExamWorks vigorously denies.Could this be the case that extends liability to the lawyers in buyouts?ExamWorks is an independent medical examination company founded by Richard E. Perlman and James K. Price. Mr. Perlman and Mr. Price are experienced financiers, focusing on industries where they can roll up a number of small companies, take the larger enterprise public and then sell out, typically to a private equity firm.This is what happened at ExamWorks, although in this case, the plaintiff, the Daytona Beach Police and Fire Pension Fund, claims that the buyout was tainted by conflicts and a failure of Paul Hastings to run the process appropriately. The fund, a shareholder of ExamWorks, is suing the company’s directors, as well as the private equity firm leading the buyout, Leonard Green & Partners.Reading through the complaint, the initial problem is that management and directors are participating in the buyout.AdvertisementUnder the terms of the deal, Mr. Perlman, Mr. Price and three other directors and officers will be paid about $76 million in the buyout, roll over $45 million worth of shares into 3.7 percent of the new company and then receive incentive grants to buy another 9.2 percent of the now private company.AdvertisementThis is not uncommon in a private equity deal. Management will cash out some shares and flip over the rest. But it looks a bit awkward, as management gets to participate on both sides — receiving a nice cash-out while reloading into a stake in the newly private company. This can lead to claims that management is favoring its own interests over shareholders’.To deal with this, companies establish a committee of independent directors to guide the process from the beginning.In this case, however, the ExamWorks board was slow to act. It is unclear from the proxy filing, but it appears that on Feb. 8, when Leonard Green proposed a buyout at $32 to $35 a share, the firm also suggested a possible rollover of management’s shares and its participation in operating the company afterward.In these situations, the protocol is to establish a special committee immediately and give it its own independent advisers. This did not happen, however, until a month later, when the board formed a special committee to exclude William A. Shutzer, a partner at Evercore and the owner of 1.5 percent of the company.Mr. Shutzer was excluded because ExamWorks had hired Evercore to advise it on the buyout, agreeing to a fee of $13 million if the transaction occurred. Evercore also excluded Mr. Shutzer from the deal team advising ExamWorks.Yet the board still included management in the buyout discussions. This is a no-no. You really do need strict separation when conflicts are being heavily — perhaps too heavily — scrutinized.The board also hired Goldman Sachs to help purge the conflict. But the complaint contends that Goldman was conflicted because it had done substantial business with Leonard Green, as well as with Mr. Perlman and Mr. Price. This type of accusation is common in private equity deals, a somewhat incestuous industry, but there seems to be nothing more to it.AdvertisementMr. Perlman and Mr. Price were excluded from the special committee only in early April, when active discussions concerning the management participation began. Yet even then, it appears that the ExamWorks board could not quite kick the habit of having everyone participate, and Mr. Shutzer, Mr. Perlman and Mr. Price all regularly participated in meetings.At the center of this was Paul Hastings.Reinaldo Pascual, a partner at Paul Hastings, had been advising Mr. Perlman and Mr. Price for more than a decade and had been involved in previous buyouts. He continued to represent the board while, according to the lawsuit, he was also representing management in negotiating its own buyout arrangements. He also represented the special committee and the company itself.Paul Hastings did not immediately respond to a request for a comment. A representative of ExamWorks declined to comment.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawsuit contends that the special committee failed to bargain effectively. It negotiated only to get Leonard Green to raise its price to $35.05 a share, an increase of 5 cents from the top of the firm’s indicated range.And although some private equity firms expressed interest in bidding, none emerged and there was only a short 25-day “go shop” period — a process to flush out other potential bidders — which produced no competing bids.These questions over the process would all be washed away if the deal were gangbusters for shareholders. But the price being paid is below ExamWorks’ 52-week stock market high of $44.09 and only a 4 percent premium over the closing price the day before the deal announcement, albeit 37 percent over the price when Leonard Green’s first bid came in.Any process that is less than rigorous in a buyout with management is just the sort of thing on which Delaware courts have nailed companies. A study by myself and Matthew D. Cain found that paying closer attention to the process results in higher buyout prices in management buyouts.Investment bankers have also come under fire; the Royal Bank of Canada was ordered to pay $76 million for appearing to be too conflicted and running a bad process over the buyout of the Rural/Metro Corporation by the private equity firm Warburg Pincus.The Delaware judge in the ExamWorks case, Vice Chancellor J. Travis Laster, has expedited proceedings to hear these claims.AdvertisementThe question now is whether the lawyers will be the next to be held accountable in a questionable buyout process.The accusations in the lawsuit are just that and ExamWorks contends otherwise, but it does appear that the sale process was less than perfect.Ultimately, the suit could depend on whether this rollover of the management’s stake was “forced.” Management is claiming that it did not want to participate but Leonard Green made it a condition of the buyout, so this was really just a normal buyout and a special committee would not even have been necessary.In the past, when questions came up about how a sale was run, the lawyers largely avoided the line of fire. The ExamWorks case, however, threatens to open up the floodgates, exposing lawyers to the same type of conflict liability and heat that investment bankers are under. Paul Hastings is not a defendant in this case, but reading the complaint shows that it may become one.This is a lesson in managing conflicts. Lawyers have ethical and legal obligations, and they represent clients for many years. A number of firms have even gone so far as to represent both sides of a deal in some strategic transactions.But perhaps there are different rules when management is involved. For deal advisers, lawyers and bankers alike, the best practice is to be like Caesar’s wife: They must be above suspicion. Indeed, the chief judge of the Delaware Supreme Court, Leo E. Strine Jr., has written that conflict-free advisers are the heart of the buyout process.A takeover lawyer once told me that “the only conflict I see is the one where I can’t be paid.” Perhaps that’s not the best advice these days.Steven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on July 13, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Contested Sale of ExamWorks Could Put Lawyers in Line of Fire.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »