

 Andrew Ross Sorkin
 

DEALBOOK
JULY 4, 2016
With the summer upon us and the so-called Brexit vote behind us, perhaps you might have some time to read one of the terrific books published recently that touch on big themes in business, finance and technology. I’ve been plowing through stacks of them to make your life simpler. Here are some of my favorites.The most fun business book I have read this year? “Chaos Monkeys: Obscene Fortune and Random Failure in Silicon Valley,” by a former Facebook executive, Antonio García Martinez. I was sent a galley copy several months ago and picked it up with no intention of reading more than the first couple of pages. I don’t think I looked up until about three hours later.This is a tell-all of Mr. Martinez’s experience in venture capital and later at Facebook, filled with insights about Silicon Valley — what he calls “the tech whorehouse” — mixed with score-settling anecdotes that will occasionally make you laugh out loud. Clearly there will be people who hate this book — which is probably one of the things that makes it such a great read.The dedication page includes this gem: “To all my enemies: I could not have done it without you.” Mr. Martinez is particularly incisive when it comes to illustrating how failed ideas that happen to work are often spun into great successes: “What was an improbable bonanza at the hands of the flailing half-blind becomes the inevitable coup of the assured visionary,” he writes. “The world crowns you a genius, and you start acting like one.”Turning to more serious books, two will help you make sense of the precarious nature of the economy and the future of capitalism. The first is “The Only Game in Town: Central Banks, Instability, and Avoiding the Next Collapse” by Mohamed A. El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz and chairman of President Obama’s Global Development Council. This book is one of the best explanations I’ve read about the power and limits of central banks and how interconnected our economies really are.AdvertisementAdditionally, the journalist Rana Foroohar’s book, “Makers and Takers: The Rise of Finance and the Fall of American Business” is a well-told exploration of why our current economy is leaving too many behind.For people who prefer an introspective read that is both inspiring and has a dash of self-help, Adam Grant’s “Originals: How Non-Conformists Move the World” is truly original. Mr. Grant, the youngest-ever tenured full professor at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, dives into what it takes to be a shoot-the-moon, Steve-Jobs-like success. Many of his conclusions are counterintuitive and based on deep research.AdvertisementThe biggest surprise for me was that the most successful entrepreneurs didn’t quit their day jobs to pursue their ideas; instead, they stayed at work until they had worked all the kinks out of their plans and gotten them off the ground. The other head-scratcher in this book? Procrastination is a great thing. (This was a terrific revelation.)Mr. Grant’s research shows that some of the most creative thoughts develop during periods of so-called procrastination. (Another book in a similar vein is “Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance” by Angela Duckworth, which delves into the personal ingredients of great success. It’s worth reading, but the gist is that talent and skill are less valuable than effort.)If you’re a deal junkie — and especially if you’re a DealBook junkie — you will devour “Bloodsport: When Ruthless Dealmakers, Shrewd Ideologues, and Brawling Lawyers Toppled the Corporate Establishment” by Robert Teitelman, the founding editor of The Deal. This book tells the story of our modern mergers and acquisitions economy and how it developed. Mr. Teitelman takes readers back to the 1970s and 1980s, when being an investment banker or a deal lawyer made you a master of the universe.The book is peppered with stories about the likes of Michael Milken, Bruce Wasserstein, Felix Rohatyn and Martin Lipton — a cast of characters who defined an age that irrevocably shaped corporate America today. But more than any book I’ve read, Mr. Teitelman’s has managed to capture how power shifted from a company’s boardroom to its shareholders, a change that is often seen as positive but clearly comes with its own pitfalls.“So profound has been that revolution that memories of an earlier corporate identity — the patriarchal company managed for the stakeholders, the Platonic corporation — have grown dim, as if it had never existed,” Mr. Teitelman writes.Speaking of corporate boardrooms, an excellent read is “Dear Chairman: Boardroom Battles and the Rise of Shareholder Activism,” by Jeff Gramm, owner and manager of the Bandera Partners hedge fund and an adjunct professor at Columbia Business School. This book explores the rise of activist investors like Carl C. Icahn and Daniel S. Loeb.AdvertisementMr. Gramm has collected a series of deliciously rich letters, many of which were never before published, sent to chief executives by investors by everyone from Warren Buffett to Ross Perot. They are eye-opening, often chilling and include fascinating lessons about business.My personal favorite is this letter from Mr. Loeb to the chief executive of Star Gas Partners: “It seems that Star Gas can only serve as your personal ‘honey pot’ from which to extract salary for yourself and family members, fees for your cronies and to insulate you from the numerous lawsuits that you personally face due to your prior alleged fabrications, misstatements and broken promises. I have known you personally for many years and thus what I am about to say may seem harsh, but is said with some authority. It is time for you to step down from your role as C.E.O. and director so that you can do what you do best: retreat to your waterfront mansion in the Hamptons where you can play tennis and hobnob with your fellow socialites. The matter of repairing the mess you have created should be left to professional management and those that have an economic stake in the outcome.”With the Olympics coming up in Rio, it is worth picking up “Brazillionaires: Wealth, Power, Decadence, and Hope in an American Country” by the journalist Alex Cuadros. This is a wild, richly reported tale about Brazil’s recent economic rise and fall, and some of the biggest, most colorful characters in business in Brazil who now have a global reach. Brazilians own several of America’s largest companies that are also global icons: Budweiser, Burger King, Heinz and Kraft. But Mr. Cuadros’s story really takes off when he focuses on Eike Batista, an over-the-top one-time billionaire who became the country’s corporate mascot, only to go bankrupt in a dramatic unraveling.This is probably a bit of an unfair tease, but one of the best books I’ve read recently isn’t out until October. It is a biography of Alan Greenspan titled, “The Man Who Knew: The Life and Times of Alan Greenspan.” It is by the journalist Sebastian Mallaby, an adroit writer who also published a brilliant book on hedge funds several years ago, called “More Money than God: Hedge Funds and the Making of a New Elite.”Mr. Greenspan is a fascinating subject because for so long he was considered a genius, only to later be blamed for the financial crisis. Mr. Mallaby does an exquisite job going beyond these two versions of the Greenspan narrative and taking the reader inside the complicated mind of a man who may have had one of the largest ever influences over our economy.Finally, another book that isn’t out yet (until November): “To Pixar and Beyond: My Unlikely Journey with Steve Jobs to Make Entertainment History” by Lawrence Levy, the former chief financial officer of Pixar. What a delightful book about the creation of Pixar from the inside. I learned more about Mr. Jobs, Pixar and business in Silicon Valley than I have in quite some time. And like a good Pixar film, it’ll put a smile on your face.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tell-Alls, Strategic Plans and Cautionary Tales.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »