AdvertisementSupported byBy Amie Tsang and Michael J. de la MercedThe biggest clash in the N.F.L. over the weekend was off the field — but the battle over protests may soon draw in the broadcasters, deep-pocketed sponsors who partner with the league as well.The Big QuestionMr. Trump suggested that fans were already punishing the N.F.L., saying that ratings were way down.That isn’t true for the most part, according to PolitiFact and The Times’s Julie Hirschfield Davis. Still, Fortune’s David Z. Morris argued that a Trump-inspired boycott could end up hurting the league’s partners:The likely outcome will be continued erosion in viewership, costing broadcasters hundreds of millions of dollars. That could impact renewal negotiations down the line, but even a divisive NFL remains a rare unifying force in an increasingly fragmented media landscape. Some viewers — and venues that show N.F.L. games — appear ready to back a boycott.Others aren’t so sure that the political controversy would be bad for broadcasters. From Bloomberg’s Lucas Shaw:“There will be a lot of attention paid to ratings, and it will be fascinating to see if more people tune into the beginning of games just to see what happens,” said Brian Wieser, an analyst with Pivotal Research Group.Yahoo Finance’s Daniel Roberts questions whether the league’s big sponsors — including Anheuser-Busch InBev, FedEx, McDonald’s and PepsiCo — will take a side here. (Historically, they haven’t walked away when controversies erupted, he notes.)Related ReadingTreasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin backed Mr. Trump and argued that players should not assert free speech on the job, according to Politico’s Kevin Robillard: “They can do free speech on their own time.”Angela Merkel won her fourth term as chancellor. But the electoral showing of a far-right party, Alternative for Germany, dimmed her victory — and knocked down the euro’s value this morning.The result is expected to lead to a tougher line on fiscal discipline in the eurozone, pushing up yields on government bonds in places like Spain and Italy, according to The Financial Times’s Michael Hunter.But some expect the weakness of the euro to be short term, Reuters’ Saikat Chatterjee reports:“The impact is limited, as the German election results is more of a domestic political story for now rather than a regional European trend, and the euro will be more sensitive to any shift in direction from the European Central Bank policy,” said Viraj Patel, an FX strategist at ING Bank in London.What to Look Out ForMario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, is to give a monetary policy update at the European Parliament on Monday.Uber said on Monday that it was unclear why London’s travel authorities had decided not to renew its license. Reuters reports:“Sitting down with TfL (Transport for London) representatives as soon as possible would be the most helpful thing to really understand their concerns to work out what they are,” Uber’s U.K. Head of Cities Fred Jones told BBC radio.“It’s just not clear for us what their concerns might be.”Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, took the moment to engage in some self-reflection, according to Recode’s Johana Bhuiyan:“Irrespective of whether we did everything that is being said about us in London today (and to be clear, I don’t think we did), it really matters what people think of us, especially in a global business like ours, where actions in one part of the world can have serious consequences in another.”In the Obama administration, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission was one of the toughest financial regulators around. Under President Trump, it’s adopting a new strategy.The Times’s David Enrich obtained a preview of a forthcoming speech by the commission’s director of enforcement, James McDonald:“We also recognize that no matter how much corporate leaders may want to foster compliance within the company, when they detect misconduct their decision whether to voluntarily report it often comes down to their perception of whether they’ll be treated fairly.”The ContextHere’s how The Times described the regulator’s former chief Gary Gensler in 2014:But even as Mr. Gensler’s aggressive streak thrust the once-backwater agency into the front lines of reform, it also maddened colleagues and complicated his legacy. And now that his tenure is ending on Friday, the agency has reached an inflection point, prompting Wall Street to hope for a friendlier regulator.Is it time for Facebook to step up and be regulated? Antonio García Martínez, a former employee, writes in Wired: “The company needs to put its big boy pants and assume its place on the world stage.”Meanwhile, The Washington Post reports that Mark Zuckerberg received a high-level warning about political interference last year:Huddled in a private room on the sidelines of a meeting of world leaders in Lima, Peru, two months before Trump’s inauguration, Obama made a personal appeal to Zuckerberg to take the threat of fake news and political disinformation seriously. Unless Facebook and the government did more to address the threat, Obama warned, it would only get worse in the next presidential race.Related Reading• Maureen Dowd wonders about automation after Sheryl Sandberg apologized for ad-buying tools that enabled advertisers to direct pitches of people who expressed interest in topics like “why jews ruin the world.”• Facebook dropped a proposal to reclassify its stock, a move that would have solidified Mr. Zuckerberg’s control over the social network, in a victory for shareholders in a class-action lawsuit.James Altizer, an engineer at the chip maker Nvidia who leads a group called Bay Area Fathers’ Rights, to The Times’s Nellie Bowles:“It’s a witch hunt,” he said in a phone interview, contending men are being fired by “dangerous” human resources departments. “I’m sitting in a soundproof booth right now because I’m afraid someone will hear me. When you’re discussing gender issues, it’s almost religious, the response. It’s almost zealotry.”Ms. Bowles’s piece stirred up a lot of debate on Twitter:Follow Amie Tsang @amietsang and Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced on Twitter.Advertisement