By FARHAD MANJOO and MIKE ISAACJULY 9, 2016
Each Saturday, Farhad Manjoo and Mike Isaac, technology reporters at The New York Times, review the week’s news, offering analysis and maybe a joke or two about the most important developments in the tech industry.Mike: Good morning, Farhad! After a week of unequivocally bad news from across the country, I need to start thinking about something nice, possibly tech-related. Although I’ll settle for nice.Tell me something, anything, nice.Farhad: Hmm. Do you like Taylor Swift? I read this amazing theory that her very public relationship with British actor Tom Hiddleston might be an elaborate bit of performance art — that she’s getting the paparazzi to follow her and her beau around the world as part of creating some kind of visual album or statement on celebrity worship. I very much want this to be true. Imagine Taylor Swift as Banksy!Mike: I said something nice. This ruins my belief that true love exists.A few things happened this week. Facebook announced it planned to add an end-to-end encryption option to its Messenger app, in line with a bunch of other messaging companies doing similar things. The security community loudly complained about how bad the implementation was, but mostly to fulfill their daily quota of complaining about things in general.AdvertisementFarhad: The implementation will get better, and the war between tech companies and law enforcement officials will get worse. Remember how the F.B.I. tussled with Apple over the data in the San Bernardino shooter’s iPhone? You can now expect to see the same fight over messaging, especially given Facebook Messenger’s extreme popularity.AdvertisementMike: That’s a good prediction! I think I agree with you.Also, Snapchat got a little less, um, snappy? Chatty? The company gave users the ability to load old snaps — or “memories” — into their Snapchat stories, essentially moving away from the focus on raw, ephemeral messaging and more squarely into Facebook’s territory. Facebook, which offered to buy Snapchat for billions years ago, will probably not like this.Farhad: Judging from my Twitter stream, it seems that a lot of longtime users don’t like it, either? But maybe Snapchat doesn’t care about that. As The Wall Street Journal reported in a hilarious piece this week, old people (that is, folks who are no longer teenagers) have started flocking to the app that has long been associated with young people. This seems good for Snapchat’s future, but annoying to its teen fans. As one teen quoted pointed out: “Lmao I’m so done my friends parents got snapchat.”Mike: I actually really liked the Snapchat update! I looked back through all my terrible morning face snaps and realized how fat I was in New York. So now that I think about it, I take it back, I hate the update.The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Oh, and let us not forget to pour one out for the death of the original BlackBerry, as the company announced this week it was discontinuing the last phone with the classic keyboard and trackpad. Man, that takes me back to when I thought I was so cool, typing away on my BlackBerry in Washington. in 2007. I could do email from a press conference!Farhad: I never owned a BlackBerry. I looked down on people who did.Mike: Back in my BlackBerry D.C. days, I was about as cool as the Jonah character from “Veep.” Now that’s cool.What I really want to dig into is Theranos, the embattled blood-testing company. For the past few years, the company was the golden child of consumer and tech media. It made cover after magazine cover, usually with glowing profiles of the chief executive, a so-called prodigy who seemed styled very much like a female version of Steve Jobs.But how the mighty have fallen. Since The Wall Street Journal has published story after story about Theranos’s seemingly disingenuous practices around its finger-prick blood-testing, the company has basically been falling apart. Walgreens pulled out of a partnership with Theranos, and regulators have been investigating the company’s legitimacy.AdvertisementOn Thursday evening, it announced its C.E.O., Elizabeth Holmes, has been banned from owning or operating any sort of medical laboratory for at least two years.This seems like irreparable damage. How does Theranos even come back from this?Farhad: The company’s statement on this was pretty bizarre: It announced the sanctions and promised to comply with regulators, but it did not explain how it could continue operating if its boss has been essentially banished from the industry. I guess there are two options: Theranos shuts down, or it does a thorough housecleaning, getting rid of Holmes and other top execs, and attempts some kind of exhaustive rehabilitation of its business.I don’t see the first one happening — Holmes and some of the firms’ investors still seem to be in denial about the depth of its problems — and the second seems extremely difficult to pull off. That’s because the reporting suggests that problems in Theranos’s lab aren’t the company’s only headache. The bigger problem is that it does not seem to have a working product. Theranos’s big sell was that it had created a machine that would be able to diagnose a wide range of medical conditions from a single, nearly painless pinprick blood draw. But there is no evidence that this machine has ever been made to work correctly, and instead Theranos has mostly been operating by outsourcing to old-school technology that most medical labs use already.David Sacks, the new C.E.O. of Zenefits, another embattled start-up, has been remaking that firm by firing people, working with investors and making other big moves to alter the company’s culture. But that’s only possible because Zenefits has a product — human resources software offered as part of the purchase of health insurance coverage — that many small businesses want. Whoever takes over from Holmes at Theranos won’t have the same advantage. How do you remake a company that doesn’t have a product?Mike: I dunno. “Scrappy start-up magic”?I think the company’s implosion, while bad for it and its investors, is really worse for some others in tech. Think of the chilling effect this could have on biotech investments in Silicon Valley; the whole premise of Theranos was bought and sold on the start-up, techie approach to serious medical issues. Do investors keep biting at biotech start-up pitches, or do they think a bit more cautiously in the future?Anyway, that’s enough serious talk for me. I’m off to investigate “Taygate.” Say it ain’t so, Farhad. Say it ain’t so.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.