

 Jim Rutenberg
 

MEDIATOR
JULY 7, 2016
At a time of fast-moving social change, Fox News can at times be viewed as a port in a storm for traditionalists who pine for the way we were — for the days when there was no gay marriage; no terms like “gender fluidity”; no doubt about the roles men and women were supposed to play and certainly no talk about the liberties men might take with female subordinates behind closed doors.With the gender discrimination suit filed against the network’s chairman, Roger Ailes, this week, Fox, too, is being carried by the same gale force that is sweeping through Hollywood, Silicon Valley and Madison Avenue, bringing into the open generations-old patterns and behaviors that were never O.K., but were for so long abetted by silence.Fox News has strenuously denied the allegations by Gretchen Carlson, a former host, that Mr. Ailes offered a smoother path at the network in return for sex, portraying her as a former employee with an ax to grind. And Ms. Carlson’s legal team will have the burden of proving the veracity of the accusations, along with its claim that other women are considering stepping forward as well. (As of Thursday night, none had.)Mr. Ailes will have to defend himself not only against Ms. Carlson’s legal challenge, but also against an outside law firm that Fox News’s parent company, 21st Century Fox, is expected to hire to conduct its own internal investigation, the results of which it may or may not make public.AdvertisementEven if Mr. Ailes wins, the developments — especially the way it was handled by the new generation of Murdochs now gaining control of 21st Century Fox — signal a big shift for Mr. Ailes and a network that has avowedly refused to go along with what so many of its commentators dismiss as political correctness and feminism run amok in the name of progress.Respect and equality in the workplace don’t represent political correctness anymore, if they ever did. They are the cornerstones of modern human resource policies used by sophisticated companies. Mr. Ailes is not just bumping up against an annoyance he can wave away, he’s confronting a new world order, something Rupert Murdoch and his sons, James and Lachlan, understood when they issued a statement about the lawsuit saying, “We take these matters seriously’’ and would conduct an internal review.Wrapped up in all of it is the future of Mr. Ailes, who through his own cunning, mastery of television and, in a former life, politics, has made his network a singular force within the Republican Party and, therefore, in the national political dialogue.AdvertisementMr. Ailes’s very approach to television — as the quintessential visual medium — has stood as a rebuke to those who might be sensitive to signs of female objectification. His sets are famous for their translucent desks, which show the legs of his female stars who are so often in skirts.It was Ms. Carlson who once said that when she was a host on the set of “Fox & Friends,” the network’s morning program, “pants were not allowed.” Fox News has denied any such rule.A great surprise in the news on Wednesday was that, at a casual glance, Ms. Carlson could seem like the symbol of gender norms that no longer seem so normal or acceptable. When Jon Stewart parodied her in 2009, one of his gripes was that Ms. Carlson was playing the role of Chrissy from the 1970s sitcom “Three’s Company” — the flighty blonde role Suzanne Somers had — when Ms. Carlson in fact attended Stanford and Oxford, and won the Miss America crown in 1988 with a masterful violin rendition of “Zigeunerweisen” by Sarasate.A video mash-up that Bloomberg Politics put together this week shows repeated instances in which male counterparts commented on Ms. Carlson’s appearance on air. At times, she plays along. But if you watch carefully, you will notice a piqued expression on Ms. Carlson’s face as she deadpans in one clip “all women should be reading bra stories” and jokes that she will report her colleague Brian Kilmeade to human resources for calling her “a skirt.”She was not alone at Fox in venting such frustration. Not long after Ms. Carlson walked off the “Fox & Friends” set in 2012 — after a sexist joke by Mr. Kilmeade — the Fox News host Megyn Kelly made a splash by eviscerating the conservative commentator Erick Erickson for saying that in nature “the male typically is the dominant role.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By this past May, Ms. Carlson was writing on the Fox News website that the actress Robin Wright deserved praise for demanding the same pay as her co-star Kevin Spacey on the Netflix show “House of Cards,”’ calling it “a great message for girls and women of any age,” and boys and men, too. Viewers could watch cultural norms at Fox changing in real time, but that’s not the behind-the-scenes environment Ms. Carlson described in her suit.Fox News executives rejected Ms. Carlson’s depiction of Mr. Ailes as they began their defense Wednesday night and Thursday, portraying her as a jilted television talent who was retaliating after being let go — at least partly for committing the cardinal sin of losing to CNN in June in the ratings for the demographic group advertisers covet.On Thursday, several Fox News stars questioned Ms. Carlson’s motives. “She’s disgruntled she didn’t get her contract renewed and the timing is very suspicious,” the Fox host Greta Van Susteren said in a telephone interview. Asked about the behavior Ms. Carlson described, Ms. Van Susteren said, “I’ve been here 15 years I haven’t seen it and frankly I’m rather outspoken and I don’t think I’d stick around for it.”In a similar vein, a Fox News weekend host, Jeanine Pirro — a former prosecutor and judge who has known Mr. Ailes for 30 years — told me, “This is something that is totally inconsistent with the man I’ve known probably longer than most people who work in that building.”AdvertisementFox News shared with me handwritten thank-you notes they said Ms. Carlson wrote after the meeting in which, she says, Mr. Ailes propositioned her. In one of them she tells Mr. Ailes, “I’d love to stay at Fox.”But for all that, there were a couple of articles in the last two days quoting former female staff members — albeit anonymously — echoing Ms. Carlson’s descriptions of Mr. Ailes’s behavior and the overall climate at Fox.A few years ago, Mr. Ailes might have been free to defend himself with the unquestioned support of his like-minded longtime patron, Mr. Murdoch, who has stood by him as Mr. Ailes has brought in huge revenue — an estimated 20 percent of the total profits for 21st Century Fox for fiscal 2016, according to Anthony DiClemente, an analyst with Nomura Securities.But Mr. Murdoch’s sons have different political and corporate sensibilities than their father. They began taking increasing control of the family’s publicly traded business after it took steps to move the corporate culture away from the pirate-ship mores for which it was known, before a phone-hacking scandal at its newspaper division in Britain threatened its future.Mr. Ailes had initially appeared to balk at reporting to the sons instead of to the father, and in his last contract agreement in 2015, 21st Century Fox said he would report to all three men. Their approval of an independent investigation of Ms. Carlson’s allegations is an acknowledgment of the new era in which Mr. Ailes and the elder Mr. Murdoch now find themselves.So the world is changing. The question now is how Fox News and Mr. Ailes change with it.Emily Steel contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on July 8, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ex-Anchor’s Lawsuit Lashes the Levees at Fox News.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »