OCT. 30, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.49 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.17 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementBellevue, Wash., School District No. 405, $239.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementNorth Kansas City School District No. 74, Mo., $114 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Ohio, $150 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Clackamas County, Ore., $53.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Loudoun County, Va., Economic Development Authority, $60.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Residential Authority, $65 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Illinois, $480 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Sullivan County, N.Y., $85 million of general obligation limited tax bonds. Competitive.Beverly Hills, Calif., Unified School District, $57 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.California Municipal Finance Authority, $78.7 million of California Baptist University revenue bonds. D.A. Davidson & Company.California Statewide Communities Development Authority, $115.4 million of revenue bonds. D. A. Davidson & Company.AdvertisementCalifornia Statewide Community Development Authority, $91 million of Redlands Community Hospital revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Camden County, N.J., Improvement Authority, $60 million of county guaranteed loan revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Canaveral Port Authority, Fla., $59.8 million of port improvement and revenue refinancing bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Chicago, $1.1 billion of O’Hare International Airport general airport senior lien revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $170.3 million of housing mortgage finance program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Hillsborough County, Fla., $115.7 million of solid waste and resource recovery revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Illinois Finance Authority, $111 million of Swedish Covenant Hospital tax exempt bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Indiana Finance Authority, $95.2 million of revenue bonds. B. C. Ziegler & Company.Iowa Finance Authority/Palm Beach County Health Facilities Authority, $93.1 million of revenue bonds. B. C. Ziegler & Company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Johns Hopkins Health System, $500 million of taxable revenue bonds. Jefferies.Knox County, Tenn., Health, Educational and Housing Facility Board, $188 million of Covenant Health hospital revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.AdvertisementLouisiana Public Facilities Authority, $92.2 million of Tulane University taxable revenue and taxable refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Louisiana State University, $139.6 million of auxiliary revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Mesquite Independent School District, Tex., $86.2 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Montana Facility Finance Authority, $140.3 million of Benefis Health System Obligated Group hospital revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Hope, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $150 million of debt securities. Piper Jaffray.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $53.5 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.Oklahoma City Water Utilities Trust, $85 million of debt securities. BOK Financial Securities.Orange County, Fla., Health Facilities Authority, $157.3 million of revenue bonds. Herbert J. Sims & Company.Phoenix Civic Improvement Corporation, Ariz., $230.6 million of junior lien wastewater system revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Pocono Mountain School District, Pa., $67 million of general obligation bonds. Boenning & Scattergood.AdvertisementPort Authority of New York and New Jersey, $733 million of debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.San Bernardino, Calif., Municipal Water Department, $50 million of water revenue bonds. Raymond James.Seminole County, Fla., School Board, $51 million of certificates of participation. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.South Carolina Jobs-Economic Development Authority, $101 million of Anmed Health Project hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.South Dakota Housing Development Authority, $116 million of homeownership mortgage bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Spokane County, Wash., $82 million of limited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Sumter Landing Community Development District, Fla., $352 million of taxable senior recreational revenue bonds and taxable subordinate recreational revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Oklahoma Board of Regents, $63.9 million of general revenue and refinancing tax exempt bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Virginia Resource Authority, $129.9 million of pooled financing program bonds. Raymond James.Westlands Water District, Calif., $52 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.A version of this schedule appears in print on October 31, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Treasury Auctions to Be Held the Week of Oct. 31.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.