AdvertisementSupported byHistorySourceBy Michael BeschlossThe contest between Senator John F. Kennedy and Vice President Richard M. Nixon on Tuesday, Nov. 8, 1960, was expected to be close, and Americans were glued to their televisions until long after dawn. Coverage of the changing returns revealed some of the stresses and growing pains of early television news, which was little more than a decade old at the time.NBC and CBS, wary of granting a head start to the competitor, each moved up its broadcast to the early evening from 9 p.m.ABC News, showing how much of an also-ran it was at the time, interrupted its coverage to run episodes of “Bugs Bunny” and “The Rifleman.” This helped cause its already disgruntled vice president and anchor, John Charles Daly, to quit in protest the next week.The Big Two news divisions paid lavishly for their election-night coverage — commercials alone would not be enough to cover all expenses. NBC opted for a new space-age set at 30 Rock. Chet Huntley and David Brinkley sat at an X-shaped desk that was suspended above the floor of Studio 8-H, now home to “Saturday Night Live.”In 1960, “The Huntley-Brinkley Report,” celebrated for its sometimes witty dialogue between the principals, was, by far, the nation’s most watched nightly news program. Huntley opened election night by telling viewers, “You may choose to do a little dial-twisting to see how our competitors are doing, but we hope and trust you’ll be back.” True to form, their election coverage drew many more viewers than that of the more old-school Walter Cronkite on CBS.Starring at all three networks that evening were state-of-the-art computers, programmed to estimate returns in advance. But in a belly-flop at the start of the night, the CBS machine, an IBM 7090, concluded that Nixon, the Republican candidate, would be elected. The machine gave Nixon odds of 100 to 1, and by an Electoral College landslide of 459 to 78 votes. A nervous Kennedy, watching at his brother Robert’s home in Hyannis Port, Mass., was reassured by his pollster, Louis Harris, that the CBS prediction was “crazy.”ABC’s Univac computer also predicted Nixon would win. As the night wore on and Kennedy’s edge became clearer, Richard Harkness of NBC boasted on the air that his network’s computer — an RCA 501, made by its corporate parent — had achieved a “truly amazing electronic coup” by predicting a narrow Kennedy victory. Twisting the knife into his network rivals, Brinkley told viewers that NBC’s computer was the only one “that has not at any time predicted Nixon would win — the others did.”At that early stage of television technology, election night coverage was limited largely to the New York studios, except for reports from the candidates’ headquarters.On CBS, Charles Von Fremd reported from Hyannis, Mass., that Kennedy’s sister Eunice had divulged that her brother was “smoking a big cigar, and he’s mighty happy.” (Hearing this on television, Kennedy reprimanded his sister for her indiscretion.) At the Driskill Hotel in Austin, Tex., CBS’s Nancy Hanschman — later the mother of John Dickerson, now of the same network — asked Kennedy’s running mate, Lyndon Johnson, about his plans. Johnson replied, “Going out and get some scrambled eggs and a glass of milk and watch you some more, Nancy.”By about 3 a.m. New York time, although Nixon was closing the gap in the popular vote, Kennedy had moved within striking distance of an Electoral College victory. A CBS correspondent reported that Nixon would soon speak to supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, where, “on reliable authority,” he would concede defeat.From the Nixon campaign’s ballroom, Herb Kaplow of NBC said, “Most of the people here seem to know that their candidate is not doing very well.”The Nixons, with pained, forced smiles, were shown descending into a crowd singing (to the tune of “Goodnight, Ladies”), “We want Nixon / to be our pres-i-dent!” One Nixon hater shouted, “We want Tricky Dicky!” Pat Nixon winced and clearly tried to suppress her tears. Her husband declared, “Many are listening here who are supporting Senator Kennedy — I know too that he is probably listening to this program.” This was followed by laughter and then boos, which Nixon closed down. “If the present trend continues,” he said, Kennedy would be the next president. The vice president added that after “hard-fought” campaigns, “we unite behind the man who is elected.” If Kennedy should be declared the winner, “he will have my wholehearted support and yours too,” Nixon said, to more catcalls.Huntley told Brinkley, “I don’t know whether that was a concession or not, do you?” Cronkite said that Nixon “came as close as a man can, but did not actually concede.” Some of Kennedy’s aides were angered by Nixon’s failure to throw in the towel. But Kennedy told his family: “Why should he concede? I wouldn’t.” And with that, he went to bed.Later that morning, Brinkley announced: “At 7:19 a.m. Eastern time, Senator Kennedy was elected president of the United States. The NBC Victory Desk has just given California to Kennedy, and that gives him the election.” (NBC proved to have been premature: After absentee ballots were counted the next week, California’s 32 electoral votes were assigned to Nixon.)Almost an hour after noon Eastern time came the denouement. NBC interrupted “Play Your Hunch,” starring Merv Griffin, with the image of Nixon’s press secretary, Herbert Klein, in Los Angeles, reading Nixon’s telegram assuring Kennedy that “you will have the united support of all Americans as you lead the nation.”Klein said that Nixon “looked at this thing philosophically” and showed “wonderful grace” and “very good spirits” as he explained his defeat to his daughters, Tricia and Julie. President Dwight D. Eisenhower also wired congratulations to Kennedy. (In Nixon’s and Eisenhower’s messages and the rest of the TV coverage was not even a faint insinuation that Kennedy’s victory was anything less than absolute. If Nixon had any private desire to investigate possible voting irregularities, there was no sign of it on this day.) Watching at his brother’s house, Kennedy was appalled that Nixon had not conceded in person, if only to thank his followers. “He went out the way he came in,” Kennedy told his circle. “No class.”An hour after Klein spoke, viewers saw the smiling victor, waving from the front seat of a white Lincoln Continental, in a motorcade moving away from Hyannis Port. When the victor arrived at the Hyannis Armory in a flurry of confetti, people shouted, “Hey, Jack, Jack!” Inside the building, Kennedy, with glistening eyes, and his wife, Jacqueline, neared the platform. An NBC reporter intoned that the winner had achieved “the rarest of tributes — a standing ovation from newsmen.” In December 1960, the Electoral College confirmed Kennedy’s victory, giving him 303 votes to Nixon’s 219, with Kennedy taking a hairbreadth popular-vote margin over Nixon of slightly more than 100,000 votes.The television critic Eve Starr called it “the most suspenseful evening anyone ever spent in front of a TV set.” Election nights had been televised since the tiny audience of 1948 that saw Harry S. Truman’s comeback victory over Thomas Dewey, but November 1960 was the first time that so many Americans gathered before their screens to watch the results.That election-night audience was far exceeded three years and two weeks later, when the networks covered the aftermath of President Kennedy’s assassination — an event that confirmed the rise of television as the nation’s pre-eminent source of news.Michael Beschloss, a presidential historian, is the author of nine books.Advertisement