By CHAD BRAYMARCH 21, 2017
Will President Trump seek to have his likeness added to Mount Rushmore? Will he announce the existence of alien life?Whimsical as these situations might sound, there is a growing market for betting on an already unpredictable Trump presidency.Paddy Power, the Irish gambling website known for its over-the-top marketing stunts, says wagers associated with Mr. Trump have been more popular than any other novelty bets it has offered in the last year, including bets associated with Britain’s referendum on whether to leave the European Union.Now, Paddy Power is hiring a “head of Trump betting” to oversee bets related to the American president and his administration.AdvertisementThe company, which is part of Paddy Power Betfair, a bookmaking business based in Dublin, is advertising the three-month contracted position amid sustained interest in Trump-related bets.AdvertisementA Paddy Power spokesman insisted the job is a real one, despite the irreverent manner in which its advertisement is written.“With more than 100 special bets online, the successful candidate will monitor and manage existing Trump markets while devising new specials to launch,” the company said in its online advertisement. “They will also need to build a wall around the hub to ensure foreign bets don’t get in.”The ad also said that “substantial experience with fake tan is preferable” and an “awareness of national security situation in Sweden” is beneficial, referring to the controversy after comments in February by Mr. Trump that implied something terrible had happened in Sweden the night before.On its website, Paddy Power offers customers a variety of potential bets tied to the Trump administration.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.They include which member of the Trump administration is likely to resign next — Attorney General Jeff Sessions is a 2-to-1 favorite — and whether the president will seek to have his likeness added to Mount Rushmore this year, at 100 to 1.The likelihood that Mr. Trump will announce that alien life exists: 20 to 1.Despite the popularity of bets involving Mr. Trump, Paddy Power Betfair said in January that the unexpected victory by Mr. Trump cost the company almost 5 million pounds, or about $6 million, in the fourth quarter.Before the election, Paddy Power said that it had paid out more than $1 million in late October to customers who bet on a victory by Hillary Clinton. The company had paid out $700,000 two days ahead of President Barack Obama’s re-election in 2012.The company did not say how much customers had wagered on Trump-related bets.Paddy Power completed an all-stock merger with its rival Betfair last year, creating an online gambling company that is now worth £7.3 billion.AdvertisementThe marketing for the Paddy Power brand includes a tongue-in-cheek blog, irreverent television advertisements and a variety of stunts.For example, the company sent a hearse to the stadium used by the British soccer team Leicester City after the team fired its manager, Claudio Ranieri, last month, less than a year after winning the English Premier League.
            FOXED OFF! We sent a hearse to Leicester this evening to signal the death of football following the sacking of Claudio Ranieri. RIP pic.twitter.com/R5otpH0ygF The unexpected title run of Leicester City last year proved costly to gambling companies in Britain, costing Paddy Power alone more than £2 million. The club had a 5000-to-1 chance of winning the league entering the 2015-16 season.Other marketing stunts by Paddy Power have included the unveiling of a hot-air balloon in the shape of a pair of lucky underpants at the Cheltenham Festival in 2013, and the display of a wax figure of the former Manchester United manager, Alex Ferguson, in a box labeled “In case of emergency break glass,” when the soccer club was struggling in 2014.Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.A version of this article appears in print on March 22, 2017, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Think You Can Predict Trump’s Next Move? You’re Hired.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.