By AMIE TSANGMARCH 20, 2017
Uber is not just struggling to right the ship, its problems may actually be getting worse.Jeff Jones, the president of ride sharing and the No. 2 executive at the company, left after just six months, the latest in an executive exodus.He had been hired to much fanfare and was viewed as a successor or counterpart to Travis Kalanick, the chief executive. Mr. Kalanick had already been searching for a chief operating officer after admitting that he needed help with leadership.Mr. Jones — who was seen as an adult in the room at a company that experienced months of turmoil — had determined that the situation at the company was more problematic than he had realized, according to Recode, which earlier reported his decision.And the departures are continuing.Brian McClendon, president of maps and business platform at Uber, also plans to leave. He is departing amicably to explore politics and will continue to advise the company, but his move is also a source of concern because of Uber’s dependence on mapping services, particularly those from competitors like Google.AdvertisementThis comes just after a string of departures and questions about the ethics and culture of the company.AdvertisementOne person trying to help guide the company through its current problems is Bill Gurley, a venture capitalist at Benchmark, the firm that bought into Uber six years ago.Mr. Gurley has become deeply involved in efforts to resolve the controversies at the company, and is trying to help Uber deal with many of the excesses that he publicly condemns, like holding off an initial public offering.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Judge Neil M. Gorsuch’s confirmation hearing starts today and Democrats will be keen to see how able and willing the nominee would be to stand up to President Trump, given the expectation that issues like the executive order on immigration will end up before the Supreme Court.They will also want to press him on more fundamental constitutional issues, like whether a law barring Muslims from entering the United States would be constitutional.How will he deal with questions? Well, he has several people to take inspiration from.John G. Roberts, the chief justice, opted to show he was familiar with constitutional doctrine, but avoided details on how they would apply to new controversies. Ruth Bader Ginsburg chose to avoid specifics and maintain impartiality, while maintaining that she could not deal with abstractions.The investor William A. Ackman may want to close to the book on Valeant, having swallowed a $4 billion loss, but he cannot do so yet.A lawsuit contends that Mr. Ackman and his firm, Pershing Square, violated securities laws in 2014, when they secretly acquired a stake in the pharmaceutical giant Allergan based on nonpublic information from Valeant that it intended to make a takeover bid.AdvertisementDamages in the case may be $1 billion to $2 billion.The case is entering a crucial stage. Mr. Ackman and J. Michael Pearson, the former Valeant chief, have either been deposed or will be questioned under oath soon.The case remains a constant reminder to investors of how the cult of personality has risen in the hedge fund industry.Investment managers say Mr. Ackman’s wager on Valeant raises questions about his investment style.“It is all about Bill Ackman,” said D. Ellen Shuman, a veteran manager at Edgehill Endowment Partners, who has avoided investing in Pershing Square. “It is not about his investors or the companies in which he is investing.”Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.