By AMIE TSANGMARCH 16, 2017
The Federal Reserve raised its benchmark interest rate on Wednesday, inching toward the end of the economic stimulus campaign it began in the depths of the financial crisis.So everything is great with the economy, right? Not so fast.Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, wants to make one thing clear — the Fed does not share the optimism of stock market investors and business executives.To be sure, the Fed is confident about the economy. But growth is still slow, and the central bank wants to have time to adjust its plans should President Trump and Congress cut taxes or spend massively on infrastructure.If these policies materialize, the Fed could accelerate the pace of rate increases. If Congress gets bogged down, it can hold off.AdvertisementYahoo has given scant details about the data stolen from 500 million of its accounts in 2014. The Justice Department, though, has taken action, charging two Russian intelligence officers and two other men with directing the scheme.AdvertisementThe Silicon Valley company disclosed the data theft in September. But the F.B.I. said its investigators had been looking into the case for two years. So why weren’t Yahoo users informed about the breach during that time?An internal investigation by the company’s board found that some senior executives and information security personnel were aware of the breach shortly after it occurred, but “failed to properly comprehend or investigate” the situation.The incident has already sliced $350 million off the value of Yahoo in its deal to be bought by Verizon.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.More bad news may be coming: The F.B.I. is still investigating a breach of one billion Yahoo accounts that occurred in 2013 and was disclosed just three months ago.A high-rolling Las Vegas sports gambler, William T. Walters, went on trial on Wednesday in the most prominent insider trading case in Manhattan since the former McKinsey managing director Rajat Gupta was convicted of tipping off a hedge fund manager.Prosecutors contend that Mr. Walters realized profits and avoided losses of more than $40 million from inside information he received on Dean Foods.The source of those tips was Thomas C. Davis, the chairman of Dean Foods, who has admitted his participation in the scheme and become a witness for the government, the prosecutors said.AdvertisementMr. Walters’ lawyers have maintained that his bets were the result of the acuity he had honed over the years as a sports bettor.There is even a celebrity angle — will the golfer Phil Mickelson testify? The federal authorities say he is one of the people on the receiving end of a stock tip that prosecutors accuse Mr. Walters of getting illegally.Virtu Financial has made a bid for KCG Holdings that would value the company at as much as $1.33 billion, The Wall Street Journal reports.A deal would aim to help the two companies shore up business at a time when securities trading firms have been struggling to maintain revenue growth with low market volatility.These firms buy and sell in large volumes to facilitate trading and earn a small amount on each transaction. But low volatility has squeezed profits.Virtu, whose founder, Vincent Viola, recently withdrew himself as President Trump’s nominee for Army secretary, is seeking to expand its client business. KCG said its board was evaluating the offer.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.