By RICHARD SANDOMIRMAY 8, 2016
When talking about his programming philosophy, Jamie Horowitz, the president of Fox Sports National Networks, fondly cites a quote recently attributed to Norman Lear, the acclaimed creator of “All in the Family.”“He said the guiding light for his shows was, ‘Don’t worry whether this opinion or that view is likable. It just has to be real and honest, and then you build around that,’” Mr. Horowitz said during a recent interview. “Oh yeah, that’s perfect.”And he is betting that his shows will be successful.Under Mr. Horowitz, a strategy has crystallized at FS1, the cable sports network of 21st Century Fox, over the last year. First, it hired opinionated personalities like Colin Cowherd and Jason Whitlock. Then, it euthanized a version of “Fox Sports Live,” a misbegotten knockoff of ESPN’s “SportsCenter,” and replaced it with another, in which its hosts work in a closet-size studio, trying to be witty.And last month, Skip Bayless, the 64-year-old co-star of the ESPN2 debate show “First Take,” decided that he would join FS1 in late summer for a reported salary of $5.5 million and a signing bonus of $4 million.AdvertisementThat Mr. Horowitz was able to lure these personalities to FS1 should not come as a surprise. After all, Mr. Cowherd and Mr. Bayless owe a portion of their success at ESPN to Mr. Horowitz, who spent years at the network developing and overseeing opinion-based programming that drew scorn and ratings in equal measure. It is this kind of programming that Mr. Horowitz now believes will make FS1 a more serious competitor to ESPN, an untouchable behemoth in sports television.Advertisement“We’re making big bets on three types of programming: live events, pre- and postgame programming and opinion-based programming,” Mr. Horowitz said by phone from Los Angeles. “And we’re making an equally big bet against traditional news and information shows.”That may be partly because of the failure of “Fox Sports Live” but also the realization that the availability of scores and highlights on mobile devices has made programs like “SportsCenter” — once must-see TV for any self-respecting sports fan — less critical.You can almost hear Mr. Horowitz pronouncing last rites for SportsCenter — which runs several times a day during the morning, early and late evening and overnight and accounts for about half of ESPN’s programming — when he says, “Strictly, analytically, the traditional news and highlights show is in a record free fall.”From 2010 to 2015, the average viewership of all live editions of “SportsCenter” has fallen by one-quarter to 552,000. And among adults 18 to 34, the audience has declined 37 percent to 178,000. By contrast, viewership for “First Take” has risen 48 percent since 2010, with the last four years featuring Mr. Bayless and Stephen A. Smith. The show’s audience this year is 11 percent larger than the late-morning edition of “SportsCenter” on ESPN.Keith Olbermann, who first came to prominence as a “SportsCenter” anchor during the 1990s and subsequently played the same role for Fox Sports Net on a similar show, said the change in viewing habits feels irreversible.“You can have a show anchored by me, Dan Patrick and Jesus,” he said. “And we could be announcing as our lead story that it was written in the sky that Cubs fans had been granted eternal life — and seven-eighths of our audience would say, ‘I don’t want to hear this.’ If it’s not about the N.F.L. or N.B.A., they’re gone.”ESPN and FS1 are each flush with college sports programming and Major League Baseball games, but ESPN also has National Football League and National Basketball Association rights.AdvertisementESPN executives are protective of “SportsCenter” and claim they are not too concerned about Mr. Horowitz, their former colleague, and his plans at FS1. They like to point to the 5,700 hours of “SportsCenter” that populate ESPN and ESPN2 each year; its substantial digital growth as video highlights are shared more and more online; and how its 11 p.m. audience is 11 times larger than that of “Fox Sports Live.”“I remember when FS1 launched, the story was that people were tired of ESPN and that it wasn’t fun,” said Rob King, ESPN’s senior vice president of “SportsCenter” and news. “Now they have a new story.”He acknowledged the declining viewership but said “SportsCenter” has adapted by adding more features and tailoring some of its editions to suit various personalities, such as the midnight version hosted by Scott Van Pelt.“There’s nothing wrong with debate and discussion as a tactic,” Mr. King said. “But there’s not much new about it, either.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.He added: “What is new and what continues to evolve is the sports fan of today. Fans are smarter and more diverse than ever before. Underestimate fans at your own peril. We’re aiming bigger.”Mr. Horowitz, 39, a former basketball player at Amherst College, has spent most of his career in sports television. But he is probably best known to the wider television industry for his brief and unsuccessful stint two years ago as senior vice president of NBC News and general manager of the “Today” show. NBC lured him from ESPN, where he specialized in developing and overseeing opinion-based programs like “First Take,” “SportsNation” (with Mr. Cowherd and Michelle Beadle) and the short-lived “Olbermann.” But Mr. Horowitz’s ambition to change the on-air talent at “Today” upset the staff, lacked his superiors’ support and led to his ouster.The lesson of that experience, he said, is that he did not fully grasp how much change NBC News would tolerate at “Today” or the time frame in which the network would allow it to happen.“If you’re not aligned in that, it’s a tricky situation,” he said.With that in mind, Mr. Horowitz sought assurances from Fox executives that they would back his plans. Mr. Horowitz recalled a conversation he had last year with Eric Shanks, the president of Fox Sports, in which he said, “If you’re not interested in my ideas, that’s cool. Hire someone else.”So far, Mr. Shanks has supported Mr. Horowitz’s initiatives despite companywide cost-cutting at 21st Century Fox. “At least starting out,” Mr. Shanks said, “there’s nothing that we haven’t been able to rationalize financially.”AdvertisementHow many shows Mr. Horowitz will develop at FS1 remains to be seen, but the goal is to find long-running hits like “First Take” and “Pardon the Interruption,” which is on ESPN and ESPN2 and works because of the friendly alchemy between Michael Wilbon and Tony Kornheiser, who were fellow columnists at The Washington Post for years.Mr. Horowitz’s acumen will be tested when Mr. Bayless comes aboard — Mr. Horowitz declined to discuss him or plans for his show until Mr. Bayless officially leaves ESPN — and in his latest project: teaming Mr. Cowherd and Mr. Whitlock in “Speak for Yourself,” a daily show starting June 13 to compete against “SportsCenter” at 6 p.m. Eastern time.“It’s an alternative at 6 for ‘SportsCenter’ fans,” Mr. Horowitz said emphatically.Like Mr. Bayless, Mr. Cowherd is devoted to Mr. Horowitz from their time at ESPN and calls him an intuitive executive whom he trusts implicitly.“We did a test show the other day,” Mr. Cowherd said last week. “And I thought it was brilliant. Imagine that, me thinking I’m brilliant, and he said, ‘You buried the lead.’ He’s a big believer in leading with your boldest statement first.”Mr. Whitlock is a combustible columnist known for his outspoken views on race. He returned to Fox for a second stint after his dismissal as head of The Undefeated, ESPN’s boutique website about the intersection of race and sports.Mr. Horowitz chooses to overlook Mr. Whitlock’s recent past and instead extols his fearlessness and willingness to tackle complex issues as perfect traits for FS1.“This is the mission,” Mr. Horowitz said. “Two thoughtful guys in a format that allows them to say incisive things that other people hadn’t considered or weren’t exposed to.”A version of this article appears in print on May 9, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: This Time, He’s Working to Bulk Up FS1.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.