By SYDNEY EMBERJULY 6, 2016
The Gannett Company, the owner of USA Today, has continued its buying spree, purchasing The Record of Bergen County, N.J., and other assets of the North Jersey Media Group. The sale was announced to North Jersey Media Group employees at a staff meeting on Wednesday.With the acquisition, which also includes The Herald News and other publications, Gannett gains a stronger presence in the tristate area. Along with USA Today, Gannett now owns 109 daily newspapers, including several others in New Jersey.“This latest acquisition positions the company to be the leading news provider in the state of New Jersey,” Robert Dickey, the chief executive and president of Gannett, said in a statement. Gannett, which is based in McLean, Va., said it expected “the acquisition to contribute approximately $90 million in annual revenues.” Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.The deal is the most recent for Gannett, which has been snapping up publications to broaden its reach and make itself more appealing to national advertisers. In April, the company completed its acquisition of the Journal Media Group, adding 15 newspapers to its portfolio, including The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Gannett is also in a monthslong takeover battle with Tribune Publishing, which owns The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune. The Tribune has so far rebuffed two bids from Gannett — the latest of which represented a 99 percent premium to the price of The Tribune’s shares in April before news of the potential bid became public — drawing harsh rebukes and a shareholder lawsuit. Gannett said last month it was not walking away from its offer.AdvertisementGannett’s purchase will place The Record under corporate ownership for the first time in decades. Founded in 1895 as The Evening Record, The Record has been owned by the Borg family since 1930.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Today, I announce that the Borg family will be leaving a business we have nurtured and loved for 86 years and which is now in its fourth generation,” Malcolm Borg, chairman of the North Jersey Media Group, wrote in a letter to employees. He said the family chose Gannett as the company’s new owner over others because Gannett was “strategically positioning itself as the journalism and industry leader.”AdvertisementIn 2014, The Record, the second-biggest newspaper in New Jersey after The Star-Ledger in Newark, was the first paper  to publish an article linking Gov. Chris Christie’s staff to the closings of traffic lanes on the George Washington Bridge.The sale reflects further consolidation in the newspaper industry, which has been struggling with declining circulation and falling advertising revenue. It also represents a now familiar transition for newspapers away from family ownership. The Washington Post, for instance, which was owned for decades by the Graham family, was sold in 2013 to Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com.After the staff meeting when the sale was announced, North Jersey Media Group newsroom employees were reassured about Gannett’s commitment to journalism and told they would not have to reapply for their jobs.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Gannett Buys The Record of Bergen County, N.J.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.