By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 30, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Over much of his career, George Pyne has worked at the intersection of sports and media, helping turn Nascar into a multimedia giant and leading the talent and management agency IMG.Now, as an investor, Mr. Pyne is taking a deeper dive into the business by buying a 30-year-old specialist in helping broadcast soccer games and other sports events.Mr. Pyne’s Bruin Sports Capital said on Thursday that it had reached an agreement to buy deltatre, which provides graphics, data and live-streaming technology for sports and broadcasting clients. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.The acquisition is perhaps the highest-profile move yet for Mr. Pyne at his latest venture. Established last year with $250 million in capital, Bruin is meant to invest in sports, media and lifestyle businesses.AdvertisementIt draws on the executive’s two-decade career, where he ascended from sports marketing to be the chief operating officer at Nascar. He later became the president of IMG’s sports and entertainment practice, helping the agency grow in college athletics. He left when IMG was sold to the Hollywood behemoth WME.AdvertisementSince its founding, Bruin has taken over operations like the National Football League’s hospitality business, acquired along with RedBird Capital and the league’s 32 owners and renamed On Location Experiences.Mr. Pyne also set up Courtside Ventures, a $35 million early-stage investment arm with Dan Gilbert, the owner of the Cleveland Cavaliers basketball team, and the advertising titan WPP.Now the company has set its eyes on deltatre, which has grown to a company of more than 500 employees spread out over a dozen cities, from Miami to Tokyo. Its clients include UEFA, the European soccer league, and FIFA.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We believe this is a great asset,” Mr. Pyne said in a telephone interview. “The best sports brands in the world trust them to provide important technology.”According to Giampiero Rinaudo, deltatre’s founder, the business has grown well over the years without having to take on much outside investment. But as it looked to continue that growth, it needed help.“We are lucky to be in a business that is continuing to grow and change,” he said in a telephone interview. “But we also think that to get to the next step, we needed quite an important investment.”After learning of deltatre’s search for a potential partner, Mr. Pyne and Bruin met with Mr. Rinaudo and his team this spring.WPP helped Bruin run due diligence on deltatre, and its insights into the advertising market and enormous client base will be made available to the newly acquired company.“We worked hand in glove with them to identify this opportunity,” Mr. Pyne said of WPP.The goal now is to bring deltatre’s services to an even wider market, with the United States and Asia high on the list for expansion opportunities, according to Mr. Rinaudo. At the same time, deltatre is also looking at American sports leagues that are considering moves abroad, including the N.F.L. in its efforts to expand in Europe.Advertisement“What we are looking at now is big sports properties trying to go outside their traditional space,” he said.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.