By AMY ZIPKINJULY 4, 2016
With tens of thousands of out-of-towners expected to descend on Philadelphia and Cleveland this month for the political conventions, most other travelers may want to stay away. But whether for business meetings, personal visits or other reasons, many others will not be able to avoid traveling to those cities.David L. Hackett, a labor and employment lawyer at Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney in Philadelphia, is counting on being able to carry out his normal routine when the Democratic National Convention arrives this month.“I would not anticipate the general disruption for this convention that the pope’s visit caused,” he said. Pope Francis’ visit to Philadelphia in 2015 led to major restrictions in the downtown area of Center City and interstate closings.Still, for Mr. Hackett, it will not entirely be business as usual during the convention. He has advised out-of-town clients to avoid trips that week and said he would be using Skype or rescheduling in-office meetings. He said he, the Philadelphia office and his clients would “play it safe.”AdvertisementAs the presidential nominating process intensifies, the country’s attention will be directed to the Republican National Convention at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, July 18 to 21, and the Democratic National Convention at the Wells Fargo Center in Philadelphia, July 25 to 28.AdvertisementBetween protests, special group receptions and general revelry, the most popular restaurants and top tourist attractions will be catering to extra visitors. And business travelers or tourists who are planning to visit those cities need to be aware that complications may arise with limited accommodations, restricted pedestrian access and unexpected demonstrations.“To be very honest, if you don’t have a reason to be in Cleveland or Philly for these conventions, stay away,” said Henry Harteveldt, a travel analyst with Atmosphere Research.Both cities recently have been host to major events that attracted the nation’s attention. In June, after the Cleveland Cavaliers won the National Basketball Association championship, the city celebrated with a parade that an estimated 1.3 million people attended. And last fall, Philadelphia came to a standstill at times as Pope Francis greeted hundreds of thousands of people.This time, the numbers are smaller. Cleveland is anticipating 50,000 visitors, as is Philadelphia. Still, like the papal visit, each convention is designated a national special security event by the Department of Homeland Security.“It provides a mechanism for state and local officials to coordinate and fund their efforts to secure the event venue,” said Daniel Kaniewski, a senior fellow at the Center for Cyber & Homeland Security at George Washington University. The $50 million given to each city has gone toward the purchase of barriers, riot gear, police overtime pay and other related items.Security will be extra tight, especially after the contentious primary season. Cleveland has established an event zone adjacent to the convention center, and it has established restrictions on where individuals and groups can assemble and protest. The restrictions banned legal weapons like air rifles, but also umbrellas with metal tips, coolers, sleeping bags and tennis balls. A federal judge struck down the rules after the American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio filed a lawsuit.The city and the A.C.L.U. reached a settlement on June 24 governing protests and marches. The event zone will now be smaller. The changes are likely to increase the visibility of demonstrators along the parade route, and there is additional time to apply for parade permits.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.However, Nicole Mainor, a spokeswoman for the Secret Service, said, “When people are acting in a lawful manner, there won’t be any corrective action.”AdvertisementDefinitive road closings are not yet available. That does not surprise George Taylor, vice president of operations at iJet, a risk management company. The authorities are trying to keep some security plans restricted to limit the ability of anyone who wants to cause trouble to plan ahead, he said.For political tourists and others, rooms are expected to be available, although not close by. With the vast majority of accommodations spoken for, Destination Cleveland, the area’s visitors bureau, is directing travelers an hour west to Sandusky or south to Canton. And the Greater Philadelphia Hotel Association said that by convention time, the availability would probably be in suburbia with transportation either on Amtrak or commuter rail. “Still not a bad option,” Ed Grose, executive director of the hotel association, said.In Philadelphia, James Adamson, general manager of the Hotel Monaco, a Kimpton hotel, is anticipating a full house, even though the hotel is not hosting a delegation and is about five and a half miles from the Wells Fargo Center. Of 268 rooms, 85 percent are committed to the Democratic National Convention. When Pope Francis visited, the property was in the thick of the action, with metal detectors and fences a block away. This time, Mr. Adamson expects to have food and linens delivered without interruption. Previously, “we had to stock up,” he said. And trash will be picked up regularly. Still, he has denied requests for time off, enhanced an on-site security presence and has seen typical summer nightly rates skyrocket to $800 and above from the mid-$200 range a year ago.His counterpart at the Kimpton Schofield Hotel in Cleveland, Adam Gurgiolo, does not know anything about his guest list. “We still don’t know who is going to comprise our block. We won’t know until the day before,” he said. Another question is whether guests will be arriving by car or plane. About 43 percent of the United States population is within 500 miles of the city.For those traveling by air to Cleveland, United is adding 20 flights. Once on the ground, there will be “staff throughout the airport, on the secure side and the public side,” said Fred Szabo, interim director of port control. A command center will operate from the Friday before the convention until the Sunday after.In Philadelphia, American Airlines, which operates 70 percent of the flights in and out of the city, does not expect to add any additional planes. But efforts are planned to help conference attendees repack their souvenirs. “We want to be able to answer the question, ‘How do you get all this stuff onto the aircraft?’” said Victoria Lupica, a spokeswoman for American Airlines.Amtrak anticipates no changes in service on the Northeast Corridor.In Cleveland, Henry E. Billingsley II, a maritime lawyer at Tucker Ellis, plans to bicycle to work as usual. His office is not in the event zone.For the recent Cavaliers event, he expected traffic to be an issue and it was. But the crowd was in a festive mood. “That’s not necessarily true about the R.N.C. and could be a concern,” he said. Still, he gives the city high marks for its preparations to handle potential conflicts or protests.Mr. Hackett, the employment lawyer, said he would monitor things, including whether to have employees work remotely.AdvertisementThe possibility of complications could give some pause. “There’s an alarming potential for violence around the convention venues by different groups,” Mr. Harteveldt, the travel analyst, said. And traffic delays and rerouting, and the higher cost of hotels and difficulty getting restaurant reservations, make these places less appealing to visit, he added.A version of this article appears in print on July 5, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: National Political Conventions Lure and Repel Visitors to Host Cities.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »