By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSOCT. 28, 2016
SACRAMENTO, Calif. — California will recover $15 million related to the vast Ponzi scheme engineered by Bernard Madoff as part of an agreement liquefying the $277 million estate of a Beverly Hills investment adviser, officials said on Friday.The settlement ends a seven-year-old lawsuit filed by the state attorney general against Stanley Chais, a Beverly Hills investment adviser. Officials said he charged astronomical fees to invest hundreds of millions of dollars from more than 460 victims.Mr. Chais, who died in 2010, collected nearly $270 million in fees from 1995 to 2008 while presenting himself as an “investment wizard,” according to the lawsuit filed in Los Angeles Superior Court.In fact, he funneled investors’ life savings to Mr. Madoff, the onetime Nasdaq chairman whose $20 billion financial pyramid collapsed in 2008, the lawsuit said.AdvertisementThe agreement filed in federal bankruptcy court in New York settles separate lawsuits against Mr. Chais. Trustees say the settlement will essentially turn over his estate to his victims.AdvertisementThat includes nearly $263 million in cash and other assets to the Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities customer fund, and another $15 million that will be administered by the California attorney general’s office to pay claims by investors in companies operated by Mr. Chais.Investors in the Chais-operated companies are not permitted to lay claim to the larger amount of money because that share will go to those who invested directly with Mr. Madoff, not through so-called feeder funds, said Kristin Ford, a spokeswoman for California’s attorney general, Kamala D. Harris.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The lawsuit estimates there are more than 460 defrauded investors in three Chais-related companies, which would work out to reimbursements of about $32,600 each. Ms. Ford said the actual awards would be decided by an administrator and depended in part on how many former clients filed claims. The state can also use up to $750,000 of the settlement money for its administrative costs.Mr. Chais’s clients had no idea the money that they had invested since the 1970s was being sent to Mr. Madoff, who is serving a 150-year prison sentence after pleading guilty to fraud charges. The state’s lawsuit says some lost their homes and had to move in with their adult children.“For over 30 years, Stanley Chais unscrupulously defrauded Californians, many of them elderly, by taking their life savings, charging steep fees and funneling their money to Bernie Madoff’s elaborate Ponzi scheme,” Ms. Harris said in a statement.The settlement with Mr. Chais’s widow and other family members brings total recoveries related to Madoff to more than $11.4 billion, Stephen Harbeck, president and chief executive of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation, said in a statement.Nearly $9.5 billion of that money has already been distributed. Distributing all of it is expected to return more than 65 percent of the principal estimated to have been lost by Mr. Madoff’s customers whose claims have been allowed by trustees.A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: $15 Million for California in Madoff-Tied Suit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.