By BARRY MEIERFEB. 10, 2016
The federal judge overseeing hundreds of claims against General Motors related to a defective ignition switch has rejected an effort to replace Robert C. Hilliard, one of the lead plaintiffs’ lawyers on the case.In a ruling issued on Wednesday in Manhattan, Judge Jesse M. Furman of Federal District Court also refused to undo a $275 million settlement reached last year between G.M. and Mr. Hilliard. The agreement covered some 1,400 lawsuits, or about 60 percent of those pending against the carmaker.The ruling represented a setback for Lance Cooper, the plaintiffs’ lawyer who had asked Judge Furman to remove Mr. Hilliard from the case and overturn the settlement. In motions, Mr. Cooper, who helped uncover the switch defect that has been linked to 124 deaths, cited what he described as self-dealing actions on the part of Mr. Hilliard.The requests threatened to throw into disarray the lawsuits against G.M. that had been consolidated into a so-called multidistrict litigation. But Judge Furman held that the Mr. Cooper had provided little or no evidence to support his “(sometimes wild) accusations of impropriety and underhandedness.”AdvertisementJudge Furman also said “the court also hopes that plaintiffs’ counsel will stop litigating their grievances with one another (especially through the press) and return to focusing on their common adversary.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cooper’s initially lodged his complaints against Mr. Hilliard and two other plaintiffs’ lawyers appointed to lead the G.M. case after a “bellwether” trial against the carmaker ended abruptly last month.AdvertisementThe trial, which was the first of several meant to test the strength of other claims, was halted midway after G.M. lawyers showed that the plaintiff, a client of Mr. Hilliard’s, had altered a check and may have given misleading testimony.Mr. Cooper, of Marietta, Ga., charged that Mr. Hilliard, a lawyer in Corpus Christi, Tex., could have chosen a much stronger case to try first but had not done so because he was denied a role in it. He also said the settlement that Mr. Hilliard struck with G.M. was not in the best interests of the other plaintiffs in the litigation.Mr. Cooper did not immediately respond to requests for comment.In the G.M. case, the automaker has recalled 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Saturn Ions and other small cars since early 2014 because of a defect that allowed a vehicle’s ignition switch to shut off if jostled, cutting off engine power and steering, and disabling airbags.A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Business Briefing; Bid to Replace Plaintiffs’ Lawyer in G.M. Recall Case Is Rejected.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.