
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

JULY 1, 2016
Apple is flailing around to the beat.The company may buy Tidal, the music-streaming service started by the superstar rapper Jay Z, according to The Wall Street Journal. The presumed logic is that it will help Apple strengthen its own service.Spotify, a rival, says that Apple is harming it by rejecting an app upgrade. Apple has the clout to fend off rivals, but adding Tidal will not help get its rhythm back.It was just two years ago that Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, spent $3 billion for Beats, the streaming music and headphones business owned by Jimmy Iovine and Dr. Dre. The co-founders have deep ties to the music industry with roots at Interscope and Death Row Records.And yet Apple’s streaming ambitions have been middling at best. It is redesigning the service after frustrating its approximately 15 million paying subscribers. That is just half as big as Spotify’s 30 million subscriber base.AdvertisementTidal is struggling, too. It had a star-studded debut last March — with Beyoncé, Madonna and Chris Martin of Coldplay — and promised that an online service owned by artists would be better for artists. But it is on its third chief executive and has not drawn the masses, picking up fewer than five million paying customers, many of them reaped by dropping occasional exclusives from the likes of Kanye West, Prince and others.As sales of iPhones, computers and iPads slow, it is understandable why Apple is setting its sights on other businesses. Revenue from apps, Apple Music subscriptions, along with a few other services, rose 20 percent year-over-year and accounted for 12 percent of its $50 billion in last quarter’s top line.AdvertisementThat partly explains why Apple is giving Spotify headaches. Recode reported that Apple will not approve the digital music service’s latest app. Spotify, based in Sweden, is encouraging customers to sign up through its own website, thus bypassing in-app subscriptions. Apple takes a 30 percent cut, though the fee falls to 15 percent after one year. It’s a retributive move – like a lyric from one of Dre’s old NWA raps.An earlier version of this article misstated the number of chief executives that the music streaming service Tidal has had. Since the company started, it has had three chief executive, not four.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »