
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

OCT. 27, 2016
AT&T’s audacious $85 billion bid for Time Warner may help more independent advisory companies handle mergers and acquisitions.The year’s biggest merger enlisted the services of two boutique firms, Perella Weinberg and Allen & Company, alongside their bigger Wall Street brethren. If it emboldens other chief executives, the likes of Lazard and Moelis should benefit. They could use the help as the advice market goes through a rough patch.Third-quarter results released this week by independent advisory companies have held up well despite a 22 percent decline in annual global deal volume, according to Thomson Reuters data. Only Greenhill reported a drop in revenue related to mergers and acquisitions from the end of June. It was nevertheless the boutique’s best showing in a while, and revenue growth was 52 percent higher than a year ago. Lazard and Moelis, however, experienced little or no growth in merger fees from 2015.The falloff from a record year of wheeling and dealing has taken its toll. Market values for Lazard, Greenhill and Moelis are each down at least 10 percent this year. In contrast, shares of two of the top three deal advisers — Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan Chase — are up around 5 percent, while those of the third, Goldman Sachs, are down only slightly. Evercore stock, thanks in part to an industry-beating one-third increase in advisory revenue so far this year, is flat.An increase in new deals would help reverse this decline. The contribution of merger advice fees to earnings is, after all, easier to divine than the ups and downs of trading stocks, bonds, currencies and commodities.This week’s slew of announced transactions, including Qualcomm’s $47 billion agreed takeover of the rival chip maker NXP Semiconductors — which included Evercore, Centerview and Frank Quattrone’s Qatalyst among the list of advisers — is already having an effect. Lazard’s stock, for example, has jumped almost 10 percent since last Thursday’s market close. For investors, a few more megamergers could be enough to seal the deal.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »