AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinAt the beginning of every episode of “Serial,” the host, Sarah Koenig, opens with these words: “From This American Life and WBEZ Chicago, it’s ‘Serial,’ one story told week by week.”Well, make that every other week.In an unexpected development, the second season of “Serial,” which is about Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, is moving to a biweekly broadcasting schedule. The fifth episode of the podcast, which had been scheduled for Thursday, will instead become available on Jan. 21, and that biweekly schedule will continue for the rest of the season.Julie Snyder, an executive producer of “Serial,” said in an interview Tuesday that a 14-day window between episodes was needed to accommodate additional reporting and a longer season than she anticipated.“There are more paths we need to go down,” Ms. Snyder said. “Since we started broadcasting the show, we have gotten more people willing to talk, and because of that, it has opened up more avenues of reporting.”She declined to comment on whom those interviews were with, or what additional reporting the show needed to pursue.“We have narrative developments,” she said. “I hesitate on calling them news developments.”The first season of the podcast was a smash hit with listeners and earned a Peabody Award for its examination of a 15-year-old murder case involving high school students in Baltimore County.This season, “Serial” is tackling the much more prominent case of Sergeant Bergdahl, who walked away from his Army base in Afghanistan in 2009 and was held in captivity by the Taliban for five years. Since Sergeant Bergdahl’s release in 2014, in return for five Taliban detainees, he has been the subject of enormous controversy. Many on the right accuse him of desertion.In interviews released on “Serial,” the first Sergeant Bergdahl has given since being released by the Taliban, he has described his reasons for walking away from his Army base, his attempts at escape and the brutal conditions of his captivity.The podcast’s timing has been opportune: After the first episode, Gen. Robert B. Abrams, head of Army Forces Command at Fort Bragg, N.C., ordered that Sergeant Bergdahl face a court martial  on charges of desertion and endangering troops.But despite the fact that “Serial” has tackled a widely known topic, this season has failed to generate the same kind of intense interest the first one did. The change to a biweekly schedule risks further blunting momentum.“I have definitely noticed it and I was definitely prepared for it,” Ms. Snyder said of the season’s relative lack of buzz. “So much of the story of Season 1 was about us. There was a lot of coverage about, ‘What is this? Have you heard it?’ We’re not a new story anymore.”Still, Ms. Snyder pointed to numbers that indicated “Serial” was still attracting plenty of listeners and, at least on a weekly basis, more than last season. The first episode of this season was downloaded about 3.4 million times in its first week, a figure that did better than the first seven-day total of every episode last season, including the season finale.Additionally, the second season of “Serial” has been streamed five million times on Pandora, according to a company spokesman.The bulk of the listeners in the first season, however, listened after the season was over, Ms. Snyder said.And there are signs that the show is reaching a plateau. The number of downloads for the second episode this season was 3.1 million in its first week run, while the third episode was downloaded 2.8 million times. (“Serial” projects that the fourth episode will have about 3.1 million downloads.)Ms. Snyder said the download figures bolstered her confidence that listeners would remain engaged, even with additional time between episodes.“I thought the numbers were really solid considering this wasn’t a whodunit story like last season,” Ms. Snyder said. “I’m not anticipating a drop-off. I think we’re good.”Ms. Snyder said that the number of episodes this season would now expand beyond Ms. Koenig’s preseason projection of “eight to 10-ish” installments, though she did not disclose a specific number.And she vowed that this season — which will now stretch at least until late March, and possibly well into the spring — will not deviate from its new biweekly pace.“As a boss, I would simply say that is not the option,” she said.Advertisement