
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

OCT. 26, 2016
Comcast is schooling AT&T on media mergers and acquisitions.The cable giant now gets more than one-third of its revenue from NBCUniversal, a deal it concluded in early 2013 when the regulatory and political climate was more accommodating and the strategy of the company’s chief executive, Brian L. Roberts, was sound. AT&T’s $85.4 billion bid for Time Warner, by contrast, is a mess.The top line at NBCUniversal, home to the Peacock Network, MSNBC and a giant movie studio, jumped 28 percent in the third quarter, to $9.2 billion. Granted, the unit got a huge lift from broadcasting the Olympics in the United States. But even after stripping out the sporting event, revenue increased about 6 percent thanks to strong growth at its theme parks.Comcast’s two-part deal for NBCUniversal, which it bought from industrial conglomerate General Electric, was prudent by today’s standards. Regulators insisted on a variety of conditions before approving the deal, including that Comcast take a passive role in its ownership of video-streaming service Hulu. G.E.’s then-huge finance division was also under duress thanks to the financial crisis, and the parent company was eager to rid itself of media assets that made little sense in its portfolio of jet engines and capacitors.By contrast, AT&T is offering a whopping $20 billion above Time Warner’s market value before word of a deal leaked out. The cost savings cited by AT&T, some $1 billion, barely cover a third of the premium. The telecommunications giant also has little experience in producing TV shows and movies.Mr. Roberts himself has learned some hard deal lessons. Comcast’s earlier attempt to take over the Walt Disney Company was a failure. So too was his proposal to buy Time Warner Cable after trustbusters denied the union. AT&T argues it will have no problem sailing through the review process. Based on Time Warner’s shares, which are now trading $20 below the offer price of $107.50, AT&T may want to take a more humble tack.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »