AdvertisementSupported byStrategiesBy Jeff SommerAttacking big banks is as American as apple pie. But it’s a new entry on this year’s Republican menu.In a convention surprise, the Republicans inserted a plank in the party platform calling for the restoration of a Depression-era law, the Glass-Steagall Act, that separated commercial and investment banking.The law was repealed in 1999 during the Clinton administration, with bipartisan support, at the behest of the big banks, which said they needed to combine their investment and commercial functions in order to compete on the global stage.It didn’t turn out so well, of course.The world endured a severe financial crisis and global recession, and big multiservice banks like Citigroup, Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase received government funds. Subsequently, investment banks like Goldman Sachs, which also received a bailout, took on commercial banking, adding to the entanglement of investment and commercial functions.It’s not clear that Glass-Steagall, had it remained in place, would have staved off the financial crisis, which had many causes. Yet it has emerged as almost a code word in both parties for poking a finger in Wall Street’s eye, and exacting payback for the crisis bankers wrought. A draft of the Democratic platform — negotiated with the active participation of Senator Bernie Sanders’s supporters — also calls for restoring Glass-Steagall.For both parties, it is a page straight out of the populist playbook.William Jennings Bryan showed the way in his keynote speech at the 1896 Democratic convention in Chicago. Citing populist predecessors like Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, Bryan said “the banks should go out of the governing business.” And in one of the most famous final sentences in American speechmaking, he declared, “You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.”The speech is still remembered, but it didn’t all work out as Bryan might have hoped: He ran for president repeatedly but never won.What the Republican Party did in adopting the platform plank on Monday night also seemed calculated to grab headlines. The 58-page draft of the official party platform included this one short sentence: “We support reinstating the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 which prohibits commercial banks from engaging in high-risk investment.”The Democratic platform draft, somewhat more expansive, embraces variety of measures “to downsize or break apart financial institutions when necessary to protect the public and safeguard financial stability.” One of those measures, it says, is “an updated and modernized version of Glass-Steagall and breaking up too-big-to-fail financial institutions that pose a systemic risk to the stability of our economy.”Those pronouncements may not mean much in the real world, however. Donald Trump has not made Glass-Steagall a campaign theme. Republicans in Congress generally oppose the law’s restoration. Hillary Clinton has expressed skepticism about the utility of reviving it.And in any case, party platforms are often irrelevant. Bob Dole, the Republican presidential nominee in 1996, declared that he didn’t even read the platform of that year’s convention.Moreover, even if the parties nominally agree about Glass-Steagall, they are still miles apart on many other financial reform measures. And it’s not clear that separating commercial and investment banking could more effectively reduce the size and the risk-taking of major banks than the main legislative response to the financial crisis: the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010.That law and the so-called Volcker Rule, named after Paul Volcker, the former Federal Reserve chairman, aimed to prevent banks from ever again becoming “too big to fail.”Even as it invokes the bygone era of Glass-Steagall, the Republican platform reiterates a longstanding party goal: repealing the Dodd-Frank law and many of its regulations. A draft version of the Democratic platform, which is to be voted on at next week’s convention, on the other hand, calls for strengthening Dodd-Frank. It vows, “We will stop dead in its tracks every Republican effort to weaken it.”Senator Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts Democrat, embraces restoration of Glass-Steagall, but she also calls for strengthening Dodd-Frank and for strengthening the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which she helped create. The Republican platform calls for elimination of the bureau, and does so with zest, saying it is “the worst” part of Dodd-Frank, and was “deliberately designed to be a rogue agency.”It is difficult to imagine that either party’s platform will alter public perceptions markedly with its position on Glass-Steagall or that the law will actually be re-enacted. The banks were extraordinarily active in seeking its repeal in 1999, and any serious effort to restore it might start that train rolling again.And if they are seeking to stir up the populists, both parties may want to be careful about attacking big banks right now. Who, after all, was the father of national banking in the United States?Alexander Hamilton, as any Broadway aficionado knows. And after Lin-Manuel Miranda’s magical transformation of the founder of the first Bank of the United States into a populist hero, it might not be the smartest move to campaign against Hamilton’s well-heeled descendants.Advertisement