AdvertisementSupported byBy Danielle IvoryWhile acknowledging its role in failing to report a deadly defect for more than a decade, General Motors on Tuesday forcefully questioned the story of a man who was injured in a May 2014 crash and is suing the company.The automaker is facing a civil trial in the first of six so-called bellwether cases over deadly defective ignition switches in its vehicles.Bellwethers are often used in product-liability litigation when many people have similar claims. In this instance, such cases could help G.M. and lawyers for the plaintiffs try out legal strategies or help them determine whether to settle. Of the six bellwethers, three were picked by lawyers for the plaintiffs and three by the defense.The first case, being heard in Federal District Court in Manhattan, is one chosen by the plaintiffs’ side. It involves Robert Scheuer, an Oklahoman who was injured when his 2003 Saturn Ion crashed into a tree on May 28, 2014. Mr. Scheuer, 49, has claimed that the defective ignition switch in his car caused the airbags not to deploy during his accident, leading to neck and back injuries.In February 2014, G.M. began recalling what eventually numbered 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Ions and other small cars for a defect in the ignition switch. If jostled, the switch could unexpectedly shut off, cutting power to the engine and disabling airbags, power steering and power brakes. At least 124 deaths have been acknowledged by G.M., through its compensation program, to be tied to the defect.Bob Hilliard, a lawyer for Mr. Scheuer, said in his opening statement that his client had received a recall notice for his Ion in early May 2014 and had called his dealership, which had informed him that there were not enough replacement parts and to call back in a month.Mr. Scheuer then followed G.M.’s instructions to remove his key from his key chain, Mr. Hilliard said, to prevent the extra weight from accidentally turning the key. Later that month, on a sunny and dry day, he drove off the road. Photos in the courtroom on Tuesday showed his white car wrecked against a tree. His airbag did not deploy.Mr. Hilliard walked the jury of five men and seven women through the history of the defect, from 2001 when G.M. first began to learn about the problem, to the first recalls in early 2014. He said that G.M. had engaged in a cover-up. He emphasized that the automaker had rejected an inexpensive repair for the defect that could have saved lives.“This case is not just about an accident that occurred in 2014 in Oklahoma,” he said. “It’s about the conduct of the company for a period of time that spans more than a decade.”Mike Brock, a partner at Kirkland & Ellis, who is defending G.M., said in his opening statement that the company “does not come to court today to tell you that we were perfect.” He emphasized that the company had terminated 15 employees in the wake of its ignition recall and had created a program to compensate some victims of crashes and their families, in exchange for their not suing the company.But Mr. Brock said G.M. had committed no fraud against Mr. Scheuer and would show that Mr. Scheuer’s injuries were not linked to a defective ignition.In the opening statement, Mr. Brock argued that Mr. Scheuer, a postal worker, had a long history of back pain that preceded the accident, stemming from an industrial accident in 1988. He also showed a hospital discharge report from the day after the accident that said: “No obvious injuries from his motor vehicle collision” and “history of chronic pain management.”Mr. Brock also argued that testing by G.M. showed that Mr. Scheuer’s key could not have accidentally turned if he had, as he said, taken it off the key chain. He said that Mr. Scheuer had claimed that he did not lose his power steering or power brakes while going off the road. He added that under the circumstances of the accident, Mr. Scheuer’s airbag should not have deployed.Both sides agreed that Mr. Scheuer’s car was airborne — after going off the road, but before hitting two trees — for about 28 feet with a vertical drop of about three and a half feet.Mr. Scheuer’s lawyer argued that his client’s airbag should have deployed upon landing, before the car hit the trees. G.M.’s lawyer argued that although the car continued to travel forward while airborne, the vertical drop should not have caused the airbags to deploy. The car had slowed substantially by the time it hit the trees — though it did knock one over.“You do not want your airbags to deploy on every little bump and grind that a car goes through,” Mr. Brock said.Chris Caruso, an airbag expert for the plaintiffs, said during his testimony on Tuesday that when the car landed, the undercarriage would have gone right into the ground and the airbags “should have fired right there.”Mr. Brock questioned Mr. Scheuer’s timeline of the events and suggested that, because of the trajectory of the car, Mr. Scheuer might have fallen asleep and drifted off the road, contradicting Mr. Scheuer’s story that he had been run off the road.Advertisement