By MICHAEL CORKERYJAN. 12, 2016
A measure of consumer credit worsened in the third quarter, a potentially troubling sign for banks that have enjoyed a long spell of low defaults.A composite of consumer loan delinquencies compiled by the American Bankers Association increased to 1.41 percent from 1.36 percent in the previous quarter. The composite tracks eight different loan types, including auto loans, personal loans and mobile home loans.In addition, credit card delinquencies increased to 2.54 percent in the third quarter from 2.52 percent in the second quarter.James Chessen, the chief economist for the American Bankers Association, said the delinquency rates, while ticking higher, remained far below the 15-year average. He attributed the weaker credit to slower job growth and lower consumer confidence in the third quarter.Advertisement“Now is a great time for consumers to reflect on their holiday expenditures and resolve to reduce any excess debt in the new year,” Mr. Chessen said in a news release that included a section on consumer tips, like advice on talking with creditors and avoiding bankruptcy.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The last time the trade group reported a quarterly uptick in delinquencies in its composite of consumer loans was in the fourth quarter of 2014.AdvertisementWeakening credit quality will be a focus when the nation’s largest banks begin reporting their fourth-quarter results this week, starting with JPMorgan Chase on Thursday and Wells Fargo and Citigroup on Friday.After a period when many banks loosened underwriting standards and reduced their reserves because of low delinquencies, analysts have worried that losses will begin to mount. One of the biggest areas of concern for banking regulators is auto lending, where competition has been fierce, prompting some lenders to extend loans to less creditworthy customers.“There is a demand for credit and a lot of competition on the bank side to provide it,” Mr. Chessen said in an interview.A version of this article appears in print on January 12, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Weakening Credit.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.