By AMIE TSANGMARCH 27, 2017
Carl C. Icahn is known for his pugnacious and persistent approach to activist investing.Now, as a special adviser to President Trump, Mr. Icahn is applying that style to regulatory matters, generating protests from ethics experts and Democrats about a growing list of potential conflicts.One regulatory fix that he has been pushing would have benefited CVR Energy, an oil refiner based in Texas in which Mr. Icahn is a majority investor. (The company has already seen its stock soar since the election.)And he has provided input to the White House on the selection of the new head of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, while being a major investor in companies that have been targeted for enforcement action or investigation by the agency.Kelly Love, a White House spokeswoman, dismissed the criticism, saying that Mr. Icahn was simply “a private citizen whose opinion the president respects.”AdvertisementMr. Icahn is unapologetic and shows no sign of backing down.“All my life I have fought the establishment — from U.S. Steel, to eBay, to Apple,” he said last week, referring to his battles to force management changes at different companies. “I have never shied away from it. I am not going to now.”Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.• President Trump and Republicans in Congress will make a start on overhauling the tax code this week. After the bruising collapse of their health care plans, some think they might aim for an easy win. That means the grand plans of lower rates, fewer loopholes and a tax on imports may be scaled back to a big corporate tax cut and possibly an individual tax cut.AdvertisementUber faces yet another setback, this time involving its self-driving car unit.The company suspended the testing of its autonomous cars after one of the vehicles was involved in a collision in Tempe, Ariz.The car, which had a person in the driver’s seat but was in self-driving mode, was not at fault in the accident, according to the police. It was hit when the driver of another car failed to yield and the Uber rolled over onto its side.Neither driver suffered serious injuries.The incident comes after a series of crises involving Uber’s workplace culture and business practices.North Korea needs cash and is getting bolder in its moves to get it.The country, cut off from much of the global economy, has used its cyberattack abilities to spread propaganda and disrupt websites overseas. Now, it has more financial targets — including the World Bank, the European Central Bank and Bank of America.North Korea has a huge hacking network and the information left behind when it tried to break into Polish banks last year, which has been analyzed by The New York Times, shows the scale of its ambitions, targeting major countries and more than 100 organizations around the world, according to security researchers.In the Polish attack, the perpetrators used a so-called watering hole to go after banks. They used a financial regulator’s website to redirect visitors to software that would attempt to download malware.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.