By NEIL GOUGHJAN. 11, 2016
HONG KONG — Chinese stocks plunged again on Monday, as jittery investors worried about whether the authorities could manage the financial market turmoil and a broader economic slowdown.Following steep losses last week, the main Shanghai share index fell 5.3 percent on Monday. The benchmark Shenzhen index ended the day down 6.6 percent.Global stocks, though, largely shrugged off the slump in China, with Asian and European stocks steadying after a tumultuous week. The futures markets pointed to gains on Wall Street.After several months of relative calm, global investors have faced a wild ride, set off by weakness in the Chinese stock market and currency. The troubles have raised concerns about the health of the country’s economy, a major engine of global growth.Advertisement“A China hard landing is bad for capital markets, and we think the risk is uncomfortably high, higher than we would prefer,” Bob Browne, the chief investment officer at Northern Trust, said Monday morning in an interview in Hong Kong. A sharp slowdown was not the likeliest outcome for China’s economy, Mr. Browne added, but it remained a cause for worry among global investors.AdvertisementThe government’s messy attempts to manage the situation have added to investors’ anxiety.While the government is pushing for major overhauls, it has also kept a tight control over areas like the market and currency. It is sending a mixed message to investors, making it more difficult to navigate the markets.Take the so-called circuit breaker mechanism, a newly installed measure that halts trading when losses reach a certain threshold.The mechanism, a response to last summer’s stock plunge, was intended to bring greater stability to the markets. But it deepened the losses last week.The Shanghai index opened the new year on Jan. 4 with a 7 percent plunge before trading was closed early for the day. The same happened on Thursday. In both cases, global investors panicked, with stocks selling off around the world.The government backtracked, suspending the use of the circuit breaker late Thursday. In a stark admission, the main securities regulator acknowledged that it had “no experience” operating such a mechanism.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Adding to the recent uncertainty has been the renewed weakness of China’s currency, the renminbi.The renminbi, which is tightly controlled by the government, has been steadily falling in recent weeks. While that has helped exporters, it has also pushed companies and families to pull money out of the country, in anticipation that their wealth will be worth less.The government tried to calm the markets by setting the renminbi’s official exchange rate stronger against the dollar for the second day in a row. But it is also making it difficult to discern the motives of policy makers.The strengthening in the official exchange rate on Monday set off a scramble for offshore renminbi in Hong Kong, where the currency is more freely traded, albeit in smaller volumes.AdvertisementThe overnight bank-to-bank borrowing rate for offshore renminbi in Hong Kong rose sharply on Monday to a record high of 13.4 percent. Such a drastic, short-term spike in demand can indicate a so-called short squeeze, in which investors betting that the currency will continue to weaken are forced to buy it to avoid losses, temporarily increasing its value.Stock investors in China took a dim view of the currency, bringing the total losses on the Shanghai market to 15 percent this year. The sharp sell-off spilled over into Hong Kong, where the Hang Seng, which includes a large numbers of companies from the mainland, closed down 2.8 percent. Markets in Japan were closed for a holiday.Global investors, though, were more sanguine.Shares in Europe were steady, after falling slightly in early trading. The blue-chip FTSE 100 in London rose 0.1 percent in afternoon trading, while the DAX in Frankfurt gained 0.6 percent.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.