By THE NEW YORK TIMESJAN. 10, 2016
General Motors on Monday will face a trial in the first of six so-called “bellwether” cases in 2016 over deadly defective ignition switches in its vehicles. The bellwethers, frequently used in product liability litigation when many people may have similar claims, could help G.M. and lawyers for the plaintiffs work out trial strategies or help determine whether to settle. The first case going to trial involves Robert Scheuer, who was injured when his 2003 Saturn Ion crashed into a tree in May 2014. Of the six bellwethers, three were picked by lawyers for the plaintiffs and three by the defense. —Danielle IvoryChina’s central bank is expected to release a variety of data this week on credit in the country’s economy last month, although the date of the release has not yet been set. The data is expected to show that China’s overall debt continues to rise, much of it at state-owned enterprises with mixed chances of ever being able to repay it. —Keith BradsherOn Wednesday, the United States Supreme Court will hear arguments in a case that touches upon a delicate issue — the country’s relationship with Iran. The case, known as Bank Markazi v. Peterson, follows the awarding of billions of dollars in default judgments against Iran for its role in the deadly 1983 bombing of Marine barracks in Beirut. Lawyers for families of those killed filed a lawsuit in 2010 to collect on the awards by attaching some $2 billion in assets held outside Iran by the country’s central bank, Bank Markazi. And in 2012, Congress passed a bill that specifically addressed that lawsuit and sought to clear the way for families to collect. On Wednesday, lawyers for the Iranian bank will claim that Congress, by passing a bill that singled out one lawsuit, violated the separation of powers. Lawyers for victims will say that Iran is seeking to escape its responsibilities. —Barry MeierJPMorgan Chase is expected to start bank earnings season by reporting on fourth-quarter results on Thursday morning. Wells Fargo and Citigroup report on Friday. While it may be too early to see the impact of higher short-term interest rates on the banks’ bottom lines, investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when this rate increase will start to kick in. Investors will also be homing in on whether banks are experiencing any signs of weakness in the United States economy in the face of global financial turmoil. —Michael CorkeryAdvertisementThe Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England is set to announce on Thursday whether it will increase the key lending rate for the first time in more than eight years. Since early 2009, the rate has been at a record low of 0.5 percent. Analysts have said, however, that an increase is unlikely to be announced by the bank’s governor, Mark J. Carney, anytime before the second half of this year. Last month, the bank’s American counterpart, the Federal Reserve, raised its short-term lending rates for the first time since 2006. —Susanne FowlerPlease verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On Thursday, the European Central Bank will release minutes of its Dec. 4 meeting, at which the bank’s Governing Council surprised many investors and outside experts by taking only incremental measures to further stimulate the eurozone economy. Although the council, the central bank’s main policy board, did decide to extend the bank’s stimulus program of bond buying by six months and changed a key interest rate to encourage banks to lend more, it did not cut borrowing rates or increase the amount of monthly bond purchases. While the European Central Bank’s president, Mario Draghi, has indicated the bank stands ready to take further action if necessary, the question has been whether there is stiff resistance on the Governing Council to significantly increasing the bank’s stimulus spending. The Dec. 4 minutes may shed light on the matter. —Tim RaceThe Commerce Department will release retail sales data on Friday for the month of December, when retailers across the United States rely on a final holiday shopping push to lift their bottom lines. The numbers will be an important window into how tightly consumers held on to their purse strings in 2015, and how retailers are faring as Amazon continues to dominate the e-commerce ground. —Rachel AbramsAdvertisementOn Friday morning, the Federal Reserve will report the latest data for industrial production and capacity use in December. Economists are expecting production to decline for the fourth consecutive month, with the consensus calling for a 0.2 percentage point drop. Warm temperatures in many parts of the country hurt utility output, but more economically significant weakness in the manufacturing sector and among energy producers may also have cooled activity. —Nelson D. SchwartzA version of this article appears in print on January 11, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.