
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

OCT. 24, 2016
There is a scene in the 1992 movie “My Cousin Vinny” in which the defense lawyer gets a courtroom bailiff to bring his girlfriend forward to testify over her vocal resistance. How much help the government has to give to the defendant to build a defense is the basis on which Sean Stewart, a former investment banker convicted in August of insider trading, is asking for a new trial. He claims that prosecutors improperly threatened his father to keep him from testifying that there was no violation of the law.The government is required to aid the defense under the Sixth Amendment, which provides that a defendant shall enjoy the right “to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor.” Even if a witness can be required to appear, the person can refuse to testify by asserting the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination if the testimony might result in being prosecuted.That creates a problem for defendants, who may desperately need the testimony to establish that they did not commit a crime. But the only way to force a witness to testify is to grant the person immunity, and defendants lack the authority to provide that protection.In Mr. Stewart’s case, one of the most damning pieces of evidence came from a recording of his father, Robert Stewart, who traded on inside information he received from his son, a former investment banker at Perella Weinberg Partners. Robert Stewart told another man he was tipping that his son once said, “I handed you this on a silver platter and you didn’t invest in this.” The prosecutors argued that a son chastising his father for not using confidential information proved he knew there was insider trading.AdvertisementTo explain that comment, Sean Stewart subpoenaed his father to testify at trial. But the Justice Department threatened to pursue further charges against Robert Stewart, who had already pleaded guilty to insider trading charges and was sentenced to probation. The government could have charged Robert Stewart with perjury and making false statements to government agents if he testified inconsistently with earlier responses after his arrest.AdvertisementTo avoid facing additional punishment, the father asserted his Fifth Amendment right, and thus was unable to help his son.After his conviction on insider trading charges, Sean Stewart filed a motion for a new trial, asking the trial court to grant his father immunity to testify that his son was unaware the information he had given out in discussing his investment banking work would be used for trading. Without access to that evidence, Sean Stewart claims that he did not receive a fair trial.Bloomberg reported that Sean Stewart sent an email to former co-workers at Perella Weinberg in September stating, “My father wanted to testify that I had ABSOLUTELY NO idea what he was doing, and also explain other statements, but he was threatened with potential loss of his probation and potential jail time if he did.”Although the government must aid the defense in gathering evidence, courts generally find that prosecutors need not give immunity from prosecution just because a defendant wants testimony from a recalcitrant witness. If it did, the danger for the government is that the witness might take all the blame for a violation in an effort to exonerate the defendant, after which it would be almost impossible to pursue charges against the witness because of the protection afforded by the immunity grant.Courts have expressed concern that prosecutors may violate a defendant’s rights by improperly withholding immunity to keep important evidence out of court. There are three requirements to showing such misconduct: that the government was discriminatory in granting immunity to favorable witnesses while denying it to those who will help the defendant to gain a tactical advantage, the testimony the witness would have given was helpful and important, and the information was not available from other sources.One challenge to proving misconduct is that the witness immunity statute provides that a court can grant it “upon the request of the United States attorney,” but not on its own. It is recognized that the decision to charge someone with a crime is within the Justice Department’s broad discretion, so judges are reluctant to interfere in a case when they may not have the same perspective as prosecutors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Cases finding that the government acted improperly have proved to be quite rare, despite acknowledgment by the appeals courts that a judge may be able to immunize a defense witness as a means to combat prosecutorial misconduct that would result in an unfair trial. In a 1992 case, United States v. Bahadar, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, which governs the prosecution of Sean Stewart, pointed out that “we have yet to be presented with a case in which the defendant gets over the first hurdle, let alone succeeds entirely.”A law review note found that through 2012, only a dozen cases resulted in a finding that prosecutors acted improperly in not granting immunity to a defense witness. Almost all were concentrated in appeals courts in California and Pennsylvania, while the only case in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was in 1979.AdvertisementEven when prosecutors grant immunity to some witnesses while refusing to do so for the defense, that does not necessarily show improper conduct. In the prosecution of Bernard J. Ebbers, the former chief executive of WorldCom who was convicted of accounting fraud, the defense wanted immunity granted to senior executives who would testify that they were unaware of problems in the company’s records. The government declined to give that immunity to three of the executives, who then refused to testify for the defense. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit found the government did not act improperly because “there is no evidence of ‘overreaching’ or the manipulation of immunity expressly for tactical reasons.”For Sean Stewart to show a violation, it will require more than just pointing out that his father would have been helpful to his case. Prosecutors act improperly when they refuse to grant immunity with the purpose of keeping evidence out of court that would have a significant impact on the case and that is not otherwise available.Robert Stewart might have been able to help his son by testifying, but the evidence of his “silver platter” statement was in a recording, so even a denial that he really meant what he said would not necessarily undermine the government’s proof that Sean Stewart tipped confidential information. The threat of potential prosecution for perjury and false statements if Robert Stewart testified raises questions about the government’s motivation, but that alone may not be enough to show the requisite misconduct to earn a new trial.The authority to grant immunity to compel a witness to testify gives the government a powerful weapon to prove its case. Denying the same benefit to a defense witness can hamstring a defendant, but as with much in the criminal justice system, there are tools at the prosecutor’s disposal that need not be shared with the other side.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »