By VICTORIA FINKLEOCT. 24, 2016
WASHINGTON — Three judges at Washington’s federal appeals court on Monday questioned the government’s analysis that led to MetLife’s designation as a “too big to fail” financial company, as the Justice Department appeals a lower court’s decision to strip the insurance giant of that label.During arguments that lasted a little more than an hour, the judges explored whether banking regulators should have more explicitly examined the likelihood that MetLife would have failed — one of the insurer’s central arguments — rather than just looking at what would happen if it did.They also questioned whether regulators delved deeply enough when analyzing how the insurer’s hypothetical failure would impact the financial system as a whole.Judge Patricia Millett of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia said the regulators’ conclusions lacked “concreteness.”Advertisement“You’re not specific enough when you say, ‘Well, it’s a really bad situation so we assume bad things are going to happen,’” she said.AdvertisementIt was the second time lawyers for the regulators and MetLife faced off in court in the fight over whether the insurance company deserved to be labeled a so-called systemically important financial institution, or SIFI, something that brings new standards and extra regulatory oversight.The 2010 Dodd-Frank Act empowered a group of regulators known as the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate some nonbank firms that could pose a risk to the financial system in times of trouble as SIFIs.But Judge Rosemary Collyer of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia threw out MetLife’s SIFI designation in March, arguing that regulators had failed to adequately assess the likelihood that the insurer would experience severe financial distress or the consequences a failure would have on the broader economy. She also noted that regulators did not consider the potential costs of the designation.All three judges at Monday’s arguments pressed Mark B. Stern, a lawyer for the Justice Department, on the issue of vulnerability, including whether regulators had a duty to look at a firm’s likelihood of failure.“The prediction is a 100 percent chance that it will fail,” said Judge A. Raymond Randolph. “That’s what the assumption is.”In response, Mr. Stern argued that the council considered a host of “interrelated factors” such as leverage that go to the issue of vulnerability, asserting that regulators were never required to assess the likelihood of distress on its own.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“What the council is trying to determine is not whether but how distress will affect an institution — in this case, MetLife,” he said.He added that predicting the likelihood of failure was tremendously difficult, noting that very few people, except perhaps those featured in the recent movie “The Big Short,” would have forecast the collapse of American International Group before the financial crisis. But Mr. Stern argued that its near-failure in September 2008 and the consequences were devastating.Advertisement“A.I.G. is instructive,” Mr. Stern said.While the line of questioning at the hearing appeared sympathetic to MetLife’s arguments, the judges also asked some pointed questions of the insurer’s lawyer, Eugene Scalia, son of Antonin Scalia, the late Supreme Court justice. They pressed him about whether regulators had acted within the law in applying the SIFI designation, even if they did not conduct the exact analysis that the insurer itself would have preferred.In addition, the judges asked Mr. Scalia about whether it was the job of the regulatory council to estimate the potential costs and benefits of the SIFI label.Mr. Scalia emphasized that the designation itself had already posed significant costs on the firm, including millions of dollars in assessments to the government. He said that MetLife had hosted about a dozen examiners who were overseeing its activities before the March ruling.“What the council did was trigger” the duties and burdens now facing MetLife, he said.Any court ruling could have broad implications for the council’s designations process going forward, including the handling of firms it has already labeled. In addition to MetLife, regulators have named A.I.G., Prudential Financial and General Electric’s finance unit as SIFIs, though G.E. succeeded in removing the label earlier this year after shedding significant assets.Before the arguments, analysts had predicted the federal government had a slight edge in its appeals case, because two of the judges, Ms. Millet and Sri Srinivasan, were appointed to the court by President Obama; this potentially makes them more inclined to defer to the expert judgment of the regulators who came to assume these new regulatory mandates during the Obama administration. Judge Randolph is an appointee of former President George H.W. Bush, and Judge Collyer of the Federal District Court was appointed by former President George W. Bush.The tough questions posed at the hearing suggested the court may not be so lenient, though there is a high bar for judges in deciding that regulators have acted inappropriately.The government has also tapped some financial policy heavyweights on its behalf. The former Federal Reserve chairmen Ben Bernanke and Paul Volcker filed a friend-of-the-court brief this summer that supported the council’s conclusions. And more than a dozen current and former members of Congress — including former Senator Christopher Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and former Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, the primary authors of the Dodd-Frank Act — submitted their own filing.“The district court’s decision, if upheld, would fundamentally undermine the program that Congress put in place when it enacted Dodd-Frank to try to prevent such financial crises from occurring in the future,” the lawmakers wrote.A version of this article appears in print on October 25, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: MetLife Again Faces Off With Regulators Over ‘Too Big to Fail’ Status.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.