AdvertisementSupported byBy Peter EavisAn “Alice in Wonderland” accounting rule that allowed stressed banks to book huge gains simply because they were stressed has been overturned.The Financial Accounting Standards Board, which formulates accounting rules, on Tuesday voted to do away with the rule, which took effect as the financial system was starting to crumble in 2007.The change was one of several the board approved Tuesday.Russell G. Golden, the board’s chairman, said the changes were “intended to provide users of financial statements with more useful information on the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments.”Even though the rule at times enabled struggling Wall Street firms to print magical profits, and even though the financial industry pushed for the rule in the first place, the banks ended up despising it. The rule added confusing noise to banks’ earnings statements that distracted from the fundamental performance of the banks’ businesses.Investors also had to get used to the jargon the rule created. In a 2012 earnings release, for instance, Bank of America stated, “Results include negative valuation adjustments of $4.8 billion pretax, or $0.28 per share, from the narrowing of the company’s credit spreads.”Bank analysts said they were glad to see the rule’s demise. “Good riddance,” said Mike Mayo, a banks analyst at CLSA. “It gets rid of the noise that didn’t add value.”The rule grew from an accounting approach that holds that bank balance sheets need to closely reflect prices in the marketplace. If a bank holds bonds, its financial statements must reflect the value of the bonds using their prices in the market.This so-called fair value approach can prevent banks from masking losses, and provides crucial information to investors who are, for instance, assessing whether to lend to banks. In the financial crisis, fair value accounting helped give regulators and investors an approximation of the losses the banks were having on bad mortgage securities.But the rule that was scrapped Tuesday may have taken the fair value approach too far.It stated that banks could choose to value some of their liabilities, the money they owe, according to fair value. And in doing so, the accounting rule allowed a bizarre treatment when a bank was under stress. If a bank is ailing, investors have less desire to lend to the bank. As a result, the value of the bonds that the bank has issued might fall. The rule then assumed that the bank could, in theory, buy back those distressed bonds at a discount. By doing this trade, a bank would create profits for itself. The bond’s covenant might require the bank to pay back 100 cents on the dollar to its holders when it matured. But if the bank itself bought the entire bond for 70 cents on the dollar, it would avoid having to pay the bond back at 100 cents — and the 30 cents it would not now have to pay back would become a gain in its earnings statement.The fair value rule allowed banks to reflect such gains in their earnings even if they did not buy back any bondsBut the conceptual flaw in the rule was that a stressed bank might not have the cash to buy back large amounts of its own debt. Even so, because it was possible in theory, the rule let the banks book gains — and they were often large. In the fourth quarter of 2008, for instance, when Morgan Stanley was having huge losses on its mortgage securities, it also booked $2.7 billion in fair value gains in its debt and equity trading operations that were driven by a fall in the value of the bank’s liabilities.But the rule also punished the banks’ earnings. When investors’ perceptions of a bank’s creditworthiness improved, its liabilities would in theory rise in value. As a result, a bank would make less of a gain if it bought back its own debt — and this would show up as a loss in a bank’s earnings.Banks did not elect to apply the fair value rule to all of their liabilities.Advertisement