AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Antony CurrieMorgan Stanley’s latest management revamp puts a chief executive on the market.James Gorman, the $61 billion Wall Street bank’s boss, on Wednesday appointed Colm Kelleher the sole president and his heir apparent, leaving co-president Gregory Fleming in the cold. Mr. Kelleher is the ultimate Wall Street survivor. But Mr. Fleming may find his skills in high demand.Between them, the bankers have helped get Morgan Stanley back on its feet. Mr. Fleming oversaw the integration of Citigroup’s former brokerage arm, Smith Barney, into Morgan Stanley’s wealth-management division and drove its pretax profit margin up to a respectable 23 percent in the first nine months of last year.Mr. Kelleher has arguably had more of a slog: The fixed-income-trading franchise was more of a mess. And he butted heads with his former co-head of the institutional securities division, Paul Taubman. The latter’s more strait-laced approach did not mix well with Mr. Kelleher more colorful, salesmanlike charm. As with today’s shuffle, Mr. Kelleher came out on top.But Mr. Kelleher’s chances of assuming Mr. Gorman’s corner office are low. Mr. Gorman, an Australian former McKinsey & Company consultant, intends to stay in charge until he reaches 65, the company’s retirement age, in seven years’ time. Mr. Kelleher is a year older than his boss, so he would be more of an interim emergency replacement. That leaves a next generation of potential leaders to groom.Mr. Fleming, 52, may have missed some of the more obvious recent chief executive jobs in the financial industry — assuming he wanted them — such as running Barclays. The board of BlackRock, though, might consider him as a successor to the 63-year-old chief, Laurence D. Fink, with whom Mr. Fleming is close.American Express’s chief, Kenneth Chenault, has been having problems recently. The stock has dropped nearly a third in the last 12 months and attracted the attention of the activist hedge fund ValueAct Capital after losing a big-ticket contract with the retailer Costco. Now on the market, Mr. Fleming may appeal to Amex’s directors as a potential replacement.Some of America’s regional banks may consider hiring Fleming, too. Advising them on mergers and acquisitions was his specialty earlier in his career at Merrill Lynch. With the Federal Reserve now showing more willingness to allow lenders to merge, Mr. Fleming might even be in a position to put his old tricks to use.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.Advertisement