AdvertisementSupported byBreakingviewsBy Jeffrey GoldfarbIn a sense, Blackstone is back where it started. On June 22, 2007, at what turned out to be a market peak, Steve Schwarzman and Pete Peterson took their private equity firm public in a ballyhooed transaction that inspired rivals to do the same. A decade on, the firm’s units are trading just above their $31 price ahead of their New York Stock Exchange debut. A better result over the next 10 years could require Blackstone to financially re-engineer itself.Even including dividends, assumed reinvested to derive a total return, Blackstone’s performance has been just ordinary. At about 7 percent a year since the initial public offering, its stock has fared no better than the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, and at a much higher risk. The firm has roughly $360 billion to deploy into buyouts, real estate and credit on behalf of pension and sovereign wealth funds, and that has historically generated at least twice as much return for the investors in the funds Blackstone runs.And while Blackstone units have outperformed the 1.2 percent total return delivered by shares of the Wall Street blue-chip Goldman Sachs, they’ve badly lagged some best-of-breed money managers, including BlackRock, the mutual and exchange-traded fund behemoth, and Berkshire Hathaway. Warren E. Buffett’s conglomerate makes for an apt comparison in that it’s an investment akin to owning a slice of both Blackstone’s publicly traded units and a piece of each of the companies held by its funds.Inside 32-year-old Blackstone, the stock performance isn’t the main measure of the I.P.O.’s success. Simply going public conferred a certain brand status, particularly overseas. Selling a big slug of the new units to China Investment Corporation also paid off. China Investment gritted its teeth through a share-price decline of nearly 90 percent at one stage and helped Blackstone forge relationships with other pools of capital in the People’s Republic. Over the years, the firm has sold more than $30 billion of its holdings, including stakes in Hilton Worldwide and the European warehouse owner Logicor, to Chinese buyers. And Mr. Schwarzman established a unique scholarship program at Tsinghua University.The units also provided a currency to reward employees and expand the firm. For example, less than a year after the listing, Blackstone used units to help fund the acquisition of GSO Capital Partners, which significantly enlarged its credit-investment arm. Since going public, Blackstone has quadrupled its assets under management while increasing its work force less than threefold, to about 2,100.That’s a measure of the economies of scale Mr. Schwarzman and his right-hand man, Tony James, have produced, with the right people to help them. They’re not alone, though. Over the same span, Larry Fink’s far larger BlackRock has nearly quintupled the amount it oversees, to some $5.1 trillion, with two and a half times the staff, now numbering 13,000.Opening its books to public scrutiny also may have made it easier for Blackstone to get a credit rating. That in turn has allowed it to borrow and to entice incoming fund investors with an extra demonstration of its financial robustness.Nevertheless, it is the stock market perceptions of Blackstone that perplex Mr. Schwarzman, who routinely complains about them. Merely putting its profit on the broad average price-to-earnings multiple would make it a roughly $50 stock, he recently argued. If instead of its recent dividend yield of about 8 percent the units were priced on the S.&P. 500 average payout of a little over 2 percent, they’d fetch over $100 apiece, he claimed. With Blackstone’s current market capitalization at about $40 billion, that would represent a huge markup for investors.Despite years of trying to educate outside investors, and the subsequent I.P.O.s of rivals such as Apollo, Carlyle and KKR, portfolio managers are reluctant to ascribe much value to private equity’s secret sauce, which is generating profit on investments and collecting a cut. Instead, it is steady management fees of 1 to 2 percent on assets that are coveted.This attitude favors investment managers who worry more about gathering assets than making money for those who invest in them. Blackstone did say from the start that its main goal would be making money for limited partners in its funds, a group that includes its own senior people, rather than for investors in the firm’s publicly traded units. The trouble is that when the profit does flow through to unit holders, they don’t value it as highly as they might.Such an unchanging mind-set suggests that if Blackstone is genuinely eager to see its stock rise more strongly in the next decade, it may take more than Mr. Schwarzman thumping the table. One option could be to pay a fixed annual dividend rather than a variable one based on performance. It’s a solution that could perversely mean giving back less to unit holders than the firm has of late, but it might help assuage investor fears about the lumpiness of returns.Any excess funds stockpiled also could be used to buy back units, thus enabling Blackstone, in theory at least, to nudge up their price. One case study is not encouraging so far, though. KKR unveiled such a plan in October 2015 and has not benefited much in terms of its stock price.An even bigger Blackstone makeover might have a greater effect. Converting the firm from a partnership to a more conventional sort of corporation would garner considerable attention. For one thing, it would make its stock eligible for entry into indexes, thus attracting many index-following funds that would be forced to buy them. Investors who are currently put off by the firm’s complex partnership structure and paperwork might consider putting their money into a simpler Blackstone that has shares, not units, and pays regular corporate taxes rather than passing untaxed income through to unit holders.Making such a radical restructuring financially worthwhile, however, could require a reduction in business tax rates in the United States . In one of his other roles, Mr. Schwarzman is serving as a consigliere to President Trump, who says he is eager to cut taxes. The association may provide a modest advantage. More likely, Blackstone and its leadership team will have to find one for themselves.Advertisement