By AMIE TSANGJAN. 6, 2016
HONG KONG — New World Development, a Hong Kong property company, offered on Wednesday to privatize New World China Land, its property developer unit, in a deal worth about $2.8 billion.New World Development is controlled by the family of the Hong Kong billionaire Cheng Yu-tung, which also controls the jewelry chain Chow Tai Fook, one of the world’s largest. It had tried to privatize the property unit in 2014 but failed to gain shareholder approval because of a so-called head-count test, required under a special accelerated buyout process, which takes into account not just the number of shares that are voted but also the number of shareholders voting.New World Development had offered 6.80 Hong Kong dollars, or 87 cents, a share. While holders of 99.84 percent of New World China shares were in favor of the takeover, they constituted only 255 registered shareholders, or 34 percent. The remaining 66 percent of shareholders, with a stake of 0.16 percent, opposed the deal. After the offer fell through, regulations required New World Development to wait 12 months before making another bid for the unit.The new offer for all the shares that the parent company does not already own will not have to pass the head-count test because it is not using the accelerated process. At 7.80 dollars a share — for a total 21.5 billion dollars — the company is offering a premium of 25.6 percent over the closing price of New World China on Dec. 31, its last trading day before shares were suspended in anticipation of the offer.AdvertisementIn a filing with the Hong Kong exchange, New World Development said that New World China would be able to use the parent company’s “greater financial strength” and its “more competitive financing terms for raising bank borrowings” without being subject to the requirements of a listed company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The move also allows New World Development to invest in mainland China through New World China.New World China’s shares jumped nearly 21 percent after the announcement, while New World Development’s shares slipped 4.4 percent.The proposed takeover in 2014 had involved a “scheme of arrangement,” a court-facilitated process that can move faster than a normal buyout. To qualify for this arrangement, a bid needs the support of only 75 percent of the shares but 50 percent of the shareholders voting.AdvertisementAlthough Hong Kong does not use the head-count test, the Cayman Islands, where New World China is incorporated, requires all proposals to be approved by a majority of shareholders.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.