By LESLIE PICKERJAN. 7, 2016
Media General should be familiar with soap operas. The company operates 71 television stations across the United States. But it is having a difficult time climbing out of a particularly tricky mergers and acquisitions love triangle.Six months ago, Media General rebuffed a takeover offer by the Nexstar Broadcasting Group. A few weeks later, Media General opted instead to acquire Meredith Corporation. But Nexstar was not about to let Media General get away, so it made a higher bid in late September, and then a third bid in November, both of which Media General rejected. The last bid, though, intrigued Media General enough that it said it would be willing to negotiate with Nextstar, hinting at a potential future combination.On Thursday, those discussions appeared to reach a point of agreement. Media General said it had negotiated a deal in which Nexstar would acquire it for cash and stock for about $2.3 billion. The transaction includes a so-called contingent value right, or C.V.R., which could give Media General’s current shareholders up to an additional $549 million, after taxes, depending on the worth of Media General’s spectrum in an upcoming auction.But the agreement with Nexstar does not matter yet because Media General is still bound to Meredith. Meredith’s terms prohibit Media General from being acquired until their own merger agreement is terminated.AdvertisementDespite Media General’s efforts to sever ties, Meredith is holding on. Meredith even disclosed its own revised plan, calling for a merger of equals, instead of Meredith as the target and Media General as the acquirer. That arrangement would give Media General cash from the transaction as opposed to using cash to acquire Meredith.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.From a cash perspective, though, Meredith’s offer may not be acceptable. Nexstar is offering $10.55 a share in cash, almost three times as much as the $3.90 a share that Meredith is offering. Both offers contain C.V.R.s with an estimated value up to $4.29 a share.AdvertisementIf Meredith does not agree to terminate its agreement, Media General will ask shareholders to vote on the transaction. If it is struck down, Media General will be able to move forward with Nexstar (and of course, pay a breakup fee to Meredith for all of its pain and suffering).Shareholders of Nexstar and Meredith both seem unhappy with the situation; shares of both companies have fallen. Media General’s stock rose on Thursday.They will all just have to stay tuned.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Media Marriage.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.