By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJAN. 7, 2016
There are big initial public offerings — the $25 billion stock sale by the Alibaba Group, the biggest on record; the $16 billion market debut of Facebook — and then there are really big ones.If Saudi Arabia follows through on its plan to list its state-owned oil producer, Saudi Aramco, as one of the kingdom’s top officials recently told The Economist, it would certainly claim the latter.“This is something that is being reviewed, and we believe a decision will be made over the next few months,” Prince Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s deputy crown prince and one of its most powerful figures, told the publication. “Personally I’m enthusiastic about this step. I believe it is in the interest of the Saudi market, and it is in the interest of Aramco, and it is for the interest of more transparency, and to counter corruption, if any, that may be circling around Aramco.”On Friday, Saudi Aramco released a statement confirming that it the company has been studying options to offer the public an unspecified, “appropriate percentage” of its shares or some of Saudi Aramco’s subsidiaries.AdvertisementIt is difficult to understate just how big Saudi Aramco is believed to be. Its stated oil reserves amount to 261 billion barrels, or more than 10 times those of Exxon Mobil. As the world’s biggest exporter of petroleum, it supplies roughly a tenth of the world’s oil.AdvertisementConsider that Exxon Mobil, the world’s biggest publicly traded oil producer, is valued at just over $320 billion. It’s not hard to believe that Saudi Aramco would be valued at huge multiples of its American counterpart.In the interview with The Economist, Prince Mohammad agreed with the implication that an I.P.O. would be tantamount to a “Thatcher revolution” for Saudi Arabia, referring to the 1980s privatization of a number of Britain’s government enterprises under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.Brent crude, the main international benchmark, was trading around $ a barrel on .
	The American benchmark was at around $ a barrel.
	This is why oil prices have dropped so much since 2014.Just how much Saudi Aramco’s market value would be is up for debate, of course. The Financial Times estimated in 2010 that the oil producer was worth $7 trillion, or approximately 12 Apples now. But The Financial Times’s Alphaville acknowledged in a post on Thursday that the estimate was born of heady times for state-owned energy producers that had gone public — companies whose earnings multiples have since tumbled.Saudi Aramco could be different, of course. It has unparalleled cheap access to the ocean of petroleum that floats beneath Saudi Arabia’s sands.The kingdom could have fetched an even higher valuation for its crown jewel before oil began plunging in price. (Brent crude closed on Thursday just above $33 a barrel.)Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The kingdom would virtually certainly refuse to cede any control over the company if it is listed on a public exchange, which The Economist said would most likely be the Tadawul in Riyadh. While some companies with concentrated ownership have taken a hit on valuation, the biggest such market debutantes, like Alibaba and Facebook, have escaped such a fate.Discussions about Saudi Aramco’s fate appear to be at an early stage. The Economist reports that Prince Mohammad has held two “high-level meetings” to discuss a potential stock sale. And discussions about how such a stock sale would look — whether it would be for some of the producer’s constituent businesses or for its parent company — are still going on.At the least, the world’s biggest banks are undoubtedly salivating at the chance to work on such a big I.P.O., as much to claim credit for a prestigious assignment as it would be for the fees.The company has relationships with many a major bank. Just look at the $10 billion in debt that Saudi Aramco secured last year: Deutsche Bank, JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup were among the underwriters.AdvertisementSurely all of them, and Wall Street’s other top institutions, would compete hard to gain an I.P.O. mandate.A version of this article appears in print on January 8, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Oil Behemoth.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.