By LIZ MOYERJAN. 7, 2016
New York State’s former chief judge has joined the litigation and trial practice of the law firm Latham & Watkins.Jonathan Lippman, who retired last week as chief judge of the state’s highest court, the New York Court of Appeals, is of counsel for the firm, where he started on Monday. The former judge, who is 70, is focusing his advice on New York law and appellate matters as well as continuing his long-standing efforts to expand access to legal services for the needy.During his time on the bench, Mr. Lippman pushed for more free legal services to help the poor in civil cases such as housing disputes, and he urged private practice attorneys to give more free legal advice for the public good.Latham & Watkins, which has 2,200 lawyers in Asia, Europe, the Middle East and the United States, has donated 2.5 million hours in free legal services since 2000, including 100,000 hours last year. In an interview, Mr. Lippman said the global reach of the firm and its emphasis on pro bono work made it “the perfect match for me.”AdvertisementIn New York, where it has 400 attorneys, Latham & Watkins has worked with The Legal Aid Society, New York Legal Assistance Group, Lawyers Alliance for New York, Sanctuary for Families and the Fair Housing Justice Center.Life in a big law firm will be an adjustment for Mr. Lippman, who spent 43 years in the New York State court system in various roles, including staff attorney, administrator and judge. “I don’t believe in taking time off,” he said in the interview.AdvertisementGov. David A. Paterson appointed Judge Lippman as the chief judge of the New York Court of Appeals in 2009. Before that he was presiding justice of the First Judicial Department of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, having been appointed to the position by Gov. Eliot Spitzer in 2007. He was chief administrative judge of the New York State Courts from 1996 to 2007, responsible for overseeing 3,600 state and local judges and a $2.5 billion budget.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.