The former Fox News host says her daily NBC morning show, which starts Monday, is one she was “born to do.” Others aren’t so sure.By JOHN KOBLINSEPT. 21, 2017
Though Megyn Kelly has offered few specifics about what her NBC morning show will be like, she is happy to try a few analogies.“If a news show and a talk show had a baby, that’s us,” she said of “Megyn Kelly Today,” which starts Monday, in an interview from her fifth-floor corner office at Rockefeller Plaza. “It’s newsy, and it’s talky.”Ms. Kelly, the former Fox News prime-time host, then compared her 9 a.m. show to a cocktail.“Hoda and Kathie Lee love wine,” she said, referring to NBC’s 10 a.m. hosts, Hoda Kotb and Kathie Lee Gifford, who are indeed no strangers to wine. “The ‘Today’ show is mostly coffee. I would say if you had to put a drink on my show, it would be a mimosa. There’s stuff that’s a little naughty. Stuff in there that’s good for you. Some stuff in there that’s fun and sweet.“But,” she continued with the following italics certainly emphasized, “with some effervescence.”AdvertisementThe question is, who’s buying?The premiere of the much-anticipated morning talk show effectively begins NBC’s Great Megyn Kelly Experiment. The daily show will be part of the ultra-lucrative “Today” franchise and one that many people in the TV news world are convinced will not work.There are reasons for this: Many TV stars before Ms. Kelly — Katie Couric, Jane Pauley and Anderson Cooper among them — have taken a stab at solo daytime talk shows and failed; Ms. Kelly’s Sunday evening show courted controversy and generated middling ratings; her competition, Kelly Ripa and Ryan Seacrest’s “Live,” is formidable; daytime audiences are significantly more diverse and female-driven than the audience for her Fox News show; and, well, people in the television industry like to sharpen their knives when a big personality tries something new. A recent Vanity Fair article was headlined “Has Megyn Kelly’s Star Already Been Eclipsed?”But Ms. Kelly does not care about the swell of skepticism, certainly not after weathering an election in which she found herself for a time as the No. 1 foil of the man who would become president.“I don’t feel this is a risky proposition, because I know myself and know what I can do,” she said. “And I know that I’m about to launch the show that I was born to do. This is what I was meant to do.”Ms. Kelly, 46, did provide some details about the show. She said she did not plan to talk all that much about politics. Her show will have a mix of celebrity guests — Robert Redford, Jane Fonda, and the casts of “This Is Us” and “Will & Grace” will be on during her first week — along with segments dedicated to what she described as “regular people.” There will be a studio audience of about 150 people.AdvertisementMs. Kelly said she opened a rehearsal show on Wednesday by touching on the earthquake in Mexico City and the hurricane in Puerto Rico before quickly moving on to discuss the open letter that Serena Williams wrote to her mother, which has gone viral.In a recent promo for the show, Ms. Kelly said she hoped NBC’s new 9 a.m. hour would be “fun and uplifting and empowering — that makes people feel fists in the air at the end of it.”Her show on Fox News often felt more like a fist to the face.Ms. Kelly rose to fame — in conservative and liberal circles alike — for her withering cross-examinations of her guests. Her 9 p.m. show was No. 1 in the time slot.But she suggested that the job, toward the end, wasn’t bringing her “joy” anymore. (Over the course of a 40-minute interview, she said “joy,” “joyful” or “joyous” nine times.) Still, Fox News was prepared to pay her more than $20 million a year for the job she wasn’t born to do. NBC also made an impressive offer, somewhere north of $15 million.“If I had sat there saying, ‘I have job security here at Fox News, they’re not going to fire me, they’re going to pay me very well,’ that would have been a decision based on fear,” she said. “Fear of the unknown, fear of failure. And that’s an unhealthy place from which to make any decision.”Though she had a Sunday newsmagazine show in the summer (and that will return next spring, she said), the centerpiece of her NBC deal is the morning show. Her pivot to the daytime format feels like a reboot after years in the political maelstrom, though she will not call it that.“I think it’s the presentation of the whole me,” Ms. Kelly said. “It’s not like I am changing. I’m just sharing more of who I am. My friends and my family would say, ‘You’re going to see the Megyn we know.’ For me, it truly is all about pursuing more joy. That’s the reason we are here.”On a recent appearance on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show,” she got a crash course on what her new life will look like: dancing in the stands, donning a sumo wrestler fat suit, cooking.Ms. DeGeneres is good at producing laughs from her audience. “Megyn Kelly Today” has pledged to do the same.Advertisement“Our viewers at 9 want to be informed, they want to be inspired, they want to laugh,” said Jackie Levin, the executive producer of the show and a “Today” veteran. “I think most importantly people want to laugh a little bit more. That’s what we hope to do.”The competition will be stiff. In the most recent weekly ratings, “Live With Kelly and Ryan” averaged three million viewers, its best viewership in months. And that celebrity-driven morning show has no shortage of stars in the coming weeks, including Harrison Ford, Viola Davis and Kate Winslet.Ms. Kelly acknowledged that ratings were significant (“I understand that this is still a business and the show doesn’t get to stay on the air if it doesn’t rate”) but said she wouldn’t be paying attention to them the way she did with her top-rated Fox News show.After all, she has her dream job now. And why exactly is this her dream job?“It’s because I am a person who is searching,” she said. “And always has been. I am searching for my joy and more love and more wellness. Always have been. Finally my job is going to align with my soul, with my heart, with my reason for being. It’s not going to just be a paycheck because it happens to be something I do well.”A version of this article appears in print on September 23, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘The Show That I Was Born to Do’.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.