By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 18, 2017
The military contractor Northrop Grumman said on Monday that it would buy Orbital ATK, a maker of components for missiles and satellites, for about $7.8 billion in cash, amid a rise in consolidation in the aerospace industry.For aerospace companies, the prospects of combining — and the possible cost savings from doing so — appear to be increasingly attractive. This month, United Technologies said it planned to buy Rockwell Collins for $23 billion, bringing together stables of products that include nearly every part of planes.Under the terms of the deal announced on Monday, Northrop would pay $134.50 for each Orbital ATK share, a 22 percent premium to the closing price on Friday. Including the assumption of debt, the proposed transaction is valued at about $9.2 billion.Buying Orbital ATK would expand Northrop’s presence in the market for missiles and rockets as many countries are increasing their military budgets. The Trump administration has proposed giving the Defense Department tens of billions of dollars in additional funding in the next fiscal year, much of which is expected to survive the budget-making process in Congress.AdvertisementOne of the Pentagon’s priorities is revamping the country’s nuclear arsenal. The missile business is also growing fast, particularly as missile defense becomes a bigger concern for countries around the world.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Northrop, one of the top aerospace suppliers to the American military, has largely shied away from big deals. Its last major agreement was in 2002, when it  purchased TRW for about $7.8 billion.“The acquisition of Orbital ATK is an exciting strategic step as we continue to invest for profitable growth,” Wesley G. Bush, Northrop’s chairman and chief executive, said in a statement. “Through our combination, customers will benefit from expanded capabilities, accelerated innovation and greater competition in critical global security domains.”AdvertisementThe deal is expected to close by July, pending approval by regulators and shareholders.Northrop was advised by Perella Weinberg Partners and the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore. Orbital ATK was advised by Citigroup and the law firm Hogan Lovells.An earlier version of this article misstated when Northrop Grumman bought TRW Inc. It was in 2002, not 2012.Follow Michael J. de la Merced on Twitter: @m_delamerced.A version of this article appears in print on September 19, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Northrop Grumman to Buy Orbital ATK for $7.8 Billion.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.