
Global Manager By                     
SONIA KOLESNIKOV-JESSOP

MARCH 27, 2016
Elim Chew is founder and president of 77th Street, an alternative clothing retailer in Singapore. She sits on more than 20 boards and committees of public service, youth and community organizations.Q. You started your career as a hairstylist and then moved into fashion retailing. What do you remember of the early days?A. I was never academic. I studied hairdressing in London, and when I came back to Singapore I set up a small salon. People liked how I dressed and kept on asking me about my clothes, literally buying them off my back. My sister was still living in London and I would fax her requests — can you imagine, in those days there was no email — and she would send me more stuff. A year after I’d opened my salon, I borrowed some money from my family to open 77th Street, my first shop, and the business grew from there.I was 21 and it was tough. The first time I had to let someone go, my mother asked me, “Who’d fired whom?” because I was crying! It was the school of hard knocks. I’d order, pay, and stock would never arrive. In those days, you didn’t have the Internet, so tracking down companies wasn’t easy.AdvertisementThere were plenty of failures, but I’ve always been a very positive person, and try to see the silver lining. Once I remember we ordered Dr. Martens ladies’ platform shoes in 36-40, and got size 42-46. There was nothing we could do, but then men started to buy those. Another time, we ordered T-shirts that came in a children’s size. Luckily the trend for super-tight T-shirts was starting, so we told the young girls that was the way to wear it.AdvertisementQ. You’ve been a strong proponent of social entrepreneurship. Why?A. When we first made our first $50,000 cash, my sister and I were wondering what to spend it on. Then we heard our pastor say he wanted to raise $50,000 to build six small churches in Gujarat (India). We hesitated a bit but decided to give him the money. A year and a half later, we learned there had been a big earthquake there, but the six churches had not collapsed and had become the help centers for the victims. At that point it hit me that God had a plan for us and that if we were able to provide for people in need we should. So our mission of doing business and doing well is really to provide for others.Today, we still give to our church, but we also put aside money to help as much as we can directly. We have built seven churches in China, we support a home for the elderly, an entire village in Indonesia, and a children’s home for 100 kids in Myanmar. Starting new businesses is really about sustaining what I want to do. You should make money for a purpose.Q. How would you define social entrepreneurship?A. It’s about using a business model to help solve social issues. I do believe you can do well, make money and do good at the same time. With social entrepreneurship you can integrate into your staff disabled people, ex-offenders, single mothers, pay them a fair wage; but it’s not a token hiring. It’s built into the business model.One great example is Dialog in the Dark, by Andreas Heinecke. It offers the experience of daily life in pitch darkness. You have a blind guide who becomes the one who is “able” and you are “disabled.” You need him to take you through daily life, going to the market, crossing the road. You pay for the experience, which is a very impactful one, and it helps provide jobs for the blind. There are a lot of different models.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. What kind of social enterprises have you started?A. Eight years ago, I approached Vivocity (a Singapore shopping mall) and asked them to give me space where I could help disadvantaged people who make handicrafts sell their work during the first and last weekend of the month — because in Singapore, that’s payday and people are more likely to be willing to part with money to buy a little something. I think we all need a space where we can buy, sell and trade.I think that every shopping mall in the world should have this marketplace concept, maybe just two days a month, and allow the marginalized and artisans to showcase and sell their products.More recently I invested into an app called FastFast Delivery. It’s like an Uber for courier service. I got the idea because I sit on many boards, and they need me to sign lots of documents. My staff is always tracking me down, and I thought, wouldn’t it be nice to just have those papers delivered wherever I am that day, and give an opportunity to people who are currently unemployed or maybe retired and need a bit more cash? So I found someone, my co-founder, who could create the platform, and since we launched last August, we’ve had about 900 drivers who signed up. I set it up thinking this would primarily be used by individuals like myself, but what we’ve found is that our top clients are actually hotel concierges and small business, like florists, cookie shops that just want something delivered immediately.Q. What advice would you give to a young social entrepreneur?A. I think today’s young people do have a heart and want to do good, but if you want to succeed that’s not enough. You also need to think through your financial model. So my advice: Before launching yourself into a business, get some experience, do volunteering work. Many youngsters today have been raised on handouts from their parents and they need to build some inner core strength. They can’t take stress, because they’ve never really experienced hardship, they’ve never experienced failure; their parents have always been there to help. To build a muscle you need to train it regularly; it’s the same in business. You will have issues coming your way every day, and that’s something you need to learn to deal with so it doesn’t become stressful.What you learn early on will be valuable lessons. My grandparents owned a dispensary clinic and I was always there, doing magic to entertain people waiting. In primary Grade 4, I started reselling 3-D cards for someone else at school. I’d make about 20-30 percent on each card and I learned to save that money, and then give it away. I think it’s good to let children experience how to make money from an early age and encourage them to give back.AdvertisementQ. You play a role as a mentor to many youngsters. Did you have a good mentor yourself?A. Along my journey I’ve had different mentors, business mentors and spiritual, but the greatest mentor I’ve ever had has been my mom. She always brings me back to ground. She has never been the one who says, “Go for it at all cost.” A couple of years ago, I was working on a big project, I really poured my heart and soul into it and I got played by my partner. I thought about going to court, and then my mom told me, “Let it go, you don’t need it. Even if you win, it’s going to eat you up and I’m just going to lose you as a daughter.” As an entrepreneur I wanted to fight for it, but in the end I let it go.A version of this article appears in print on March 28, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »