By LIZ MOYERJAN. 4, 2016
John M. Angelo, who co-founded Angelo Gordon & Company and helped build it into an investment firm that manages $26 billion in assets, died on Friday. He was 74.The firm’s other founder, Michael Gordon, said in a note to employees that Mr. Angelo had been treated for cancer “for some time.” The firm did not say where he died. He lived in Manhattan.Mr. Angelo began his Wall Street career in 1966 working on the bond floor of the New York Stock Exchange.He then worked for L.F. Rothschild for 18 years, investing the firm’s capital in convertible securities, options, futures and distressed securities, according to a biography on Angelo Gordon’s website. He became a partner at Rothschild in 1975 and vice chairman and a member of its board in 1985.AdvertisementHe and Mr. Gordon founded Angelo Gordon in 1988, focusing on distressed debt investing as well as real estate, credit and other alternative assets.Since 2007, Mr. Angelo had also been a director of the auction house Sotheby’s.A Republican, Mr. Angelo was part of a regular golf group that included President George W. Bush. Mary Pat Christie, the wife of Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a Republican presidential candidate, was a managing director at Angelo Gordon before stepping down last year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.John Michael Angelo was born on June 3, 1941, in Manhattan and graduated from St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y., in 1963. He served in the Army in South Korea,Mr. Angelo and his wife, Judy Hart Angelo, started a program at St. Lawrence allowing students to spend a semester in New York studying and working at internships in finance and the arts. Mrs. Angelo is a songwriter best known for co-writing the song “Where Everybody Knows Your Name,“ the theme for the television show “Cheers.”In addition to his wife, Mr. Angelo is survived by two sons, Jack, a director and writer, and Jesse, the chief executive and publisher of The New York Post; and a daughter, Kate, a television producer and writer.In a commencement speech at St. Lawrence last May, Mr. Angelo advised graduates that even the best trade would eventually become crowded and that profits would fall, forcing people to constantly search for the next opportunity.“In life, you have to keep moving to stay ahead,” he said. “Don’t stand still.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.