By MICHAEL M. GRYNBAUMMAY 4, 2016
On the day that Donald J. Trump became the presumptive Republican nominee for president, NBC came to him.In an unusual move on Wednesday, NBC relocated its flagship “Nightly News” broadcast six blocks north to Trump Tower, where Lester Holt conducted a live interview with Mr. Trump in his 26th-floor executive office.Mr. Holt anchored the rest of the broadcast from the building’s gold-and-marble lobby— a signature Trump tableau — introducing segments about a Canadian wildfire and defective airbags as tourists milled behind him.NBC plans to extend the same offer of broadcasting “Nightly News” from the home or headquarters of the eventual Democratic nominee, a network spokesman said Wednesday night.AdvertisementNews anchors frequently interview presidential candidates in their homes or campaign offices. Earlier Wednesday, Wolf Blitzer taped a conversation with Mr. Trump in the downstairs bar of the Trump Tower atrium, which was broadcast later in the day on CNN.AdvertisementBut few in the industry could recount another instance where an evening newscast — considered the symbol of a network news brand — shifted its entire broadcast to a candidate’s home turf.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Is tomorrow night’s show going to be broadcast from Chappaqua?” Judd Legum, the editor of the liberal website ThinkProgress, wrote on Twitter, referring to the leading Democratic contender Hillary Clinton’s residence. The tweet typified the surprised, and in some cases deeply skeptical, response to NBC’s move on social media, where the role of the television networks in Mr. Trump’s rise is often fiercely debated.In the interview, Mr. Holt congratulated Mr. Trump before peppering him on a range of topics, like his campaign finance plans, whether he was still committed to a temporary ban on Muslim immigration, and his plan to deport undocumented immigrants. (Mr. Trump said he would follow through on both pledges.)Sitting in a spacious office beneath a wall of framed photographs, Mr. Trump said he would run a fair campaign against Mrs. Clinton — if her team reciprocated. “If they treat me properly, I’m going to treat them properly,” Mr. Trump said. “It would be a beautiful thing to see.”Mr. Trump is a big ratings draw for broadcast and cable networks alike, prompting some critics to question the copious amounts of airtime he has received during the campaign. His evening appearance with Mr. Holt was far from his only televised interview on Wednesday. He called in by phone to four separate morning shows before speaking later to Mr. Blitzer and Bill O’Reilly of Fox News, in what amounted to a televised victory lap after his win in the Indiana primary on Tuesday.NBC also announced on Wednesday that Natalie Morales, the “Today’’ show personality, will move to Los Angeles to host the entertainment program “Access Hollywood.” She will continue to appear on “Today’’ as its West Coast anchor.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.