AdvertisementSupported byBy Alexandra Stevenson and Matthew GoldsteinRichard C. Perry, once one of the hedge fund industry’s most successful investors, is shuttering his flagship fund as clients leave after steep losses.His firm, Perry Capital, was founded in 1988 when hedge funds largely were the domain of individuals with vast wealth. It is the latest casualty in a wave of fund closures amid difficult markets and growing investor discontent over high fees and low returns.“The industry and market headwinds against us have been strong, and the timing for success in our positions too unpredictable,” Mr. Perry, 61, wrote on Monday in a letter to investors. The fund will return a substantial amount of its clients’ capital by the beginning of October, while some harder-to-sell positions will be sold over a longer period, he wrote. These include investments in mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.At its peak, Perry Capital managed $15 billion of investor money. In recent years, the firm has not shied away from battles with the United States government over its handling of Fannie and Freddie, and with the governments of Argentina and Greece over their defaulted debt. Last year, however, Perry Capital lost more than 12 percent of its investors’ money, and this year it is down 2.5 percent. The firm shrank to $6.6 billion by the end of last year.Over the firm’s 28 years, it returned an average of about 10 percent a year to investors.As the hedge fund industry has grown, scooping up tens of billions of dollars from public pension funds and endowments, returns have become harder to come by, and the strategies that once reaped big returns no longer do. In the last two years a number of managers who helped define the now nearly $3 trillion hedge fund industry have either thrown in the towel, converted to family offices, or posted lackluster returns.“We are in the first innings of a washout in hedge funds,” Daniel S. Loeb, the founder of Third Point, wrote to investors this spring, describing this as a “catastrophic period” for the industry.The traditional fees hedge funds charge — 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of profits in any year — also have come under pressure. Some firms have found themselves sitting at the negotiating table with investors who have forced them to lower fees and provide more favorable terms.Big-name investors like MetLife, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, American International Group and New York City’s pension plan have withdrawn some or all of their money from firms.Mr. Perry, one of many original hedge fund managers to begin his career at Goldman Sachs, founded his hedge fund with Paul Leff.Performance began to suffer at Perry as Mr. Leff and other senior managers left the firm several years ago.Yet until a year ago, Mr. Perry was still a frequent speaker on the hedge fund and investor conference circuit. In 2015, at the annual Delivering Alpha conference sponsored by CNBC and Institutional Investor, Mr. Perry said he saw investment opportunities in Puerto Rico and was generally bullish on the island’s debt. Puerto Rico has spiraled into a worsening financial crisis since then, defaulting on some payments as the United States enacted a rescue package this summer.Mr. Perry’s firm has been one of the most visible in leading a lawsuit challenging the federal government’s treatment of investors in preferred shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the government-sponsored mortgage finance firms. The government, in return for bailing out Fannie and Freddie during the financial crisis, argued that their private investors were essentially entitled to little or no recovery.Perry Capital and other hedge fund firms have argued that the federal government deprived private investors of billions of dollars in potential profits by taking all of the dividends paid out of by Fannie and Freddie.In his letter, Mr. Perry alluded to the dispute, noting that such longer-term investments “will take time and energy to successfully realize an appropriate result.”Advertisement