By IAN AUSTENFEB. 17, 2016
OTTAWA — Bombardier, the Canadian transportation company, said on Wednesday that it would lay off about 7,000 employees over the next two years, as it struggles to find buyers for a new series of planes that for the first time put it in direct competition with the aviation giants Boeing and Airbus.After a prolonged drought in sales announcements, Bombardier said that Air Canada, which has its headquarters in Montreal, had signed a letter of intent to buy 45 of the new CSeries planes, with options for 30 more. Bombardier expects to start delivering the aircraft within three years and estimated that all 75 planes could cost up to $6.4 billion.The company also reported on Wednesday that its revenue had fallen to just over $18 billion in 2015, from about $20 billion in the previous year. It lost $2.58 a share for the year, compared with a loss of 74 cents in 2014.While the Air Canada sale provided important help for the CSeries, sales of the aircraft remain below levels that analysts generally view as assuring the project’s success. Including the 45 planes for Air Canada, Bombardier now has 288 firm orders.AdvertisementWhile the CSeries airplanes have won praise for their technical abilities, their development has been plagued by delays. That allowed Airbus and Boeing to adapt their smaller airliners to use the unusually fuel-efficient and quiet engine technology that Bombardier had hoped to introduce to the market. The larger companies have also been aggressive in offering airlines deals to keep them from buying Bombardier’s planes.AdvertisementAir Canada has not signed formal contracts for the 45 planes, which will be the larger CS300 version. Neither it nor Bombardier offered details about sales prices, financing or other terms of the sale.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Alain Bellemare, chief executive of Bombardier, confirmed in a conference call with analysts on Wednesday that the first CSeries planes would begin service this year with Swiss International Air Lines, a unit of Lufthansa. But he warned that costs resulting from the move to full-scale production of the airliner would be a drain on Bombardier’s financial performance this year.While there have been concerns that the CSeries program might force Bombardier into a financial crisis, Mr. Bellemare said that a $1 billion investment by the province of Quebec and a $1.5 billion infusion from the province’s pension and investment fund meant that Bombardier now had $6.4 billion in cash.“Our liquidity position will remain strong,” he said.Despite that, Mr. Bellemare also said that obtaining a similar investment from the government of Canada remained “very critical” for the company. Such an infusion, he said, would give airlines further confidence in the future of the CSeries and provide Bombardier with added financial flexibility.While the Liberal government led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has not clearly indicated its plans, the idea of federal assistance to Bombardier is unpopular in Western Canada, partly because no such aid is being proposed for its struggling oil and gas industry.The layoffs will affect Bombardier’s thriving rail operations, as well as its aviation business. The company said nearly half of the announced job cuts would take place in Europe, where nearly 3,400 jobs would be affected. A further 2,800 jobs will be cut in Canada.A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Bombardier to Cut 7,000 Jobs as New Airplanes Struggle.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.