By JONATHAN SOBLEFEB. 15, 2016
TOKYO — When Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan began a campaign three years ago to turn around his country’s economy, he took aim at areas as varied as taxes, trade and women in the workplace. The campaign, given the nickname Abenomics, relied heavily on one strategy: weakening the country’s currency.Initially, it worked, as Japan’s stock market soared and corporate profits rose. But now that weapon is misfiring, and Abenomics may be in trouble.Turmoil in global markets is making the yen rise in value again. That has resulted in big hits to the Japanese stock market and has raised worries among economists that Mr. Abe will not be able to deliver the economic growth his country needs to get back on track.“Abenomics is in danger of falling apart,” said Masamichi Adachi, a former central bank official who is now an analyst at JPMorgan Chase.AdvertisementThe challenge mounted on Monday, after officials said the Japanese economy — the world’s third-largest, after those of the United States and China — shrank more than expected in the last three months of 2015. The economy has now contracted in five of the past 12 quarters, and for all of 2015 it grew an anemic 0.4 percent. Japan will hold elections this summer, putting more pressure on Mr. Abe and his governing coalition to turn around the economy.AdvertisementJapanese officials say they do not manage the currency. But until recently, it was working in Mr. Abe’s favor.
            Japan’s effort to revive the economy has relied heavily on a weaker yen. But the yen is now rising and stocks are falling, complicating the country’s turnaround plan.        The dollar in yen¥80The vertical scale has been invertedto show the rising value of the yen90100110120130’13’14’15’1625,000Nikkei 22520,00015,00010,0005,0000’13’14’15’16FEB. 15, 2016
In the eyes of many Japanese policy makers and business leaders, a weaker yen is a better yen. It makes big employers like Toyota and Panasonic more profitable by inflating the value of their overseas earnings. A weaker currency also drives up the cost of imported goods, but even that can be beneficial: It helps Japan shake off a vicious cycle of falling prices that has led to lower profits and less spending.Currency depreciation goes a long way to explaining how Toyota’s profit in North America rose five times faster than its sales volume from 2012 to last year. Toyota is now on course to become the first Japanese company to earn 3 trillion yen ($26.4 billion) in operating profit this financial year.The currency windfall is a byproduct of Abenomics.The central bank, under Haruhiko Kuroda, the governor Mr. Abe appointed in 2013, has been flooding financial markets with yen by buying vast quantities of government bonds. The explicit goal of the strategy is to make it as easy as possible for people to borrow and spend.An unspoken goal, many economists says, is to weaken the yen. Three years after Mr. Abe took office, the yen had fallen against the dollar by about 40 percent.But growing worries about the global economic outlook have undone some of that weakening. Since December, the yen’s value has risen about 10 percent against the dollar. Investors have flooded into the currency, which they see as a haven for their money.The shift could hurt Japanese companies that have been counting on the yen’s weakness, Mr. Adachi of JPMorgan Chase said. So far, companies have been saving most of their windfalls.Toyota has more than ¥15 trillion in so-called accumulated retained earnings, essentially the profit that a company keeps rather than distributing it to shareholders. Honda has nearly ¥7 trillion, while Canon’s exceeds ¥3 trillion.AdvertisementBut those savings will shrink with a more expensive yen. If it grows too strong, they are likely to start cutting costs — crimping wages and investment, which experts see as vital to helping the economy rebound.The problems are playing out in the stock market, which has been volatile of late.Last week, the Nikkei 225 stock average plunged 12 percent, as the yen strengthened to its highest level in more than a year. It was the worst performance of Japanese stocks since the depths of the global financial crisis seven years ago.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Then on Monday, stocks roared back. The Nikkei gained more than 7 percent, after a reprieve in foreign equity and energy markets on Friday took some of the upward pressure off the yen.The stock surge came despite news that gross domestic product had declined at an annualized rate of 1.4 percent in the final quarter of last year, dragged down by anemic consumer spending and exports. Economists surveyed by Bloomberg News had expected, on average, a contraction of 0.8 percent.Masahiro Ichikawa, a strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Asset Management, said that investors were less concerned about the economy contracting than about what that might mean for the central bank’s stimulus program. The Bank of Japan loosened policy even further last month by announcing that it would cut its benchmark interest rate below zero, joining a group of European central banks that are also struggling with deflation. Now more action is likely, Mr. Ichikawa said.“It’s conceivable that they will push the policy rate even further into negative territory or take some other easing steps,” he said.Some analysts have pointed to the risks of a mutually canceling “race to the bottom” — or even past the bottom — by central banks that are desperate to stimulate their economies. On Thursday, the Swedish central bank lowered its short-term rate to minus 0.50 percent, the same as Japan’s new rate, from minus 0.35 percent.As he looks to revive the economy, Mr. Abe also faces political pressure.Japan’s governing coalition must contend with an election for the upper house of Parliament this summer. Analysts and advisers say Mr. Abe has been counting on public support for his economic policies to extend the coalition’s majority there. The strategy now looks less certain, though it is unclear whether Japan’s weak opposition parties can capitalize on voter disappointment.AdvertisementTheir attacks have focused mostly on Mr. Abe’s hawkish security policies. On the economy, they have offered little in the way of alternatives.In the most recent opinion polls by Japanese newspapers, conducted last month, support for Mr. Abe was around 50 percent, high for a Japanese leader this far into his tenure and well above support for the opposition. But Mr. Abe has since lost one of the most effective spokesmen for his policies: The economy minister, Akira Amari, resigned on Jan. 28 facing accusations that he had taken bribes from a construction company.Government spending was one of two areas that made a positive contribution to growth last quarter, according to the economic report on Monday. The other was business investment, which increased by an unexpectedly strong 1.4 percent from the previous quarter — though that is an area that is often subject to significant recalculations in revised G.D.P. reports.Naohiko Baba, an economist at Goldman Sachs in Tokyo, said that the government, which is heavily indebted, could be tempted to raise spending as well as to endorse more printing of the yen by the central bank. Mr. Abe, he said, was “increasingly likely to face pressure to prepare additional fiscal stimulus ahead of the July upper house elections.”Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 16 about the state of the economy in Japan misstated what trends in the value of the yen might encourage Japanese companies to cut costs, wages and investments. That could be a result of a stronger yen, not a weaker one.Hisako Ueno contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Abenomics Hits a Wall.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.