
Global Manager By                     
NAZANIN LANKARANI

FEB. 14, 2016
Vincent Perriard  has been chief executive of the Swiss watch brand HYT (Hydro Mechanical Horologists) since it was founded in 2012.Q. What is your family background?A. I was born in Lausanne, Switzerland, into a very traditional family. My mother was a homemaker and raised three boys. My father was a surgeon.Q. Did you have an entrepreneurial streak as a child? A. Not at all. As a teenager, music was very important to me. My first real job — one with a paycheck — was at a Swiss radio station. I worked as a DJ from age 12 to 23. In fact, with a couple of friends, we founded two small radio stations at the time. By age 21, I realized I would never be able to make a serious living and support a family as a DJ. But I had no clear idea what to do.Q. Was education important in your career?A. To be honest, I was always a bad student. My goal from the outset was to work and get hands-on experience. I did not attend a formal university after high school. Instead, I signed up for a training program at a Swiss business school. Not a prestigious program, more of a practical degree for those looking, for instance, for a basic job in banking.AdvertisementAfter completing that program, I took a job at Trimedia, an advertising company. I was intrigued by the advertising world and decided to try that path. They offered me a poorly paid internship in New York for a year. I sold my car and everything else I owned in Switzerland and accepted the internship. It was a great experience.AdvertisementI never thought that education would bring much to me. Not having impressive diplomas has never been a problem. Of course, a good résumé is important, but my personal strength has always been in the face-to-face interview. That is where you can project your passion and energy.Q. At 46, you are a young chief executive, but this is your fourth time around in that role.A. I actually feel quite old. The first time I was C.E.O. was at Brand DNA, a company I founded in 2000 with two partners. I was 31 then, and managing 15 people.Later, in the watch industry, I held different positions, and became C.E.O. of the Concord brand at age 37. That brand had completely faded out and I took it over with a team of six and rebuilt it from scratch. After that, I became C.E.O. of TechnoMarine, another watch brand, in 2009. In 2012, I took my current job at HYT. I manage 44 employees in Switzerland and Singapore.Q. How did you land your current position?A. In 2010, the three founding investors of HYT were looking for a C.E.O. They were from different backgrounds, medical, automobile and finance, and none of them was familiar with the watch industry. Their idea was to create a watch brand whose concept was to integrate liquids into mechanical watches.It sounds like a completely paradoxical notion but, as it turned out, while at Concord I had experimented with the crazy idea of liquids and mechanics in a watch. The C1 Gravity Tourbillon was a model in which we had encapsulated a liquid to display the power reserve. That model had won the top design prize at the Grand Prix d’Horlogerie de Genève in 2008. The HYT investors noticed my profile. Suddenly, I was sexy to their eyes.Q. It sounds like you have taken paths that have opened up for you rather than traced them deliberately yourself.A. That is absolutely the case. Instinct has guided me, mostly. I never had a specific career target. But I have also never shied away from risk. My motto has been, if you think it is the right idea, go for it. That has always worked for me.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Q. With HYT, have you stepped into unknown territory?A. It is unknown territory for our team every day. That can be very exhausting. There are days when I think I would prefer to manage a conventional watch brand that makes purely mechanical movements. I would know what to expect. But when innovation is the DNA of your brand, you have a different responsibility, and that is to come up with new ideas constantly. The biggest thing that motivates me is making the competition irrelevant. I love that we strive to be different in concept, design and marketing.AdvertisementQ. Does that explain why the word most often associated with you is “disruptive?” A. Disruptive is a word I love. I actually associate it with that extraordinary advertising man, Jean-Marie Dru, who came up with the concept in advertising and branding. Disruption is about doing something completely unexpected. Dru’s book on the subject has had a great influence on my vision in the business world.I try to be the same way in life. In fact, I am launching a new radio station this year with a group of friends. It is purely passion-driven. Some may even say it is completely disruptive.Q. How do you reconcile being C.E.O. of a young company and the father of five boys? A. This may sound old fashioned, but it is all about teamwork. Family is my first priority. My youngest, a set of twins, are only three years old. During the week, I typically work 14- to 15-hour days. When I get home, I spend a little time with my family and usually work late into the night. But I don’t work on weekends. That is sacred family time, unless I am traveling.Managing work and family is a question of organization for my wife and me. Family is like a team, everyone must be happy for it to work.Q. What’s the best advice you have ever received?A. Nicolas Hayek, the chairman of the Swatch Group, told me something about 25 years ago that I did not quite comprehend then. He said there are three important things when managing a brand: the product, the product and the product. A marketing strategy or advertising campaign can only create a context, but what is crucial is for the product to be outstanding. Only now do I understand what he meant.Q. What is the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. A great leader stands out because of natural charisma. There are many good leaders with great résumés and sharp minds, but to be a great leader, you need charisma and superior emotional intelligence.Q. What advice would you give a young person?A. Younger people are too concerned with getting the right first job and building a résumé. When you are young, you must travel the world, discover different cultures, try new things and make mistakes. Life passes quickly; it is best to make your mistakes early on. My advice would be not to linger in the same job for very long. Do not see your résumé as the end-all and be-all of your career. Go, change, move!A version of this article appears in print on February 15, 2016, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »