By NELSON D. SCHWARTZJAN. 3, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO —  When pundits and presidential candidates talk about inequality and the tiny sliver of the population whose fortunes have soared, they often drop names like Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, Sheldon Adelson and Mark Zuckerberg.But those are just the most visible members of a larger but less-talked-about cadre of the big winners in today’s economy. This group consists of roughly 250,000 Americans who mainly populate the executive offices and managerial suites of major companies and financial institutions, along with a smattering of top law firms, hedge funds and other elite aeries.These people — the top one-quarter of 1 percent of the country’s employed population — have enjoyed explosive gains in income and wealth in recent decades, even as salaries and wages stagnated for the typical American worker.“You hear about C.E.O.s, entertainers, athletes and hedge funders, but that’s the tip of the iceberg,” said Nicholas A. Bloom, a professor of economics at Stanford who is finishing a paper examining the underlying dynamics of income inequality. “It’s a much, much bigger group and they are outpacing everyone else.”AdvertisementLike those of many of his peers who are presenting new research at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association, which began here on Sunday and ends on Tuesday, Mr. Bloom’s findings are bringing to light fresh perspectives on why income inequality is growing and how it is reshaping the national and global economy.AdvertisementWhile the much-talked-about 1 percent is doing just fine, the supersize gains are taking place even further up the income ladder, according to what Mr. Bloom and four colleagues found by examining 35 years of data from the Social Security Administration.The phenomenon is not limited to Wall Street or the big banks — manufacturers rewarded their top executives every bit as generously as did firms in the finance, insurance and real estate sectors. And this pattern is being repeated in countries where the political landscape is quite different from that of the United States, like Sweden, Germany and Britain.“This is a truly global phenomenon, and I don’t know any serious economist who would deny inequality has gone up,” said Mr. Bloom, a native of Britain whose politics veer toward a laissez-faire approach and the Conservative Party there. “The debate is over the magnitude, not the direction.”The economic association’s meeting is something of a barometer of what concerns economists most, drawing more than 13,000 attendees from the ranks of academia, as well as research groups and the private sector. And in panels, research presentations and speeches, what was once mainly a preoccupation of ivory tower Marxists and other players on the margins of the profession is taking center stage.“In the last few years, there’s been a huge change in the mainstream of the profession,” said Steven Fazzari, an economics professor at Washington University in St. Louis who first came to the conference as a job-hunting graduate student in 1982. “The issue of income inequality was a backwater in the economics field, and it was largely ignored.”At the same time, there’s a growing consensus among economists of all ideological stripes that inequality is growing — in the United States and abroad — even if the usual political fault lines appear when the discussion turns to the consequences of the trend and whether new public policies are needed to address it.“It’s pretty much indisputable that the percentage of income being earned by the top 1 percent, or the top quarter of 1 percent, is going up,” said Richard H. Thaler, the association’s president.Advertisement“It was true five years ago, but it was not as widely recognized,” said Mr. Thaler, a behavioral economist who teaches at the University of Chicago. “As with climate change, scientific consensus takes a while to build.”And, to borrow language from an economic seminar, there’s also a striking correlation between the emergence of income inequality as an issue here and the near-rock-star status accorded a handful of once-obscure experts on the subject inside and outside academia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The best known of these is Thomas Piketty, whose 700-page tome, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century,” became an improbable best-seller in 2014 and made the French academic a media superstar.Emmanuel Saez, an economist at the University of California, Berkeley, who has collaborated with Mr. Piketty, won a MacArthur “genius” grant in 2010. Raj Chetty of Stanford, who has looked closely at economic mobility, also received a MacArthur grant and has presented findings to Hillary Clinton, Jeb Bush and Obama administration officials.“There are definitely fashions in the field,” said Dean Baker, co-director of the left-leaning Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington. “As much as most economists might hate to acknowledge it, there’s no way you can’t respond to Piketty’s success.”Anticipated presentations at the economic association meeting include new findings from David Autor, an influential M.I.T. economist, on the links between college performance and increased financial aid as well as research by Enrico Moretti of Berkeley into how state tax increases prompt the highest earners to move to lower-tax locations.For all the intense focus on the roots and extent of income inequality today, most academics are leery of any easy solution. At the same time, they acknowledge that their traditional tools are inadequate for the task.“There’s no reason the free market will solve this,” Mr. Bloom said.He believes inequality is being magnified by technological change and what’s known as skills bias, where workers with a particular expertise reap the biggest reward. Neither is amenable to quick fixes.In Professor Bloom’s new paper, which he wrote with David J. Price, a Stanford graduate student, and three other economists — Jae Song, Fatih Guvenen and Till von Wachter — the top quarter of 1 percent of Americans appears to be pulling away from the rest.AdvertisementFor workers at this threshold, who earn at least $640,000 annually, their salaries rose 96 percent from 1981 to 2013, after taking account of inflation.The trend was especially pronounced among the most successful enterprises in the American economy, creating a divergence between the highest-paid people at companies that employ more than 10,000 people and the rest of the work force. In this rarefied circle, overall pay jumped 140 percent versus a 5 percent drop for the typical employee at these corporate behemoths.The split in compensation between executives and everyone else was much less pronounced at smaller companies, according to the research by Mr. Bloom and his colleagues. At these firms, between 1981 and 2013, top salaries rose 49 percent, while median pay rose 30 percent.In addition, Mr. Bloom and his team also found a sharp divergence between pay at the most successful companies and also-rans in the same field — think Apple versus BlackBerry. The highest-paid workers cluster at the winners, heightening income disparities in the overall work force.Mr. Bloom traces the outsize gains to large grants of stock and options to top workers at big companies, with their fortunes rising in line with the performance of the stock market.“There used to be a premium for working at a big company, even in a lower-level job,” he said. “That’s not true anymore. The people who have really suffered are lower-level employees at big companies.”A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Economists Take Aim at Wealth Inequality.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.