AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberMichael E. Schroeder, the manager of the company that purchased The Las Vegas Review-Journal last month, who became the focus of intense scrutiny after the sale, is no longer involved with the newspaper.Mr. Schroeder, the publisher of small newspapers in Connecticut, is no longer the manager of the News & Media Capital Group, the company through which the billionaire casino mogul Sheldon Adelson and his family bought The Review-Journal for $140 million, a spokesman for Mr. Adelson confirmed on Monday.“Mr. Schroeder has, and will have, no continuing role with regard to The Las Vegas Review Journal,” Mark Fabiani, the spokesman, said in an emailed statement.The news that Mr. Schroeder had been removed as manager of the paper was first reported by The Review-Journal.The revelation came just hours after the staff of The Review-Journal met with David J. Butler, the executive editor of The Providence Journal, who was brought in by management to discuss guidelines on how to cover Mr. Adelson and his corporate interests, according to a reporter at the meeting. The Providence Journal and The Review-Journal are managed by GateHouse Media, a subsidiary of the New Media Investment Group.One editor, Stephanie Grimes, tweeted during the meeting that Mr. Butler said he was concerned about the paper looking like it was “out to get our owner.”She also tweeted that Mr. Butler said:Reached by text, Mr. Schroeder referred questions to Mr. Fabiani.The identity of The Review-Journal’s buyer had been kept private for several days after the sale was announced on Dec. 10. But Mr. Schroeder’s name was listed in documents for the ownership company, which was incorporated in Delaware in September, and he was introduced to the newsroom as the company’s manager.The lack of transparency prompted the paper’s staff — and journalists from news organizations across the country — to look closely at Mr. Schroeder and his possible connections to the Adelson family.On Dec. 18, The Review-Journal reported that, when Mr. Adelson was in talks to buy the newspaper, its journalists were asked to observe three local judges. One was Elizabeth Gonzalez, who is handling a lawsuit filed in 2010 against Mr. Adelson and his casino company by a former employee.At the end of November, an article that was critical of Judge Gonzalez appeared in The New Britain Herald, one of Mr. Schroeder’s Connecticut papers. The article, which carried the byline Edward Clarkin, also ran in another of Mr. Schroeder’s papers, The Bristol Press.No one named Edward Clarkin lives in Connecticut, according to public records, and the article appeared to use fabricated quotes. The Review-Journal subsequently reported that Mr. Schroeder’s middle name was Edward, and his mother’s maiden name was Clarkin.Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting.Advertisement