AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.33 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.47 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.24 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Elk River, Minn., Independent School District No. 728, $50.3 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $65.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Denver County, Colo., $115 million of wastewater management revenue bonds. Competitive.Hot Springs, Ark., School District No. 6, $76.5 million of general obligation limited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Pender County, N.C., $50.5 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $87.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.California Public Works Board, $147.4 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Maryland Department of Transportation, $693 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Metropolitan Transportation Authority, N.Y., $131.9 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.Olympia, Wash., School District No. 111, $60.7 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.South Broward, Fla., Hospital District, $151 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.North Texas Municipal Water District, $327.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Alameda County, Calif., $97 million of Joint Power Authority lease revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Alaska Pension Obligation Bond Corporation, $2.4 billion of pension obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Ascension Senior Credit Group, $615.1 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Baltimore County, Md., $53.8 million of revenue refinancing bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Bridgeport, Conn., $65 million of general obligation bonds. William Blair & Company.Butler County, Ohio, $210 million of hospital facilities revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.California Health Facilities Financing Authority, $675 million of Cedars-Sinai Medical Center revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Chicago Park District, $102.6 million of general obligation limited and unlimited tax bonds. Cabrera Capital Markets.Colorado Regional Transportation District, $197.4 million of sales tax revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Comal, Tex., Independent School District, $51.7 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $109 million of revenue bonds. B. C. Ziegler & Company.Conroe, Tex., Independent School District, $191 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Crawford County, Pa., Hospital Authority, $75.7 million of Meadville Medical Center Project hospital revenue bonds. BB&T Capital Markets.Denver, $273.9 million of convention center hotel revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.El Camino Healthcare District, Calif., $93 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.El Paso Community College District, Tex., $120 million of combined fee revenue improvement bonds. Raymond James.Fulton County, Ga., Project Development Authority and the hospital authorities of Clarke and Fayette Counties, Ga., $429 million of Piedmont Healthcare revenue bonds and revenue anticipation certificates. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Grand River Dam Authority, Okla., $459 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Illinois Finance Authority, $195 million of revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.Kentucky Economic Development Finance Authority, $123.4 million of revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. B. C. Ziegler & Company.Maricopa County, Ariz., $69.6 million of Kyrene Elementary School District No. 28 school improvement and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority, $120 million of Lifebridge Health Issue debt securities. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $131 million of University of Massachusetts, Boston, Student Housing Project revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Michigan Finance Authority, $296.1 million of clean water revolving fund revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Mississippi Development Bank, $66.2 million of special obligation bonds. Raymond James.Nashville and Davidson County, Tenn., Health and Educational Facilities Board, $140.5 million of taxable revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Nebraska Investment Finance Authority, $71 million of single family housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New Hampshire Health and Education Facilities Authority, $64 million of Southern New Hampshire Medical Center revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.New Hampshire Health and Education Facilities Authority, $150 million of Elliot Hospital Issue revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.New Hope Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $150 million of Texas A&M University Cain Hall Redevelopment Project Phase II debt securities. Piper Jaffray.New Jersey Transportation Trust Fund Authority, $2.8 billion of federal highway reimbursement revenue notes. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority, $68.3 million of single family mortgage program Class I bonds. RBC Capital Markets.North Slope Borough, Alaska, $91.7 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Ohio, $61.5 million of higher education facilities revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Ohio, $64.6 million of Adult Correctional Building Fund Projects capital facilities lease appropriation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.Ohio, $162.1 million of Case Western Reserve University Project higher educational facility revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Orange County, Calif., Community Facilities District No. 2016-1, $93.4 million of Esencia Village special tax bonds. Piper Jaffray.Oregon Facilities Authority, $90 million of Samaritan Health revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Phoenix Industrial Development Authority, $92.5 million of legacy traditional schools educational facilities revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.Raleigh, N.C., $177.1 million of combined enterprise system revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Salem, Ore., Hospital Facilities Authority, $195 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.University of Texas Board of Regents, $190 million of revenue financing system bonds. Morgan Stanley.Virginia Transportation Board, $317.1 million of federal grant anticipation revenue notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Advertisement