JAN. 3, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.17 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.49 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.14 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:MONDAYFlorida Department of Transportation, $173.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.WEDNESDAYMassachusetts School Building Authority, $150 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.THURSDAYCouncil Rock, Pa., School District, $60 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Grand Prairie, Tex., Independent School District, $98.2 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementONE DAY DURING THE WEEKChippewa Valley, Mich., $65 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.Collin County, Tex., $159 million of Allen independent school district building bonds. William Blair.AdvertisementEscambia County, Fla., $51.8 million of sales tax revenue bonds. Raymond James.Kansas University Development Corporation, $333.2 million of debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $66 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New Jersey Health Care Facilities Authority, $200 million of health care system debt securities. Wells Fargo Securities.Orange County, Calif., $334.3 million of taxable pension obligation bonds. Stifel Nicolaus.South Carolina Public Service Authority, $382 million of tax-exempt revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Tallahassee, Fla., $150 million of health facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America.Texas University, $200 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America.Texas University, $250 million of revenue financing bonds. Bank of America.Volusia County, Fla., $75.5 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Raymond James.Ysleta, Tex., Independent School District, $235 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Piper Jaffray.A version of this article appears in print on January 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.