AdvertisementSupported byBy Patrick J. LyonsCharles L. Schultze, an economist who was President Lyndon B. Johnson’s budget director and President Jimmy Carter’s chief economic adviser, died on Tuesday at his home in Washington. He was 91.His death was announced by the Brookings Institution in Washington, where he was a research scholar for 45 years.Mr. Schultze spent nearly his whole career working on national economic and fiscal policy, either from the inside as a government economic adviser or from the outside as a university professor and research fellow.He came to be regarded as a leading expert on the workings of the federal government and its budget. He is credited with devising a powerful new way of analyzing the effects of the federal deficit on the larger economy. But he often met with frustration in persuading political leaders to act on his advice.Charles Louis Schultze was born across the Potomac from Washington, in Alexandria, Va., on Dec. 12, 1924. A 1942 graduate of Gonzaga College High School in Washington, he was at Georgetown University when he interrupted his education to enlist in the Army in 1943. He served for three years in the infantry and was awarded a Purple Heart and Bronze Star. After his service, he finished his bachelor’s degree at Georgetown and earned a master’s there as well, both in economics.While pursuing advanced degrees, he worked for the Democratic National Committee and then in a succession of government posts, including a stint at the Korean War-era Office of Price Stabilization. He was awarded a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Maryland in 1960. His doctoral thesis and much of his early research was on the causes of inflation.Mr. Schultze served on the staff of the Council of Economic Advisers from 1952 to 1959, then left to teach at Indiana University. It was there that he wrote that the best way to gauge the effect of a fiscal policy — say, a given rate of taxation and spending — was to ask not what size budget surplus or deficit would actually result, but rather what the outcome would be if the economy were running at, or nearly at, full employment.Mr. Schultze’s ideas explained why the Kennedy administration’s tax policies, including tax cuts, were stimulating the economy even though they were also shrinking the deficit, which in those days most economists took as evidence of the opposite effect.He showed that the policies had stimulated new investment and employment fast enough to more than make up the federal revenue lost in tax cuts, an effect they would not have had if the economy were already healthy and unemployment were low.President John F. Kennedy responded by hiring Mr. Schultze as deputy budget director. He was promoted to run the Bureau of the Budget by President Johnson in 1965. At one point he was criticized as having helped Robert S. McNamara, Johnson’s secretary of defense, obscure the rising costs of the war in Vietnam in the 1967 federal budget.In 1968, the year the Republicans retook the White House, Mr. Schultze returned to teaching and became a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, the liberal-leaning research and policy studies organization.President Carter chose the blunt, gregarious Mr. Schultze for chief economic adviser at the beginning of his administration in 1977, a time when economic stagnation and high inflation were among the leading political issues.Mr. Schultze quickly assembled an economic stimulus plan. But nearly all his proposals for fighting inflation were blocked on political grounds, and he found himself on the losing side of arguments within the administration over energy, farm policy and other economic issues.Returning to Brookings after Mr. Carter failed to win re-election, Mr. Schultze wrote frequently on budgetary and economic issues. When President Ronald Reagan’s policy makers asserted in the 1980s that steep tax cuts would once again stimulate a big increase in total federal revenue, Mr. Schultze called their argument “nonsense” and a misreading of his work during the Kennedy years.He also backed the use of statistical sampling methods to reflect hard-to-count population groups in the 2000 census.Mr. Schultze was president of the American Economic Association in 1984 and had been a senior fellow emeritus at Brookings since 1996. He wrote numerous articles and books at Brookings, including “Memos to the President: A Guide Through Macroeconomics for the Busy Policymaker” (1992). He was a frequent contributor to The American Economic Review.Mr. Schultze married Rita Irene Hertzog in 1947. She died in 2014. He is survived by their daughters, Karen Hoffman, Lynn Jones, Kathleen Schultze, Carol Kasunic and Mary Chris Weintrob; a son, Kevin; 16 grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.Asked in the 1960s, when he was budget director, what he did in his spare time, Mr. Schultze said: “Sleep. With six kids and a house to take care of and some reading to do, there isn’t much time left for anything else.”But he did take time out in 2007 to make a guest appearance on “Da Ali G Show,” the HBO series hosted by the comedian and actor Sacha Baron Cohen. Gamely playing straight man to Mr. Baron Cohen’s clueless suburban would-be gangsta rapper, Mr. Schultze patiently explained why currency does not come in denominations of, say, $22.56; that there was no particular “bestest” personal identification number to use with a bank account; and that “buying low and selling high” in the stock market had nothing to do with artificial stimulants.“Don’t be high when you’re buying and selling stock,” Mr. Schultze advised.Advertisement