
Advertising By                     
JANE L. LEVERE

OCT. 23, 2016
James Corden, host of “The Late Late Show” on CBS, sits at a table in the woods, enjoying a meal prepared by the world-renowned chef Mads Refslund and discussing Mr. Refslund’s planned restaurant in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.The concept, Mr. Refslund tells him, is fire and ice and taking cooking “back to nature.” At the end of the meal, Mr. Corden says to Mr. Refslund: “How do I pay for this? Do we barter like the old days?”Mr. Refslund says the meal they just shared is free, then adds that Mr. Corden, who has pulled out his Chase Sapphire Reserve credit card just in case, will “probably” have to pay when he dines at the chef’s restaurant.The scene is from a new marketing campaign, to be introduced on Monday, for the credit card. Created with the agency Droga5, the campaign includes three videos featuring Mr. Corden interviewing innovators in the restaurant, transportation and lodging fields. The series is called “Reserve What’s Next.”AdvertisementJPMorgan Chase introduced the credit card in August. Demand for the card — which has a $450 annual fee and offers a 100,000-point sign-up bonus, as well as triple points for dining and travel purchases worldwide — was so great that Chase received tens of thousands of applications within the first few days. The bank says demand for the card has remained steady since.AdvertisementKristin Lemkau, chief marketing officer of JPMorgan Chase, who declined to say how much the marketing campaign cost, said it was aimed “at travelers interested in what’s next in travel,” who could include, but are not necessarily, millennials.“Millennials do travel differently,” she added. “What’s different is they’re the first generation that can find anything on Google, including travel. They clearly like experiences more than stuff. They clearly want to make their own decisions about everything, including travel. It’s more fun to post a picture of a fish taco or of a sunset over a beach than of a new couch.”Droga5 enlisted David Gelb, director of the documentary “Jiro Dreams of Sushi” and the Netflix series “Chef’s Table,” to film three videos, each three to five minutes long and featuring a different innovator. These include Mr. Refslund, a founder of the Copenhagen restaurant Noma, which is often at or near the top of lists of the world’s best eateries. The second video, shot in Knoxville, Tenn., features the team at Local Motors, an open-source community of car designers and fabricators. The third video will feature someone from the lodging industry.Ms. Lemkau said Mr. Corden was given “general guidelines” for his conversations with the innovators. “The whole reason we chose him was because he would be hilariously entertaining unscripted,” she said.The videos will run through the end of the year on Meridian, a travel content site started this month by Vox Media in partnership with Chase; they will also run for an extended time on Chase.com and YouTube. In addition, 15- and 30-second versions of the videos will run through the end of the year on all Condé Nast digital sites, as well as on Time Inc. sites like those for Food & Wine and Travel & Leisure magazines.All videos will carry the card’s tagline: “Travel’s changing. Carry the only card designed to stay ahead.”Dan Coates, president of YPulse, a youth marketing research firm, said Chase was “getting a lot of things really right” with the campaign.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The focus on experience is really important for millennials, post the Great Recession,” Mr. Coates said. “In the ’90s, conspicuous consumption via luxury products was acceptable, but with the rise of the Great Recession, millennials developed a case of affluence guilt. Showing off what you own has been replaced by sharing what you do, since sharing experiences is much more egalitarian.”AdvertisementTravel in particular “is the most attainable experience for millennials,” he said. “When we ask them what they’re saving money for, travel is at the top of their list every time.”Mr. Coates praised the documentary style of the new Chase campaign, noting that its behind-the-scenes approach appeals to millennials, who “love to geek out over things, digging into the process behind the product.”He warned, however, that the card might encourage users to accelerate spending to earn more rewards, thus potentially increasing the debt load of a generation already struggling with student debt.For his part, Mr. Corden said he was thrilled to use the card.“Obviously, travel has just always been a huge part of my life,” he said. “And it won’t come as a shock to tell you that eating has been a huge part of my life. So anything that combines a bonus for both of those activities is great for me.”As Mr. Corden’s profile has grown in recent years, he has appeared in ads for Apple Music and, in Britain, for Cadbury and Confused.com, an insurance comparison website. His first spot, made in 1998 for Tango, a British soft drink, was banned shortly after its release after critics complained that it encouraged bullying.“I don’t imagine that’s going to happen with the Chase stuff,” he said.A version of this article appears in print on October 24, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Chase Whets Appetites for Travel.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »