AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinIt is no secret that Megyn Kelly played a role in Roger Ailes’s ouster as the chief executive of Fox News after she, and others, accused him of sexual harassment.But in her new book, “Settle For More,” which will be released on Tuesday, Ms. Kelly, the Fox News anchor, suggests that by making her allegations known to 21st Century Fox — in a phone call to Lachlan Murdoch, the executive chairman — she may have ensured that the investigation into Mr. Ailes’s behavior was a genuine one that he was not able to impede.The day that the former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson filed her lawsuit, 21st Century Fox, Fox News’s corporate parent, vowed to conduct an “internal review.”But in the book, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, Ms. Kelly writes that she heard that Mr. Ailes was “working to limit the review to just a small circle of staffers — those who had worked directly with Gretchen.”“He wanted the net cast very narrowly to exclude virtually all of the Fox News talent,” she continued. “I knew what that would likely mean.”The implication was clear: She feared that it would not be a rigorous review and that Mr. Ailes would not be held accountable for his actions.Up until that point, Ms. Kelly had resisted a campaign within Fox News to publicly support Mr. Ailes. But after hearing that the investigation may be limited to Ms. Carlson’s staff, she had a decision to make about whether to be proactive.“The choice became clear: honor my ethical code, or abide by my loyalty to Roger,” she writes. “There was no way to do both.”Ms. Kelly writes in the book that she had repeatedly been sexually harassed by Mr. Ailes years earlier. He commented on her appearance and asked about what he imagined to be her “very sexy bras.” After she rebuffed his advances to kiss her at one point, he asked her what she described as an “ominous question: ‘When is your contract up?’”Ms. Kelly writes that she was at her home on the Jersey Shore in July — she does not specify the date — when she decided to come forward. She called Lachlan Murdoch and requested that he get a “general counsel” on the line. She detailed her harassment allegations, knowing that the information would be “damaging” to Mr. Ailes, she writes.“In the end, however, I concluded that if Roger were taken down by an honest review of his conduct, it would be his responsibility, not mine,” she continues.She writes that within days of her call — without specifying the date — 21st Century Fox announced that “it had hired” the law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison to conduct the investigation.The firm’s involvement became public on July 11 — five days after Ms. Carlson filed her lawsuit. In addition to Ms. Kelly, other current and former Fox News staff members made allegations of sexual harassment to the firm’s investigators. Ms. Kelly said she became aware of “many other victims” including “some women who were still being harassed by him in deeply unsettling ways.” Mr. Ailes’s departure became official on July 21.“The scope of the investigation was decided and set before anyone at the company or its law firm spoke to any colleagues,” a spokeswoman for 21st Century Fox said. “Any and all of the evidence that this inquiry received is confidential, and the identity of any colleagues who provided information will remain so.”Susan Estrich, a lawyer for Mr. Ailes, declined to comment. A representative for Ms. Kelly also declined to comment.The book’s publication comes at a delicate time: Ms. Kelly’s contract is set to expire in the middle of next year and it is an open question whether she will remain at Fox News.In the book, Ms. Kelly said she was happy that the Murdochs “acted quickly and honorably” during the Ailes investigation.“Despite Roger’s attempts to prewire it, the Paul, Weiss review was not a whitewash,” she writes. “They were genuinely searching for the truth. When they found it, they knew Roger had to go.”Advertisement