
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

APRIL 4, 2017
Fox News has entered the spin zone.Mercedes-Benz, Hyundai and BMW are among the companies pulling ads from “The O’Reilly Factor” in the face of a scandal involving the popular host Bill O’Reilly. The cost to the parent company, 21st Century Fox, is low for now. A toxic culture, however, can damage long-run efforts to broaden consumer appeal.The lucrative cable news network with conservative tendencies is once again the story. The primary architect of Fox News, Roger Ailes, left as chairman last year, ending a two-decade run, after allegations by Fox News host Gretchen Carlson that Mr. Ailes sexually harassed her. Six months after the company apologized and settled with Ms. Carlson, The New York Times reported over the weekend that Mr. O’Reilly and Fox made payments totaling $13 million to five women to settle claims regarding unwanted advances and other inappropriate behavior.The list of O’Reilly refuseniks may grow. The controversy arises just as advertisers are raising concerns about their brands appearing with inappropriate material on Google and its video site YouTube — and withdrawing their ad dollars. It would take a major boycott to eat into Fox’s top line, though. Fox News typically dominates evening programming. In February, for example, nearly three million people tuned in, compared with 1.2 million at CNN and 1.5 million for MSNBC.It could become a bigger problem, however. Cable news has been enjoying a renaissance since President Trump entered the political realm a couple years ago. To keep the momentum going, however, the networks will have to find younger viewers. The median age of a prime-time Fox News viewer in 2015 was 68, according to Nielsen, older than at both its main rivals.James and Lachlan Murdoch, the mid-40s children of Fox’s chairman, Rupert Murdoch, have been given the job of making the company live up to the 21st-century moniker. They were involved with the departure of Mr. Ailes, their father’s longtime lieutenant. Fox News also has urged employees to come forward with concerns about unseemly behavior and has retained a law firm, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, to conduct a review.The situations involving Mr. O’Reilly and Mr. Ailes make the job harder for the younger Murdochs. Like Uber, Travis Kalanick’s ride-hailing company, which is confronting a backlash because of its frat-house culture, Fox may be endangered by similar threats. Audiences and advertisers may be changing faster than Fox can keep up.Jennifer Saba is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »