By MARY WILLIAMS WALSHJAN. 23, 2016
SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico — Negotiations to restructure roughly $9 billion of the debt of Puerto Rico’s power company collapsed late Friday, according to a statement from a group of creditors involved in the talks.The creditors blamed the utility, the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, or Prepa, for the collapse of the talks, saying its officials had decided to let an expiration date pass without taking action. Prepa is one of the largest single issuers of Puerto Rico’s $72 billion debt, most of it in the form of municipal bonds.The creditors’ statement was released at midnight, when the expiration date had passed. The statement did not say whether the creditors would now declare Prepa in default. If they did so it would be by far the largest and most momentous default in Puerto Rico’s growing debt crisis.Prepa has a debt payment of about $400 million due to bondholders on July 1. It also owes about $700 million to two financial institutions that finance the shipments of fuel that it burns to produce energy. The utility does not currently have the resources to make those payments.AdvertisementOne person with knowledge of the utility’s side in the talks said that despite the expiration, Prepa was still willing to keep the negotiations going. The person said the talks broke down because the creditors attempted to impose a new requirement in exchange for granting more time.AdvertisementThe negotiations have been underway since 2014, when Prepa ran into trouble making its payments, and creditors agreed to refrain from enforcing their claims. As part of their forbearance agreement, they allowed Prepa to dip into prepaid reserves to make bond payments, something that could otherwise be considered an event of default.In September 2015, the parties reached a tentative debt-exchange agreement, in which about 70 percent of the creditors agreed to exchange their existing Prepa bonds for new bonds, with a face value 15 percent less.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But before the deal could proceed, the Puerto Rico legislature had to approve it, and some lawmakers argued that Prepa and its creditors were rushing to close the deal before the island’s new public utility commission had a chance to properly review it.The creditors had expected the legislature to approve the deal in a special session in December. When that did not happen, they said they would wait until Jan. 22, and they offered $115 million to help finance Prepa while the legislature considered an enabling bill.But with the deadline looming this week, lawmakers said they were still not ready to vote on the agreement. One person familiar with the legal requirements said the creditors were willing to wait until February, but the new public utility commission was more likely to need until May. The debt exchange would have required Prepa’s first increase in its base rate for power since 1989. The public utility commission is so new it has never been through a rate-setting process before.The Prepa creditors’ statement said, “It was our desire to be as supportive of the legislative process as possible,” and added that the creditors found it “extremely disappointing and perplexing that Prepa has chosen to take this stance.”They said they remained open to resuming negotiations.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.