By JAD MOUAWADAPRIL 6, 2016
The Justice Department said on Wednesday that United Airlines had dropped plans to buy extra landing and takeoff rights at Newark’s airport from Delta Air Lines, a deal that antitrust regulators opposed last year.The airlines’ agreement was made unnecessary last week, when the Federal Aviation Administration said it would soon lift landing and takeoff restrictions altogether at Newark Liberty International Airport.Those rules, which limit operations at 81 takeoffs or landings per hour, were originally imposed in 2008 to reduce congestion and delays. But the F.A.A. said that an improvement in conditions at Newark would allow it to remove the restrictions in October.United has long been criticized for underutilizing slots that it holds in order to preserve its market-leading position. United controls more than 70 percent of capacity and flights at Newark, a position that no other airline has at its biggest hubs.AdvertisementIn November, the Justice Department said it was challenging the deal between United and Delta because of United’s dominance in Newark, which resulted in some of the highest fares in the nation because United extracted what the government called a “Newark premium.”AdvertisementThe Justice Department said travelers would benefit from expanded competition at Newark.“United has used its slots monopoly to dominate air travel in and out of Newark,” Bill Baer, the assistant attorney general of the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division, said in a statement. “The F.A.A.’s action opens up Newark to more robust competition and achieves the very outcome we sought in litigation: protecting consumers from United’s plan to enlarge its monopoly at Newark.”The F.A.A. limits landing and takeoff rights at a few airports where demand is higher than the capacity to handle traffic. Similar restrictions remain in effect at New York’s other big airports — Kennedy and La Guardia.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.By lifting the slot restrictions in Newark, the F.A.A. said last week that it expected more efficient use of existing airport terminals and runway capacity, and increased access to Newark and the New York City area, as well as more competition and service from new carriers.Airlines such as Southwest and Virgin had long complained that they could not get the access they wanted in Newark.A United spokesman said Wednesday that its original plans to acquire the extra slots in Newark had been “in the public’s interest.”“We are disappointed that the F.A.A.’s decision may undo United’s significant efforts to minimize congestion-related passenger delays at Newark, and we fear that the already-strained New York air space will be further exacerbated,” United said in a statement on Wednesday.United said last year that it planned to move out of Kennedy because it had failed to make a profit there for seven years, focusing its West Coast flying out of Newark, by planning to lease slots from Delta in Newark in exchange for slots at Kennedy.A version of this article appears in print on April 7, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: An F.A.A. Rule Change at Newark Will Loosen United’s Grip.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.