By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 18, 2016
Thrive Capital, which gained fame with early investments in technology darlings and then began incubating businesses like health insurers, is about to become bigger.Thrive plans to announce on Monday that it has raised $700 million for its fifth fund, pushing the firm’s overall size to just under $1.5 billion.Over its six years, Thrive has become a quiet force in venture capital. At its helm is Joshua Kushner, the younger son of a New York-area real estate family — his brother is Jared Kushner, who leads the family business and is the son-in-law of Donald J. Trump — who has carved his own path.Mr. Kushner, who began investing while at Harvard Business School, left Goldman Sachs soon after arriving to focus on his venture endeavor, which became Thrive.AdvertisementSince its founding, the firm has invested in number of businesses, including the computer code repository GitHub, the fitness class discounter ClassPass and the men’s grooming start-up Harry’s.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Even at its bigger size, the firm does not plan to change its investment strategy. Its focus will remain getting into start-ups early, as it did with the photo service Instagram — Thrive invested in Instagram just days before it sold itself to Facebook for about $1 billion in 2012 — the eyeglasses seller Warby Parker and the video-game spectator site Twitch.AdvertisementBut the firm also intends to keep its options open, with the potential for investing in later-stage start-ups. Among the so-called growth stage companies it has invested in are the payments processor Stripe and the chat software company Slack.Thrive will also continue to build and nurture homegrown businesses, a roster that includes Oscar, a health insurer.“We are humbled by the entrepreneurs that we work alongside,” Mr. Kushner said in a statement. “We are also mindful that we are only as good as our next at-bat.”A version of this article appears in print on July 19, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Tech-Focused Firm Raises $700 Million for Fifth Fund.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.