AdvertisementSupported byBy Nelson D. SchwartzKarl E. Case, an economics professor at Wellesley College who helped revolutionize how home prices are tracked by real estate professionals and home buyers alike, died on July 15 in Wellesley, Mass. He was 69.Mr. Case had Parkinson’s disease and multiple myeloma and died in a hospice near his home, his wife, Susan, said.While the daily ups and downs of prices for stocks and bonds have long been easy to obtain and analyze, the housing market was much more opaque when Mr. Case teamed up in the 1980s with a Yale economist, Robert Shiller, to develop an economic model to track home values.The two collected information like the price of the same property over time as it changed hands, and tweaked the data to account for reliability and other quirks. This created what has become the benchmark for gauging the value of the single biggest investment most Americans own: their home.The Case-Shiller Index charted the remarkable rise of housing prices in the bubble that preceded the Great Recession, its subsequent bursting, the sharp declines in 2008 and 2009, and the slow but steady recovery in the real estate market since then.Both men warned before the recession that the housing market was getting ahead of itself. Mr. Case presciently sounded the alarm about the danger posed by rising subprime borrowing in the decade before the financial crisis.“He was more connected to the business world than most academics,” Mr. Shiller said in an interview. “He also talked to people in the real world, like home appraisers, in order to isolate data for housing prices, which wasn’t easy.”Karl Edwin Case, who was known as Chip, a childhood nickname, was born in New York City on Nov. 5, 1946, the son of Karl Case, a banker, and the former Lillian Collier, a homemaker.Mr. Case graduated from Miami University in Ohio in 1968 with a bachelor’s degree in economics and then spent three years in the Army, running field hospitals in Vietnam at the height of the war there.He met his future wife, Susan Galbraith, when the two were undergraduates at Miami. They married in 1969.In addition to his wife, an education consultant, Mr. Case is survived by a daughter, Kristen Case, an English professor at the University of Maine at Farmington; a half brother, George Calnan; and two grandchildren.Mr. Case began teaching at Wellesley after earning a doctorate in economics from Harvard in 1976. His focus on housing was propelled by the real estate boom in the Boston area in the 1980s as computer companies there, like Digital Equipment Corporation and Data General, prospered, foreshadowing the current boom in Silicon Valley and other tech-driven areas.Mr. Case was introduced to Mr. Shiller by Sharon M. Oster, a Yale economist and colleague of Mr. Shiller’s. The two men found they had complementary interests that would prove useful as they developed and expanded their index.Mr. Shiller had studied bubbles in the bond and stock markets; Mr. Case was an expert on taxes and incentives, as well as low-income housing.As they developed their model for broader use, Mr. Case and Mr. Shiller also showed that housing prices were not necessarily rational. Like the prices of stocks, home values are susceptible to momentum and human impulses like fear and greed.In 1991, the two worked with Allan Weiss, a management consultant who had studied with Mr. Shiller at Yale, to develop their model commercially. They sold it to Fiserv in 2002. Mr. Case retired from teaching at Wellesley in 2010.From tracking four cities, the Case-Shiller data has expanded to cover dozens of cities and thousands of ZIP codes, as well as providing national benchmarks.Their creation is now produced by Standard & Poor’s and CoreLogic and is known as the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices.“What Case and Shiller put together is really the gold standard for price changes in the housing market,” Edward Glaeser, a professor of economics at Harvard, said in an interview. “It has the beauty of being both transparent and reliable.”Advertisement