
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA

NOV. 11, 2016
Donald J. Trump’s election as the next president risks turning an era of mega-mergers into one of deal breakups by command.Mr. Trump, a self-described deal maker, has already railed against AT&T’s planned $85 billion merger with Time Warner, wants to rip apart the merger of Comcast and NBCUniversal and may have a beef with large banks. Corporate chieftains may have to delay their imperial ambitions.The next commander-in-chief’s campaign rhetoric may, of course, be just that; his apparent lack of ideology makes it impossible to divine. And much of his ire was focused on the media, whose coverage he both craved and loathed. For example, he described Time Warner, the owner of CNN, and its plans with AT&T as a “power structure” rigged against him and voters and promised that his administration would not approve the deal “because it’s too much concentration of power in the hands of too few.”The nation’s big banks also do not get much Trump love. He aims both to get rid of the changes introduced in the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul and to reintroduce Glass-Steagall, the Depression-era law that kept commercial and investment banks apart. His transition website states: “The big banks got bigger while community financial institutions have disappeared at a rate of one per day.”AdvertisementHe is not the only one who says the current pace of corporate tie-ups should be stopped. Higher prices and fears about many assets in various industries being owned by just a handful of companies fed not only Mr. Trump’s campaign but also that of Senator Bernie Sanders.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The biggest sign of whether Mr. Trump’s intent will turn to action will come when he anoints the new heads of the Justice Department, the Federal Trade Commission and the Federal Communications Commission. All three play roles in reviewing deals. The litigious Mr. Trump could nominate aggressive regulators who are not afraid of bringing anticompetitive lawsuits or being challenged in courts by companies seeking to merge.He may not stop at denying or reversing big deals, either. Mr. Trump singled out the e-commerce retailer Amazon as having a “huge antitrust problem.” The company’s founder and chief executive, Jeff Bezos, also owns The Washington Post, which has been highly critical of the president-elect.AdvertisementPresident Obama’s merger reviewers have hardly been slouches. They are challenging Anthem’s purchase of Cigna and Aetna’s bid for Humana. If Mr. Trump’s campaign remarks are any indication, his picks could be even bigger deal slayers.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »