By NEIL GOUGHJAN. 22, 2016
HONG KONG — Surging Japanese shares led a strong rebound in markets across Asia on Friday, and Europe had its second consecutive day of gains, as investors buffeted by days of volatility saw opportunity amid the recent sell-offs.Oil was sharply higher, too.After mild gains on Wall Street on Thursday, Japan’s benchmark Nikkei 225 index staged a forceful rally, closing 5.9 percent higher. It was the biggest single-day increase in Japanese shares since September.Analysts said that, in addition to a push from bargain-hunting traders, Friday’s rally could also have been driven by hopes that major central banks, including those in Japan and Europe, would soon roll out economic stimulus efforts.“The general background is the expectation for monetary easing,” said Takuya Takahashi, a senior strategist at Daiwa Securities in Tokyo. “We saw a rise today because the market is just speculatively expecting the Bank of Japan, along with the central government, will take some action.”AdvertisementEuropean stocks had risen on Thursday after the president of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, said there “were no limits” to steps the bank would take to further stimulate the eurozone economy. He signaled that new measures could come as soon as March.European stocks continued their rebound on Friday, with the FTSE 100 share index in Britain rising 3 percent through early afternoon. The regional Euro Stoxx 50 index was up 2.4 percent. Futures activity pointed to a strong opening on Wall Street when trading begins in New York.AdvertisementEarlier, the Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong closed 2.9 percent higher, while Shanghai stocks rose 1.3 percent.Global markets have been under pressure this year. Increased uncertainty over the health of China’s economy and the plummeting price of oil have fed concerns that the world economy could be on shakier ground than it appeared.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In response, professional money managers have been converting more of their investment portfolios to cash, regarded as a safer but lower-return investment than stocks or bonds, according to a survey published this week by Bank of America Merrill Lynch.But the rebound on Friday in Asia suggested that buyers have not been lurking too far from the action. Many assets that have been pummeled in recent sessions got an end-of-the-week reprieve from investors.Oil continued its minirally, with futures contracts for Brent crude, the international benchmark, trading 7 percent higher at $31.27 a barrel. Futures for West Texas Intermediate, the American benchmark, also rose for the second day in a row, climbing about 6 percent to $31.26, putting it above $30 for the first time in a week. But analysts cautioned that the global glut, which has punished oil prices in the last year, is likely to continue for months to come.The yield on United States Treasury securities, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, rose moderately — signaling a slightly improved appetite for risk among investors.Hisako Ueno contributed reporting from Tokyo.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.