By NICOLA CLARKJAN. 21, 2016
Pearson, the troubled British publisher, said on Thursday that it would eliminate 4,000 jobs worldwide as part of a continuing restructuring by the former owner of The Financial Times and The Economist to shift its focus primarily to its international education business.The move comes as Pearson, which makes the bulk of its sales from its educational-testing activities in the United States, warned of weaker profit as an improving American job market slows college enrollments. That, by extension, has slowed demand for its textbooks and standardized testing services, which are the most commonly used for higher education admissions in the United States. The group also pointed to falling university enrollments in other major English-language markets, including Britain and South Africa.“Our competitive performance during the last three years has been strong, but the cyclical and policy-related challenges in our biggest markets have been more pronounced and persisted for longer than anticipated,” said John Fallon, Pearson’s chief executive.“Faced with these challenges, we are today announcing decisive plans to further integrate the business and reduce the cost base, rationalize our product development and focus on fewer, bigger opportunities,” he said.AdvertisementUnder the leadership of Mr. Fallon, Pearson has moved swiftly over the past year to divest itself of its newspaper publishing assets and to reinvest the proceeds in its core education activities. The group reached a deal in July to sell The Financial Times to the Japanese company Nikkei for $1.3 billion, which was followed a month later by the sale of its 50 percent stake in The Economist Group.AdvertisementPearson is also expected to eventually dispose of its 47 percent stake in the trade book publisher Penguin Random House, although Mr. Fallon has said that this was unlikely before 2017. According to a 2012 agreement with the German media group Bertelsmann, which owns 53 percent of Penguin Random House, Pearson has the right to sell the stake back to the German group as early as this year.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Pearson said it expected to absorb around 320 million pounds, or about $450 million, this year in costs linked to the reorganization, which will include combining its education and professional testing activities in North America, as well as efforts to consolidate some back-office activities like finance, human resources and information technology. Such measures are expected to generate savings of about £350 million by 2017, the company said.Pearson said it expected the job cuts, which represent roughly 10 percent of its global work force, to be fully put in place by the end of this year.The group also lowered its forecast for 2015 operating profit to about £720 million, or 69 pence to 70 pence a share, from a forecast late last year of 70 pence to 75 pence a share.For the current year, operating profit is expected to fall to £580 million to £620 million, excluding planned restructuring costs, the company said.A version of this article appears in print on January 22, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Pearson, Shifting Business Focus, Will Cut 4,000 Jobs.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.