
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

APRIL 5, 2016
Calpers is learning that social responsibility can have a cost.The $290 billion California Public Employees’ Retirement System, or Calpers, may reinvest in tobacco stocks after a report found that exiting the sector cost it $3 billion in potential investment gains over 15 years. There’s more to the idea than higher returns, though. Engaging financially with controversial companies can be a better way to effect change.Getting rid of any stake in the tobacco industry looked like the right thing to do back in 2001. It also seemed a smart investment move: The share prices of cigarette manufacturers were listless, and the sector’s prospects looked grim. A wave of health-related litigation was cresting, and it would ultimately cost the industry billions of dollars.Tobacco groups have been adept at managing decline, however. Aggressive cost-cutting, overseas growth and higher prices have helped the likes of Altria and Reynolds American increase their stock prices some 400 percent – including reinvested dividends – since Calpers kicked the habit, according to Thomson Reuters data. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index returned just 60 percent over the same period.The cost of lost opportunity is all the more painful given the pension fund’s recent lackluster performance. Calpers generated a mere 2.4 percent return in the fiscal year ended last June, far short of its 7.5 percent target.AdvertisementThat highlights how hard it can be to square the desire to do good with the duty to serve clients’ best interests. There are other reasons, however, for fund managers to rethink policies banning investments in tobacco makers, gun manufacturers, fossil-fuel companies and the like.Divestment just isn’t very effective. For every socially minded seller, there’s usually a buyer willing to put aside scruples and gain the influence that can come with a financial stake. As a result, companies in suspect industries may feel free to resist calls for reform.AdvertisementCalpers is considering changes to its divestment policies across the board, and has not yet made any final decisions. It seems, though, to have realized that staying invested is often a good way to maximize both social and financial gains.Kevin Allison is a columnist at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »