By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSJULY 22, 2016
United States markets crept higher on Friday, the latest nudge forward for a market that has taken a decidedly slow and steady path to new highs in recent days. Industrial stocks had the biggest declines, while telecoms rose.KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day up 0.3 percent and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index gained 0.5 percent. The Nasdaq composite index gained 0.5 percent.ANOTHER MILD ONE It has been a calm drive the last two weeks for the S.&P. 500, where mostly modest moves have helped set a series of new highs culminating in the high of 2,173.02 set on Wednesday. The S.&P. 500 has yet to have a day where it moved 1 percent, up or down, in the last two weeks.Many doubts still hang over the market, including a continued drop in corporate earnings and an economy that is growing only modestly. Various earnings and economic reports have come in better than expected, however, and the S.&P. 500 is up more than 8 percent since June 27.AdvertisementIt has been a sharp turnaround from the end of June, when worries about the British vote to leave the European Union prompted swings of at least 1 percent in the S.&P. 500 over six consecutive days.ANALYST’S TAKE “I think people are a little more sensitized, where any tick lower in the market creates this ‘buy-on-the-dip’ mentality,” said Brian Jacobsen, chief portfolio strategist at Wells Fargo Funds Management. “I think it’s interesting; a half-a-percent move down feels like a 5 percent move.”AdvertisementBIGGER WAVES AHEAD? Next week could be more exciting for markets, with the Bank of Japan and Federal Reserve both holding policy meetings. Record-low interest rates and big stimulus programs from central banks have pushed stocks higher since the financial crisis.Japan’s economy is barely growing, and economists are speculating about whether its central bank may provide more stimulus next week.The American economy is in better shape than other advanced economies, and few expect the Federal Reserve to make a big move at its meeting. But if it highlights the better-than-expected recent economic reports, economists may move up their predictions for when the Fed could next raise interest rates.HONEYWELL SLUMPS Honeywell International stock fell 3 percent to lead industrial stocks lower. The company reported stronger earnings than analysts had expected, but it also lowered its forecast for full-year sales.STRYKER DOWN Shares of the medical device maker Stryker fell 5.3 percent after the company gave a forecast for earnings in the current quarter that was lower than analysts had expected. Stryker’s stock was up more than 30 percent for the year before the report.
            Position of the Dow Jones industrial average at 1-minute intervals on Friday.        18,58018,54018,500Previous close18,517.2318,46010 a.m.Noon2 p.m.4 p.m.JULY 22, 2016
POWERED UP Stanley Black & Decker shares rose 4.9 percent after the company reported stronger revenue and earnings for its last quarter than Wall Street expected. It benefited from stronger tool sales in Europe and elsewhere.AdvertisementRISING Shares of Southwestern Energy rose 9.8 percent. It was the first day of trading for Southwestern, a producer of natural gas and oil, after it reported higher-than-expected earnings and raised its forecast for production this year.ALIGHTING American Airlines stock climbed 3.4 percent after the company reported a milder drop in quarterly earnings than analysts had expected. The carrier’s revenue fell 4 percent because of the soft global economy, among other factors, but Wall Street had forecast a steeper drop.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.EUROPEAN MARKETS European markets were mixed after reports suggested that countries that use the euro were proving resilient to the uncertainty surrounding Britain’s vote. A report on business in Britain was “truly horrible,” according to one economist, and it raised expectations of more central bank stimulus there. In Germany, the DAX lost 0.1 percent and in France, the CAC 40 rose 0.1 percent. The FTSE 100 was up 0.5 percent in Britain.ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 slumped 1.1 percent in Japan after the Bank of Japan governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, was quoted ruling out direct cash injections to the economy. In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng lost 0.2 percent. The Shanghai composite index slid 0.9 percent in China. The Kospi edged down 0.1 percent in South Korea. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 lost 0.3 percent. Southeast Asian markets were down.OIL United States crude shed 90 cents, to $43.85 in New York. On Thursday, it sank $1. Brent crude, the global benchmark, lost 93 cents, to $45.27, after falling 97 cents on Thursday.CURRENCIES AND BONDS The pound sank against the dollar on expectations of more stimulus from the Bank of England. It fell to $1.3101 from $1.3203. The dollar ticked up to 106.21 Japanese yen from 105.86 yen, and the euro dipped to $1.0965 from $1.1013. Bond prices fell. The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 1.55 percent.A version of this article appears in print on July 23, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: S.&P.; Edges Higher, Setting Yet Another Record.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.