AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Lisa Borders, president of the W.N.B.A., was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in Atlanta, and I was part of the civil rights era. I helped integrate an independent school in 1969. It was a difficult time, not only for Atlanta but for the country.There were only two African-Americans in my class, and by the time I finished, I was the only one. And kids are cruel. They say things that, as adults, we might find very offensive. Kids don’t know any better.I remember going home and telling my parents that I was being called names, and that I didn’t want to go to school there anymore. And my mother said, “It’s the best school in this state. You need the best education. You’re a woman, you’re African-American. You need every advantage, and it starts with an education.”My parents were unwilling to compromise, and they said: “This is a good life lesson for you, because everybody’s not going to be nice to you. They might not outwardly call you names, but they also might not help you.”The exposure of going through high school as a minority has really helped me navigate life because I’ve often been in situations where I’m the only woman or the only person of color. And it is not always comfortable, but I’m always able to do it because I learned to do it at a very young age.Sounds like a tough period in school. How did you muscle through it?I focused on my work. My parents told me that results matter and that the way to have people appreciate who you are as a person is not by looking at the color of your skin. If you do the work and you deliver results, people have to acknowledge that, so then it becomes a fact. It’s not your opinion or their opinion about what’s good or not good. If you achieve at a high level, then it’s irrefutable and undeniable.I’ve worked in the public, private and nonprofit sectors, and people tend to confuse activity and results. At the end of the day, results are what really matter, not activities. And so I’m very focused on tangible outcomes.How else did your parents influence you?My mom always laid down the laws, and you did not deviate. She’d say, “Never get chalk on your shoes.” When I first asked her what that meant, she said: “There’s a right way and a wrong way to do everything, and there’s a chalk line down the middle. If you get chalk on your shoes, you are much too close to the line.”How has your leadership style evolved over the years?When I started out, I was command and control — do as you’re told. Now it’s about appreciating that you have two ears and one mouth: You should listen twice as much as you talk. Empowering and enabling people is far more compelling, and the results are always much better.When you empower people, they develop their skills, and then they become your trusted allies to go out into the world and do whatever it is you’re trying to do. It probably took me 20 years to learn that. I got written up so many times for not delegating responsibility and not training others. They’d do it and then I’d do it again. So I would do twice as much work and couldn’t figure out why I was exhausted.But I learned to relax a little bit. See one, do one, teach one — it’s how they teach in medicine. I learned to apply that rubric to business, and it has worked incredibly well for me. Nobody gets anywhere by themselves, and you have to learn to trust.How do you hire?I’m always looking for the opposite of what I am, for the most part. I think so many of us, because of unconscious bias, hire people who look just like us, who have the same skills that we do, to complement us. That’s not a complement at all. That’s a duplicate. So I am often looking for the person who can complement the skills I already have.What specific questions do you ask?I ask people what they want to be when they grow up, and what’s the path to get there, to see how they think about the growth pattern for them. I often ask for them to give me an example of a project that they worked on and what the result was — what the problem was, what did they recommend, what the result ultimately was and what was the impact to the organization.What are you working on to be a better leader?I’m working on patience. That’s the weakest link in my character. I often am very hard on myself. I’m not hard on my people, but I’m really hard on myself, and I think it’s born out of how I grew up. The expectations were high.What career and life advice do you give to new college grads?Be true to yourself. It’s hard to do that when you’re young. I think none of us is confident enough when we’re young. We’re trying to prove something to somebody, to a parent, to a significant other. It’s very hard to have the courage of your convictions when you’re young. So to a young person, I would say, be true to yourself.To a person changing careers, my advice to them is that failure’s not fatal — it’s feedback. As an elected official, twice successfully and once unsuccessfully, I learned far more from not becoming mayor of Atlanta than I did being vice mayor for seven years.I wasn’t supposed to be the mayor. If I had been, I would not have been available when the job at Coca-Cola, as head of global community affairs, became available.If I hadn’t taken the Coca-Cola job, perhaps I wouldn’t have traveled the world and been exposed to so many people and so many cultures in a multinational organization. And then I would not have the breadth of experience to bring to the W.N.B.A. Everything happens for a reason.Editors’ note: The interview was conducted before W.N.B.A. players were fined by the league for wearing T-shirts during warm-ups meant to raise awareness about shootings of black men by the police and about the shootings of police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge, La. The league rescinded the fines on Saturday. Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement