AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressSEATTLE — Starbucks reported higher sales over the holiday season, and said $1.9 billion had been loaded onto the chain’s gift cards, but its outlook fell short of Wall Street expectations.The company said on Thursday that sales rose 9 percent in the United States, its flagship market, and 8 percent globally during the final three months of the year. The increase at home and abroad was the result of a mix of higher customer traffic and increased spending.Starbucks said one in six American adults received a Starbucks gift card over the holidays, up from one in seven a year ago, and one in eight two years ago.An online uproar after Starbucks unveiled minimalist red holiday cups bearing only its logo did not apparently hurt results. In past years, the company’s holiday cups were decorated with reindeer, snowflakes and Christmas ornaments.Its performance overseas was not as strong, slowing in the units encompassing Asia and Europe. In the unit that includes Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Starbucks said sales rose 1 percent at established locations, down from 5 percent in the prior quarter. The company noted there was a “dramatic decline in consumer and tourist activity across Western Europe” after the terrorist attacks in Paris in November. “We have quite recently begun to see the effects of that region’s resilience and recovery,” the company said in an email.For its Asia region, Starbucks said sales rose 5 percent, down from 6 percent the previous quarter. The company said it did not expect a material impact from the attacks this month in Indonesia, which resulted in temporary store closures.During a conference call with analysts on Thursday, Howard Schultz, the chief of Starbucks, expressed confidence in the company’s long-term investment in China, where it already has about 2,000 stores and plans to have 3,400 by 2019.Back home in the United States, Starbucks has been pushing up revenue by rolling out pricier drinks like a flat white option and more food choices. It said sales of breakfast sandwiches were up 40 percent during the quarter from a year ago.The company apparently has not been affected by unseasonably warm weather, which hurt retailers that sell items like winter coats. Starbucks sells both hot drinks and cold drinks.For the current quarter ending in April, Starbucks expects its earnings per share to range from 38 cents to 39 cents. That is below the average analyst estimate of 40 cents a share, according to FactSet. The company expects full-year earnings in the range of $1.87 to $1.89 a share, compared with the FactSet estimate of $1.89 a share.Shares of Starbucks fell 4.6 percent to $56.32 in after-hours trading.For the quarter that ended Dec. 27, the company earned $687.6 million, or 46 cents a share. That was a penny more than Wall Street had expected.Total revenue was $5.37 billion, short of the $5.38 billion analysts had forecast, according to Zacks Investment Research.Advertisement