
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
FEB. 26, 2016
This interview with Kamakshi Sivaramakrishnan, founder and C.E.O. of Drawbridge, a cross-device advertising platform, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up in Bombay, which is now called Mumbai. Education was always important in our family. I remember my mother saying often that if you study hard and do well, then you should achieve the success that you desire.There was a natural proclivity to mathematics in our family, going back for generations, with a lot of accountants and civil servants. But there is zero entrepreneurial background. I never had a lemonade stand. All I wanted to have was a stellar academic career. And that stayed true through the course of my education, including in the U.S. for my advanced degrees. The fields that I chose were some version of applied mathematics for engineers.My parents inspired me to pursue higher education, but at some point, the choices I was making appeared to them to be one challenge after another along an uncharted course. I remember my father asking, “Is there a reason that you don’t choose something that is considered to be normal? You’re always sort of moving toward the most challenging path, and not one that has been charted by us. We are not able to help you.” But it felt like a natural path to me.AdvertisementI became an entrepreneur probably by accident. As you pursue a Ph.D., you’re an innovator, and that process is something I was constantly seeking. Being an entrepreneur is more about creating impact.Back to your father’s point about your choices. Why have you always picked the more difficult path?It has always been appealing to me. I do not like the beaten path, even in the personal choices that I made. I met my husband at grad school, we fell in love, we married. But in my family, you’re encouraged to follow the norms of an arranged marriage. I grew up having broken pretty much every rule in the book that I was given as a young woman or as a child.I even left a fairly comfortable position at Google to start this company. There’s an innate desire in me to pursue what I feel is right for me at the time. And it doesn’t come from any kind of rebellious streak as much as it comes from a sense of conviction that I believe in this and I want to pursue it.I was encouraged by my mother to not pay attention to the fact that I’m a female pursuing paths that probably not many women take. Sometimes she jokes, “I wish I hadn’t empowered you that much,” because I’m on this path she barely recognizes.AdvertisementWhat are some lessons you’ve learned since starting your company?As an entrepreneur, you’re wearing so many different hats, particularly in the early days. So the better you are at multitasking, the more comfortable you’re going to be. As I was growing up, I was involved in so many different extracurricular activities, including music and fine arts. I learned the art of dabbling in multiple pursuits, and doing them semi-seriously, including playing in concerts. That has helped me in many ways with what I do today.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Tell me more about your leadership style.The one thing that has remained consistent is that I’ve always respected people who lead from the front. A sense of empathy is extremely crucial to being a good leader. And it comes much more naturally if you’ve walked in their path.The best way to inspire respect in people is when you can do what they’ve done or when you’re in the trenches with them. You can’t do that every minute of every day, but that is certainly something that I have respected in strong leaders.I’ve also learned a lot about setting expectations. Entrepreneurs are very ambitious and can have an acute sense of the success and goals they’d like to achieve. But it’s a fine line between high expectations that are inspiring and high expectations that become demotivating. I’ve had my team talk to me about the right kind of balancing act.Over time you learn to create a layer of insulation between your employees and the reality you feel as the leader and the pressure to deliver for investors. It is truly lonely, and I don’t mean lonely in a despondent way. Not everybody around you is conditioned to handle the kind of pressure that you can as the entrepreneur, leader, C.E.O. and founder.How do you hire?I want the person coming in to have almost gone through the experience of playing the role before they come into the role. That means they’ve done their homework around understanding the company, the position, their understanding of the strategy and the competitive landscape. I want to hear their proposals for some of the strategies, approaches, directions and investments from the perspective of the role for which they’re interviewing.A lot of my questions are not focused on generalities. They’re focused on specifics — “If you were to play this role, how would you be addressing X, Y and Z? And have you spent time thinking through those challenges before you’re coming into the job?”A lot of C.E.O.s tell me they are surprised by how few candidates do that kind of homework before the interview.That’s absolutely the case. You’re almost pleasantly surprised when you meet a candidate who has actually done their research and is having an intelligent conversation with you. I’m not expecting miracles in terms of your ability to solve for a particular situation or challenge or strategy inside the company. I just want to understand your thinking process.I almost want people to play the devil’s advocate in interviews, and bring some sort of contrarian view that I can debate. I want to have a debate because then it tells me that you’re going to sort of have the full spectrum of thinking around an issue. And I’m listening for whether the debate can be an objective discussion or does it get very quickly into the realm of personal remarks. That’s my best way of understanding how somebody handles conflict.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on February 28, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Finding Direction Off the Beaten Path.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »