
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

FEB. 26, 2016
Antonin Scalia’s empty Supreme Court seat has cost Dow Chemical $835 million.That is how much the chemical company is paying in a decade-old lawsuit that was heading to the top court. Dow decided the death of Justice Scalia, a conservative judge, changed the balance of the suit and settled. It is a reminder that the gridlocked politics surrounding the Supreme Court have real-world effects.Dow’s decision puts to rest the urethane price-fixing suit. Dow thought it had a good shot at setting aside a lower court’s $1.06 billion award to the plaintiffs on the grounds that it violated class-action law.Justice Scalia’s death threw a wrench into this calculation, however. Not only did Dow cite two cases with rulings written by Justice Scalia in its arguments to the Supreme Court, but a split vote — now possible with four conservative judges and four liberals — means lower court decisions stand.Perhaps Dow would have had to change its thinking and settle the case even if Washington was running smoothly. A liberal-leaning addition to the Supreme Court, quickly appointed, could have meant a majority of justices would support the earlier award to the plaintiffs.But the stalemate on the empty seat may endure for more than a year because of the standoff in Congress. Republican lawmakers are saying that they will not even consider any nominee put forward by President Obama to succeed Justice Scalia, and the chosen candidate would need the Senate’s approval. No wonder Dow also referred to rising political uncertainties along with the heightened risk of an unfavorable outcome.It’s easy to see the fight over Justice Scalia’s spot as purely political high drama. But Dow’s decision shows that it matters well beyond the halls of Congress and the Supreme Court. It’s one more uncertainty weighing down businesses and citizens seeking justice.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »