

      By PRADNYA JOSHI and 
    
DANNY HAKIM

FEB. 26, 2016

For years, Volkswagen successfully communicated an image of itself to the world: Our cars are green and our engineers are the best. In September that fell apart when the automaker admitted it had engineered millions of vehicles to cheat on pollution tests. Since then, the company — known for its insular culture and a carefully scripted messaging machine — has stumbled repeatedly in explaining itself:Volkswagen spends more than a year telling officials in the United States that discrepancies between pollution tests on its diesel cars and the starkly higher levels out on the road were a technical error, not a deliberate attempt to deceive. But by Sept. 18, the emissions-cheating scandal becomes public when the Environmental Protection Agency issues the car company a notice of violation. The company admits that it used a so-called defeat device to fool emissions tests. Researchers have found that when tested on the road, some cars emitted almost 40 times the permitted levels of some pollutants. Martin Winterkorn, who was chief of Volkswagen when the problems first become public, issues a video apology but calls the emission scandal “the mistakes of a few people.” Experts say this statement may have seemed to underplay the severity of the problems facing Volkswagen.Later, Michael Horn, the president and chief executive of Volkswagen Group of America, acknowledges that the company had “totally screwed up.”Yet, even as he resigns, Mr. Winterkorn says: “I am not aware of any wrongdoing on my part.” Volkswagen tries to appease owners by offering up to $1,000 in incentives.But VW’s top executive in Britain, Paul Willis, says in a letter to Parliament that British VW owners, and those in other European countries, will not receive such good-will payments.In a clumsy attempt at damage control, VW officials in November argue that the so-called defeat devices meant to detect and thwart emissions tests may not have been illegal in Europe. A month later, German regulators, however, say the devices constitute illegal cheating on emissions in Europe, too. In January, Volkswagen again says that its software was “not a forbidden defeat device” when it was used in Europe.   The VW chairman, Hans-Dieter Pötsch, releases the preliminary findings of an internal inquiry. He says that cheating was not a one-time error, and that the decision by employees to cheat on emissions tests was made more than a decade ago. Yet in early January during an interview with NPR at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit, the VW chief executive, Matthias Müller, says “we didn’t lie” to American regulators before the scandal came to light, chalking it up to a technical problem. After the segment airs the next day, Mr. Müller calls NPR to do another interview to retract his statement. Advertisement