By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 25, 2016
NEW ORLEANS — A former BP rig engineer was found not guilty Thursday on a charge that his negligence in interpreting a critical test that contributed to the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill.Robert Kaluza was a rig supervisor aboard the Deepwater Horizon offshore rig when it exploded, killing 11 workers and resulting in millions of gallons of oil spewing into the Gulf.He was charged with a single count of violating the federal Clean Water Act and could have faced up to a year in prison if convicted. Jurors got the case Thursday afternoon and reached a verdict after less than two hours. Mr. Kaluza, 65, declined to comment.Prosecutors told jurors that Mr. Kaluza and a former co-defendant, Donald Vidrine, had botched a crucial pressure test indicating oil and gas could be flowing from deep beneath the sea floor into BP’s Macondo well, which was thought to be securely plugged with cement and mud.AdvertisementShaun Clarke, Mr. Kaluza’s defense lawyer, said Mr. Vidrine, who pleaded guilty earlier in the case, was the one who had declared the test a success — after Mr. Kaluza’s watch aboard the rig had ended. Other rig workers agreed, he said. Mr. Clarke characterized Mr. Kaluza as a scapegoat.AdvertisementMr. Kaluza had faced more serious charges. He and Mr. Vidrine were initially indicted on federal manslaughter and “seaman’s manslaughter” charges. But the seaman’s manslaughter counts were thrown out by the courts, and government prosecutors late last year backed away from the rest.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Kaluza’s was the latest in a series of individual legal cases arising from the disaster.As for Mr. Vidrine, he is set to be sentenced in April. Prosecutors have recommended no prison time and 10 months of probation.The former BP executive David Rainey was acquitted last June of manipulating calculations to match a far-too-low estimate of the amount of oil spewing into the gulf.A former BP engineer, Kurt Mix, was convicted of obstruction of justice in 2013 for deleting a string of text messages, but accusations of juror misconduct led a judge to order a new trial, and Mr. Mix ultimately made a deal with prosecutors. He pleaded guilty last month to a lesser charge and was sentenced to six months of probation.The oil company itself pleaded guilty to criminal charges, and faces billions of dollars in civil and criminal penalties.A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: BP Engineer Is Not Guilty in Case From 2010 Gulf Oil Spill.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.