AdvertisementSupported byBy Sydney EmberWhen the Republican National Convention begins in Cleveland on Monday, The Washington Post will be there at Quicken Loans Arena. So will Politico, The Huffington Post and BuzzFeed. Ditto The Des Moines Register.These news organizations are among the dozen or so that Donald J. Trump has barred in the last year from his rallies and events. Mr. Trump, who has antagonized the news media and restricted access throughout his campaign, does not control the credentialing for the convention. That job is left to the Congressional Press Galleries. As a result, some news organizations will enjoy official entry to a Trump-led event for the first time in months.“It’s easier — we don’t have to worry about using guest passes or potentially getting thrown out,” said John Stanton, the Washington bureau chief for BuzzFeed News. “This is how it’s supposed to be.”It could very well be a smooth operation for the news organizations on Mr. Trump’s bad side. But the convention, which concludes on Thursday, is also a chance to see how much the rest of the Republican Party embraces Mr. Trump’s battle with the media.“Accredited outlets applied and received credentials based on capacity from the gallery,” said Audrey Scagnelli, the national press secretary for the convention. “If an accredited outlet applies for credentials through the House and Senate galleries and receives a credential, then they are able to cover the convention with that credential.”Other candidates have fought the news media before, and during this campaign Hillary Clinton has also attracted criticism for her treatment of the press. But none have been as openly antagonistic as Mr. Trump. In the year since he declared himself a candidate for president, he has vowed to “open up” the country’s libel laws. He has called out and insulted individual reporters on Twitter. During speeches, he has referred to political reporters as “horrible people” and “dishonest slime.”His campaign staff has also ejected journalists from events. In March, his former campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, was charged with battery after he was accused of grabbing a reporter for Breitbart News. (The charge was later dropped, and Mr. Lewandowski now works for CNN as an analyst.) The crowds at Mr. Trump’s appearances often jeer the media, and some journalists who have written critical articles about Mr. Trump have said that they were harassed online by people who professed to support him.Steve Schmidt, a senior adviser to Senator John McCain during his presidential campaign in 2008, said all campaigns were adversarial to the news media at some point.“Fighting the press is always an ancillary activity — you do it defensively, you do it prophylactically,” said Mr. Schmidt, who lashed out at journalists during the 2008 convention for their coverage of Mr. McCain’s running mate, Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska. “What Trump has done that’s different is he has made the media part of the campaign.”Hope Hicks, Mr. Trump’s spokeswoman, declined to comment.Somewhat paradoxically, Mr. Trump is also remarkably accessible to the media. He grants numerous interviews and calls in to cable news networks.Many news organizations that Mr. Trump has blackballed said they had no difficulty obtaining credentials for the convention. “We have not encountered any problems with the convention,” said Sam Stein, senior politics editor for The Huffington Post. Susan B. Glasser, Politico’s editor, said her news outlet easily secured credentials, but noted with a touch of annoyance that it had been assigned lodging about an hour away from Cleveland.“Our hotels are in Akron, Ohio, which is not the same city as Cleveland,” she said. “But I have a sense that that’s true for a lot of people.”Many outlets have worked around Mr. Trump’s ban by obtaining tickets for his events and rallies. Mr. Stein, for instance, said he sat at the far back of a Trump rally in New Hampshire shortly before the primary, with only his phone and a few pieces of paper in his back pocket. But attending Trump events as a member of the public has its downsides. Mr. Stanton of BuzzFeed said there were so many people waiting in line for an event in Houston that he did not get in even though he had arrived more than three hours early.News organizations on Mr. Trump’s blacklist are planning to cover the convention largely as business as usual. Gawker, which said it had been denied credentials in the past, is sending four people to the convention. Peter Thiel, the billionaire Silicon Valley entrepreneur who has waged a personal vendetta against Gawker Media and financially supported legal action against the media company, is scheduled to speak at the convention.The Huffington Post — which is sending roughly 40 people, many by bus from Washington — plans to live-stream parts of the convention. BuzzFeed is holding a party called Red, White & Blacklisted at a bar on Tuesday night.No matter Mr. Trump’s relationship with individual news media outlets, it was already going to be an unconventional convention to cover. Mr. Trump’s rallies have turned violent at times, and some news organizations are preparing for potential security issues, like protests. Politico has held a security briefing for all its convention attendees, Ms. Glasser said. BuzzFeed is taking its own security.Even if the media ban is not carrying over to the convention, Mr. Trump’s unwavering fight with the news media has raised questions about how far his blacklist can, and will, extend.“Once he becomes the nominee of a major American political party,” said Cameron Barr, managing editor of The Washington Post, “considerations about which media can and cannot attend certain events gets a little more complicated.”Advertisement