AdvertisementSupported byEntrepreneurshipBy Caitlin KellyIt’s the moment many entrepreneurs hit eventually, no matter how much funding they have raised and burned through, no matter how many 100-hour weeks they and their teams have put in, no matter how brilliant their initial idea.It’s time to pivot — and it’s the moment many entrepreneurs resist.For Ron Shah, founder of Bizly, a new company that helps hotels book unused meeting rooms, his pivot began with disaster: the day he found his Manhattan office flooded, his conference room under three inches of water. Trying to quickly book a quiet, private room for business meetings proved surprisingly difficult, requiring almost a week, he said. His initial focus, an app for business travelers, had found little traction, while he soon realized that hotels had plenty of unused smaller meeting room inventory and no efficient way to find takers.But the decision to drop his first business? It hurt, he said.“It’s heart-wrenching,” Mr. Shah said. “You put your blood and sweat and heart into it, and when you show it to people they shoot you down.”Mr. Shah’s new business has signed up 25 New York City hotels and raised $1.5 million from angel investors and $3 million from a seed round. Yet three months into his new project, he has had to pivot again, realizing that his best customers are large businesses, not individuals.“There’s a completely humongous market for us to take that we didn’t even realize,” he said.Valentina Assenova, who teaches entrepreneurship at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, coaches teams of students there who have already shifted gears. She said entrepreneurs’ typical qualities — passion, drive, determination and confidence — could delay the inevitable moment when it was time to make a change.“They tend to be overconfident,” said Dr. Assenova, an assistant professor of management. “They’re so passionate and enthusiastic, but where it leads them astray is being blind to the deficiencies in their projects, the gap between their idea and its successful execution.”“It is very challenging” for entrepreneurs to realize it’s time to pivot, she added, because “there’s a reluctance to let go of a pet idea, being willing to listen to your users in a nonjudgmental way.”Nicole Harris now runs an event-planning business in Los Angeles, with clients and events from Washington, D.C., to Hawaii. She started by planning dates and wedding proposals for clients, and named her business One Last Frog to reflect its focus on finding romance. But within two months, she realized that her niche was too narrow.“A proposal is a one-time thing,” she said. “I needed repeat corporate business.”Ms. Harris broadened her scope to include weddings and social and corporate events. “Because it presents a broader customer base, it’s the best decision I could have made, because I gain exposure to multiple entities of the event and design industry,” she added.Having a broader target audience has also led to more referrals, she said. But her pivot wasn’t quick or easy.“I was intimidated at first, because the type of events I wanted to do were really high end, so I studied my market to see what my competitors are,” Ms. Harris said. Using social media, particularly YouTube videos to watch entrepreneurial mentors like Gary Vaynerchuk, a venture capitalist and author, and using Instagram to follow professional athletes from teams like the Los Angeles Rams and Miami Dolphins, Ms. Harris built her new business.“I send direct messages to football players and their girlfriends,” she said. “I followed as many NFL players as I could until I had enough following me back.” Now, she added, “every month we get more and more work” planning parties for the high-end clients she originally hoped to acquire — like celebrities and corporations with event budgets of $150,000 or more.Pum Lefebure, founder and owner of Design Army, an agency in Washington that creates visual branding for a wide range of clients, made major shifts and is now seeing her company through a period of growth.She and her husband, Jake Lefebure, began Design Army in 2003 doing only print graphic design “on a kitchen table with two people,” Ms. Lefebure said. Today her company works in many forms of media; has 20 full-time employees; and is turning an old building in Cheverly, Md., into a new photo studio.Early on, the company thrived working on lucrative print projects like designing corporate annual reports, logos and brochures, but after 2005 that business dropped off.“A lot of companies stopped doing annual reports, and the catalog business declined,” Ms. Lefebure said. “We had to stay relevant.”That meant acquiring wholly new skills, including how to cast and direct fashion shoots and videos. “We had to train ourselves, or we would have become extinct very soon,” she said.Their shift also proved challenging. “We made tons of mistakes, and costly mistakes,” Ms. Lefebure said. But becoming partners with their clients — being willing to figure out new approaches together — has helped, she said: “They want to grow, and we present them with a plan of attack.”Entrepreneurs typically learn to pivot because they have to, not because they want to. The motivation might be dwindling demand, a tough new competitor or a change in consumer tastes. It can also be something deeper and more personal, as it was for Kyle Brost, who was living and working in Kansas City, Mo., when that moment came for him.He had already owned and sold a carpet cleaning firm and freight brokerage before turning to his passion, consulting and organizational design. “I enjoy working with a high level of complexity and to help people change what they’re doing,” he said. He initially worked with Fortune 500 companies, which, in his 20s, he found an “ultra-exciting time.”But Mr. Brost’s enthusiasm waned as he realized “the conversation would always be the same: ‘We need to increase revenue by 30 percent’ or its variant,” he said. “The numbers were different with each client, but the concept was always the same — let’s make more money.“I finally actually asked the question of one client: ‘How will people’s lives be different if we do this?’ Everybody looked around the room and at each other like I was an alien,” he said.That meeting became Mr. Brost’s inflection point, prompting him to work with foundations and nonprofits instead. In May, he bought and became the chief executive of the Spark Policy Institute in Denver. The institute helps government agencies, charities and other nonprofits create better operating strategies. He now manages a staff of 23, happily if a tad nervously adjusting to a new way of working.“I made the pivot after becoming jaded with so much focus on profit, without any intention behind it,” he said. “Many of my corporate clients were focused on profit for profit’s sake, and yet with increased profit, people’s lives weren’t any better — their own people’s lives or the lives of their customers.”For Mr. Brost, now 35, the most essential shift wasn’t just running a different or new company, but deciding to work from a different perspective and set of values.Choosing to buy and to lead Spark, he said, “has been one of the greatest pivots I’ve made in life, allowing me to do what I do well.”Advertisement