
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON

MAY 6, 2016
A farcical energy deal has given rise to a new takeover tactic. Call it the George Costanza defense. Like the character from the “Seinfeld” sitcom, Energy Transfer Equity wants to redefine the terms of a soured relationship: its $21 billion takeover of rival pipeline operator the Williams Companies. Energy Transfer, based in Dallas, aims to pay less cash and seems intent on forcing the issue by making itself as unattractive as possible. The stakes are no laughing matter, though.Energy Transfer spent a year trying to seduce Williams before its smaller rival finally agreed to a cash-and-shares offer last September. Then oil prices crashed, dragging down the stock of both companies and raising concerns about the debt Energy Transfer would have to incur to cover the $6 billion cash portion of the deal.Unable to wriggle out of the merger agreement, Energy Transfer has started what looks like a scorched-earth campaign against its own transaction. In March, the reluctant buyer slashed its estimate of the merger’s financial benefits by more than 90 percent. It also warned of big job cuts in Williams’s home state of Oklahoma and began a private share placement that would dilute the stake of Williams owners in the combined company.In the latest twist, the Energy Transfer boss Kelcy Warren warned on Thursday that the company would not be able to close the deal by a June 28 deadline because of problems procuring a necessary tax opinion from its legal counsel. Whether or not that issue is real, the situation is reminiscent of the “Seinfeld” episode, “The Strongbox,” in which George Costanza resorts to increasingly absurd tactics to try to persuade his girlfriend to let him dump her.For Energy Transfer and Williams, though, it is no joke. Williams is already suing its merger partner over the private placement and would presumably fight any attempt by the buyer to walk away. Judges in Delaware, where any legal case would probably be heard, have typically been unsympathetic to companies with buyer’s remorse. Energy Transfer may yet persuade Williams shareholders to accept less cash, but that might provoke another “Seinfeld” classic: an extended airing of grievances.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »