
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

NOV. 4, 2016
An antitrust investigation is the caboose of the drug consolidation train. American prosecutors are investigating Mylan, Allergan and others for colluding over generic-medicine prices. Lawmakers are on the case, too. But the apparent cooperation on raising the cost to consumers may simply be the natural consequence of a big reduction in competition.Mergers have been rife in the health care industry, with a record $368 billion worth of deals announced last year alone, according to Thomson Reuters data. That is more than twice the annual average for the preceding decade. Makers of generic pills were among the busiest.That has raised suspicions that survivors have used mergers and acquisitions to create cartels and illegally raise prices. Generic drugs are a huge market, with $85 billion of annual sales in the United States. Some of the price increases have been eye-catching: The Government Accountability Office found that about one-fifth of the generic drugs it surveyed had at least one 100 percent price increase over five years. So it is hardly surprising that the industry has attracted the attention of both law enforcement and politicians.Proving wrongdoing will be difficult, though, because that could require evidence like incriminating email or other correspondence. But there may be nothing nefarious going on. Many generic drugs have only a few producers, or just one. So a company might simply raise prices of its own accord; rivals, if any, may simply follow suit.Competition would be the best remedy. Prices fall steadily as the number of producers rises, according to the Food and Drug Administration. Multiple barriers, however, inhibit the invisible hand from working. Regulators have been speeding up approvals, but there is still a backlog of about 3,000 generic drugs awaiting authorization, with the median wait time measured in years. That is partly excusable, because it is difficult but also necessary to prove scientifically that a drug works properly.Manufacturing drugs is also a gigantic headache. Drugs can be complex to make, and errors can have deadly consequences. So regulators and companies have understandable incentives to be conservative about producing new drugs. Some drug sales may be too small to attract rivals, too, or safety conditions attached to them may mean producers can prevent rivals from getting samples to prove equivalency. That leaves prosecutors and lawmakers with a lot of hoops to jump through to make their cases.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »