
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

JAN. 20, 2016
It’s bonus day at Goldman Sachs. It also happens to be the day that the Wall Street company reports earnings for the final quarter of 2015.So employees are getting a peek at the lay of the land before sitting down for their annual pay review. It’s not, on the face of it, encouraging: Compensation has fallen on average 8 percent from 2014. But the news at Goldman and other rivals may have a silver lining.First, Wall Street professionals are still making enviable pay. Average overall compensation last year was $344,000 at Goldman. At Morgan Stanley, it was $285,000, even after an 11 percent cut.Investment bankers and traders bore the brunt of the drop as Morgan Stanley slashed the division’s compensation pool 17 percent even as revenue rose 6.4 percent. It’s a smart move by a bank that is not yet earning enough to cover its cost of capital.
                Investors are eagerly awaiting guidance from management about when higher short-term interest rates will impact the banks’ bottom lines.            Employees at JPMorgan Chase’s investment banking unit fared better. They face an average cut of just under 1 percent to $203,000, even though the overall pool is 4.5 percent lower – the division employs almost 4 percent fewer people.AdvertisementFor those not cheered by reminders of their relative wealth, there’s something else to think about. The shares of the three banks – along with those of many other financial companies – have fallen in value so much in the last couple of weeks that all now trade below book value. In fact, Goldman and Morgan Stanley shares trade below the even-lower tangible book value. That means Goldman, Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan shares are worth less than each bank’s theoretical breakup value.AdvertisementOn the other hand, it may signal that a broader crisis is in the offing, one that might hurt earnings or the value of assets on the balance sheet. That would be bad news for most banker wallets, with the exception of restructuring experts.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.If, though, shareholders are overreacting to fears about China, oil and other issues, Wall Street employees paid partially in stock may be getting one of the best deals in years. Goldman shares, for example, have not traded below tangible book value on bonus day since January 2012.If markets shrug off the current jitters, the rise in bank stock prices should more than make up for the bonus shortfall.DealBook readers: The Reuters Breakingviews predictions book, “Stairway to Heaven, Highway to Hell,” offers smart financial ideas for the 2016 playbook. Click here to read the book. (Or download the PDF.)Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »