By CHAD BRAYMARCH 31, 2016
LONDON — A former top banker at Bank of America Merrill Lynch will lead the entity overseeing the sale of the British government’s stakes in the Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland.On Thursday, George Osborne, Britain’s chancellor of the Exchequer, appointed Oliver Holbourn the new chief executive of U.K. Financial Investments, the government-owned group said.Mr. Holbourn joined U.K. Financial Investments in 2013 as head of capital markets after serving as the head of equity capital markets for Britain at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.“We have an outstanding team here and I look forward to working with them and our investee companies in my new position to continue to deliver good results for the taxpayer,” Mr. Holbourn said in a news release.AdvertisementJames Leigh-Pemberton, U.K. Financial Investments’ executive chairman, will continue as chairman after the appointment.AdvertisementBeginning on Friday, U.K. Financial Investments will become a subsidiary of a new government-owned entity, U.K. Government Investments, which will oversee all of the government’s investments.The British government is eager to exit its ownership stakes in Lloyds and R.B.S. after injecting capital into both lenders during the financial crisis.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Lloyds received a bailout of 17 billion pounds, or about $25 billion, from the British government, and Royal Bank of Scotland received £45 billion.The British government owned more than 40 percent of Lloyds after the bailout, but it has reduced its holdings since September 2013 as the bank’s financial condition has improved. The government owned just over 9 percent of the company’s shares as of the beginning of December.The government hoped to move forward with a sale of its stake to retail investors this spring, but it delayed those plans in January because of turmoil in the financial markets.The retail offering is a central component of Britain’s plans to end its ownership of the lender, and the government has said it hopes to proceed with an offering as markets improve.On Thursday, Lloyds shares continued to trade below the average of 73.6 pence a share that the British government paid for its original holding.Mr. Osborne has pledged to sell £25 billion in R.B.S. shares over the next five years, even if the government has to sell some at a loss. The government owns about 73 percent of R.B.S. after it began selling last year.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.