AdvertisementSupported byBy Liz MoyerNew York City’s employee pension fund will sell all its holdings of three American retailers because they sell guns, and will continue to press ahead in its efforts to get Walmart and a division of the supermarket chain Kroger to remove guns from their store shelves.The $59 billion New York City Employees’ Retirement System voted to divest itself of the shares on Thursday at its board of trustees meeting. The fund is selling shares in Dick’s Sporting Goods, Cabela’s and Big 5 Sporting Goods. The holdings, worth $10.5 million as of mid-June, are about 0.02 percent of the pension’s portfolio, according to a letter to the board of trustees from the city’s public advocate that was reviewed by The New York Times.However small the divestment is on behalf of New York’s city employees, the move culminates a yearlong effort by some in city government to take action against the gun industry. The public advocate, Letitia James, proposed last July that the city’s pensions sell their holdings of Walmart. She has also filed complaints with the Securities and Exchange Commission about disclosures made by the gun makers Sturm, Ruger & Co. and Smith & Wesson, in addition to putting pressure on local banks to stop lending to gun makers.Mayor Bill de Blasio has also called on New York’s pension funds to sell their holdings of companies that make assault rifles.In a statement on Thursday, Ms. James said, “We will no longer do business with companies that fund the deaths of our family members and friends.”For several years, public pensions in major cities throughout the United States have tried to use their power against the gun industry, but the movement has been slow to catch on, even with the backdrop of the elementary school shooting in Newtown, Conn., in December 2012. Gun violence has continued to dominate headlines, notably the recent mass shooting in a nightclub in Orlando, Fla., and the shooting of police officers in Dallas, among others.Trinity Church on Wall Street, which serves as an activist investor on behalf of its own funds, has been trying to push for changes at Cabela’s, a seller of hunting and outdoor gear based in Sidney, Neb. But in April, Cabela’s successfully blocked it from putting forth a proposal before a vote of shareholders concerning its sale of certain types of guns.Cabela’s has been trying to find a buyer since last fall, and could find one in a private equity firm, Ms. James’s July 5 letter to the pension’s board said. That could force New York’s employee pension to exit its stake in the private equity fund that eventually buys the retailer.A spokesman for Cabela’s was not immediately available for comment, nor were representatives of Big 5 and Dick’s.Ms. James has also been trying to pressure Walmart. Last August, the retailer, based in Bentonville, Ark., said it would stop selling certain types of semiautomatic rifles. In her letter to the pension’s board earlier this month, Ms. James said the board should continue to talk to Walmart about its sale of handgun ammunition and other issues.Randy Hargrove, a spokesman for Walmart, said, “In areas of the country where we sell guns, we have a longstanding commitment to doing so safely and responsibly.” He added that the company welcomes feedback from shareholders.Kroger, through its Fred Meyer subsidiary, sells handguns in four states. Ms. James’s letter says that, given the size of the New York pension fund’s holdings in Kroger, which was not disclosed, she believes the pension can persuade the retailer to negotiate.Keith Dailey, a Kroger spokesman, said in a statement, “We value constructive input from our shareholders and we would be happy to discuss this at any time. We understand that people have strong beliefs about firearms, and we do our best to respect everyone’s beliefs while continuing to offer our customers the products they want, always lawfully and responsibly.”Advertisement