AdvertisementSupported byCorner OfficeBy Adam BryantThis interview with Daniel S. Glaser, C.E.O. of the Marsh & McLennan Companies, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Tell me about your early years.A. I grew up on Long Island, one of four children. My parents divorced when I was about 10, and they had very different approaches with us.My dad, in a lot of ways, was the Great Santini — tremendously demanding, and you could always do better. But he was always in your corner against the rest of the world. Working hard was always the main issue.My mom, on the other hand, was tremendously motivating and inspirational, always warm and positive. You can do anything, you can be anything, she would tell us.The one thing that they shared was a disdain for conventional wisdom. They would make us think for ourselves. I just wouldn’t be part of some of the nonsense that went on when I was growing up on Long Island. I would walk away. Even today, when everybody thinks a direction is right, I just feel myself pulling in another direction a little bit.Sports were also important to me when I was growing up. I was a star, but on a very poor, small team. I heard the phrase early on that “sometimes you win, sometimes you learn,” and it really stuck with me.What did your father do for a living?He ran a small manufacturing company. When I joined Marsh more than 30 years ago, he said to me, “Danny, all I can tell you is that there’s going to be a lot of people who don’t think like an owner, and you should always be thinking like you are the owner of the business, and make your decisions like that.”I’ve heard other people say that over the years, but it sinks in more when you hear it right from your dad’s mouth.Did you start managing people early on at Marsh?I was 24, and I heard my boss saying that we were going to lose our biggest account in Saudi Arabia because of the different time zones.It was one of the first big decisions I made without consulting anyone else — I got up from my cubicle, walked over to him, and said, “Send me to Saudi Arabia.” He asked, “Do you even know anything about Saudi Arabia?” I said, “No, but I’m willing to do it.” Four months later, I was the branch manager, with 11 employees.Early leadership lessons?You develop more perspective and balance over time. I’ve never had a tremendous amount of empathy. I have more empathy today than I did back then. So I was probably harsher than I needed to be when I made decisions about people. Rather than giving people the time to improve, I would instead think that this guy just doesn’t work hard enough, so let’s find somebody else.Now I have a basic belief that almost everyone wants to contribute and do well. Some people, for a whole variety of reasons, have difficulty doing that, and at least an attempt or two should be made to try to help them.What else?The bonus plan we have across our companies today, for tens of thousands of people, is virtually identical to the bonus plan I wrote for those 11 people in my first role.I left the company for a number of years, and when I came back, we had a document for the bonus plan that was so convoluted and complex. I asked, “Why can’t we just say that this is our revenue and these are our earnings, and if we grow those earnings, a percentage of that growth will go into a bonus pool?”Why make it more complicated? I’ve always felt that the world is filled with smart people who love complicating stuff. Working to simplify, to try to get down to that first principle, is really important.How do you hire?I’m generally trying to find out, do they know themselves and do they know what they want? So I tend to ask really open-ended questions like: What are the kinds of things that make you happy? Are you easily satisfied as a person? Do you feel content?Those are tough questions to answer because you can’t really fake it. Somebody might feel that saying, “Yeah, I’m a happy person,” is a good answer, rather than, “No, I’m discontented and I’m a pain in the neck to live with at home because I’m constantly striving for something else and I can’t find it.”They don’t know what I want to hear. I don’t even know what I want to hear, but I want a sense that they know themselves. I’m trying to figure out, is this person somebody I really want to spend a lot of time with for the next decade? Are they an interesting person?I’m sure you have a preference for the kind of answer you like to hear to your question of how content they are.Well, I have a general disdain for people who are too happy and content. I look at it culturally. In a company like ours, we’ve done very well for about eight years in a row. My feeling is that companies that do well for long stretches of time have a tendency to become either complacent or arrogant, and both of those are bad paths. So how do you prevent that?To me, you do that by trying to create this striving, challenging, questioning culture, where there’s always a smarter way of doing something, and you feel a permanent dissatisfaction with obtained results. Not with a scowl. You can smile about it, but we can do everything better.So I look for people who, in their life, are sort of in the same boat — they’re kind of impatient, there’s an urgency about them, even a little edginess. They’re a good person but they’ve got some quirks about what makes them such a driver, and when you ask them questions about happiness, the answer tends to be in the future a little bit. They’re trying for more.I really think that, in some ways, the best leaders always have this sense of future.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.Advertisement