
Another View By                     
CRAIG PFEIFFER

FEB. 16, 2017
The investment advisory business is undergoing a once-in-a-generation transformation in the delivery of financial advice to individual investors.The changes are moving the industry toward higher standards of professionalism and transparency. But there is still a need for wealth management firms and financial advisers to do more.Many investors face a clear-cut savings shortfall — and a bewildering array of investment alternatives — and are challenged to accumulate sufficient wealth to meet the needs of longer life spans.Precisely when their need for advice is greater than ever, investors’ service expectations, informed by experiences with other industries, have increased, as well.AdvertisementIn response, the financial advice profession is under pressure to continue to move aggressively from a sales- and product-driven focus to a more comprehensive, advice-driven model delivering a personalized, streamlined experience to investors similar to what is happening in other industries.AdvertisementLess than two years ago, robo-advisers were seen as a threat to traditional advice models. That is no longer the case. Digital tools of all kinds are viewed as indispensable elements of the adviser’s arsenal, helping to drive practice efficiencies, ease greater investment choices, support portfolio construction discipline and improve the client experience. Investors want to engage investment advice providers on their own terms.Firms that fail to develop digital advice capabilities or align with a technologically experienced partner will be left behind.At the same time, the lack of distinguished performance by active managers and an increased focus on investment costs has led to outflows at actively managed funds and caused some to question the future of active investing. Those predictions are grossly overstated and active managers will again demonstrate their value during the next market downturn.The active versus passive argument frames the problem incorrectly.The right solutions will be the ones that find the appropriate allocation of both strategies for each investor. Exchange-traded funds and passive strategies are here to stay, and firms and advisers must evolve their portfolio construction strategies to take full advantage of both.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.On the regulatory landscape, no issue has been more debated over the last few years than the Labor Department’s fiduciary rule. Regardless of its uncertain fate under the new administration, the industry has already committed significant resources to instill greater accountability and best practices around advice delivery.Even if the rule is repealed, the Securities and Exchange Commission, perhaps in conjunction with Finra, is said to be contemplating its own proposal of new regulations that reconcile standards for retirement and nonretirement accounts.Some firms have said they will not backtrack on steps they had begun to put into effect in anticipation of narrow compliance with the Labor Department’s fiduciary rule. The direction has already been set. Attempts to provide greater transparency and eliminate potential conflicts should proceed and should apply beyond retirement accounts. The investor experience and the professionalism of our industry will be enhanced to the benefit of everyone.Combined, these forces are fueling a move toward more scalable, technology-enabled, customized investment advice that is tied to an investor’s unique goals. Firms are investing heavily in an advice-centric ecosystem with enhanced wealth management services and digital delivery tools. They are developing increasingly sophisticated approaches linking financial planning with portfolio construction and continuing management in a single end-to-end process. Legacy systems are being retooled or retired, and advisory programs that exist in separate silos are being consolidated to deliver a simpler, more cohesive investor experience.AdvertisementIn the future, the need for investment advice will increase. This next phase of evolution in financial advice delivery promises important benefits for all investors — specifically, greater access to professional investment management through lower minimums and new engagement models, lower-cost solutions and a focus on personal goals.The advice industry also stands to benefit. The automation of routine processes will provide the efficiency and scale necessary to serve more investors — and important, the time to focus on the interpersonal elements of the adviser-investor relationship that cannot be replicated by technology.The industry needs to recognize the drivers of change and take full advantage of the opportunities they present to enable expanded access to professional financial advice, increased levels of transparency and efficiency and a shared alignment of interests among firms, advisers and investors.Craig Pfeiffer is the president and chief executive of the Money Management Institute, the national trade association representing the investment advisory solutions industry.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »