By ERIN McCANNJUNE 16, 2017
Hey, did you hear the one about organic drones?When Amazon announced on Friday that it would buy the grocery retailer Whole Foods for more than $13 billion, the news that one business behemoth would be swallowing another was too juicy for the armchair comics of Twitter and Facebook to let pass without comment.It is the custom of internet life in the 21st century to compete for likes, shares and retweets with wry or snarky comments on the news.Amazon’s latest acquisition was no exception.Whole Foods has long been a punch line for people uncomfortable with everything the organic retailer represents. A bourgeois supermarket that caters to people for whom good old Tropicana orange juice just isn’t good enough, not when there’s juice that’s been squeezed by hand from organic oranges plucked from a sun-dappled field by magical unicorns who are raised in only the most humane ways. What’s an extra few dollars when you’re rushing off to yoga?(Sometimes the company has made the joke too easy. Two years ago, for instance, a Whole Foods in California put three stalks of asparagus in a plastic tub full of water, and tried to charge $5.99 for “asparagus water.” The product was pulled from the shelf pretty quickly, after a day of ridicule.)AdvertisementAnd Amazon, along with its founder, chairman and chief executive, Jeff Bezos, has been developing a reputation as a benevolent ruler of modern mass consumption.AdvertisementThe online retailer has succeeded by being an extremely convenient way to buy nearly anything and have it delivered with startling speed, even though there might be a little discomfort about the carbon footprint and the closing of beloved bookshops. But at least, customers could rationalize that. Mr. Bezos was using his fortune to pay for great journalism at The Washington Post, along with some charitable work. And fans of innovation do seem to enjoy his company’s experiments with talking cylinders for the home and drone deliveries.But underneath all that there are hints of a darker narrative, one where employees face grim pressures.It’s a bit like Loki and Deadpool going into the avocado business. It’s just the sort of dystopian comedy the internet loves on a Friday. The comments generally fell into four groups.
            I, too, spend $13.7 billion at Whole Foods.        
            Now that @Amazon is buying @WholeFoods, will they send a drone to remove my wallet?        
            Amazon just purchased whole foods!!! ....Awesome!! I can get $200 chips & Salsa deliveried by drone!        “For that price, what’d they get? Two bags of granola?,” wrote Kevin Ridder on Facebook under The New York Times’s report of the sale.“I too have spent $13.7 billion at Whole Foods Market but somehow I only have a half used container of Almond Milk to show for it,” wrote Penton Tabitha on Facebook.
            An Amazon drone screams across the sky, raining down kale aioli and the piercing howls of Mozart in the Jungle        
            I love this acquisition; need a gluten free bagel in an hour? I'll drone it to you. https://t.co/z4UjxBHX4F 
            This could be a really far-sighted strategic deal, *or* Jeff Bezos’ Alexa might have just made the biggest accidental purchase of all time.        
            right now there are about 10000 tweets with the same "alexa buy me something from whole foods" joke. good luck to whichever one wins        
            Amazon now has a listening device in every home and the compute power to send a drone with organic quinoa to you before you know you need it        
            2020: Amazon to deliver kale directly into your mouth by drone2040: Amazon launches The Matrix; humanity grateful for the rest, honestly        
            Soon, when you go to Whole Foods, the @washingtonpost will be on sale and your fish will be wrapped in the @NYTimes.        “Jeffrey,Based on your recent purchase, you may also be interested in:- Wegmans- Trader Joe’s- Kroger”Wrote Romeo Papa on The New York Times.Eric Owles contributed reporting.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.