By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJUNE 22, 2017
When big financial companies have needed a rescue over the years, one man has often stood at the ready: Warren E. Buffett.Mr. Buffett, the billionaire investor and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway, has proved time and again that he is willing to help — for a price.The latest company to turn to Mr. Buffett, following the likes of Goldman Sachs, Bank of America and General Electric, is the Home Capital Group, a Canadian mortgage lender that spent the last month shoring itself up after depositors abandoned it in droves after accusations of fraud.Late on Wednesday, Home Capital disclosed that it had sold a 38 percent stake in itself to an insurance unit of Mr. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, at a deeply discounted price of 400 million Canadian dollars, or about $300 million. Moreover, it accepted a 2 billion Canadian dollar loan from Mr. Buffett’s group, carrying a 9 percent interest rate, to replace an existing and slightly more expensive credit line.AdvertisementIt is the latest instance of Mr. Buffett entering into a financially fraught deal that most other lenders would avoid.Mr. Buffett operates with advantages envied throughout the business world. His empire, and in particular its vast insurance operation, which includes Geico, generates enormous sums of cash, with $84 billion on its books as of March 31. Berkshire carries one of corporate America’s highest credit ratings. And Mr. Buffett favors moving quickly and decisively.“Berkshire is the 800 number when there is really some panic in the markets and people really need significant capital,” Mr. Buffett declared at the 2013 annual shareholder meeting.But in spite of his image as the world’s cuddliest capitalist, those in distress often learn firsthand just how ruthless a businessman Mr. Buffett can be. He prefers quick discussions and tends not to negotiate on price.In the midst of the 2008 financial crisis, the Berkshire chief invested $5 billion in Goldman and $3 billion in G.E., providing each of the struggling companies with an important show of confidence and capital in its darkest hour.AdvertisementThree years later, Bank of America, then facing questions about the strength of its balance sheet, received  a $5 billion investment from Mr. Buffett.Then there was perhaps the most famous Buffett bailout of all: that of Salomon Brothers in 1987, which began with the businessman buying shares in the investment bank at a time when Wall Street firms were laid low because of exposure to junk bonds.“Be fearful when others are greedy; be greedy when others are fearful,” goes one of Mr. Buffett’s most famous aphorisms.Home Capital was clearly in a bind when it agreed to Berkshire’s offer. The company, one of Canada’s top lenders to borrowers who have poor credit histories or who are self-employed, has struggled since a securities regulator accused it of misleading shareholders about fraud committed by its brokers.According to the regulator, the Ontario Securities Commission, executives did not disclose important information about an internal inquiry into mortgage brokers submitting fraudulent borrower income for potential borrowers.Home Capital has denied the accusations. Still, depositors fled the company’s high-interest savings accounts, seriously weakening its financial position. Shares in the company had fallen 33 percent from the commission’s accusations through Wednesday, forcing the company to take a variety of steps to raise cash, including selling mortgages on its books.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Earlier on Wednesday, the lender said that it had about $1.2 billion in available financial resources, including $350 million remaining on a $2 billion line of credit.The stamp of approval that a Berkshire investment can provide clearly resonated with Home Capital’s board. During a conference call with analysts, a Home Capital director, Alan R. Hibben, said that the board had weighed a number of rescue proposals but decided that Mr. Buffett’s offer was the most attractive.“It is the right transaction with the right partner,” Home Capital’s chief executive, Brenda J. Eprile, told analysts. “I believe that when people look back on the events of 2017 at Home Capital, they will see this as a turning point.”AdvertisementFor his part, Mr. Buffett said: “Home Capital’s strong assets, its ability to originate and underwrite well-performing mortgages, and its leading position in a growing market sector make this a very attractive investment.”Under the agreement, while Berkshire will own nearly 40 percent of Home Capital’s shares, it will only vote the equivalent of a 25 percent stake, to avoid becoming subject to Canadian financial regulations governing lenders.Yet Mr. Buffett’s previous deals have demonstrated that he often takes advantage of being the lender of last resort, extracting extra compensation for the risk that Berkshire assumes.In the past, he has bought what are known as perpetual preferred shares, a type of stock that carried high interest rates: 10 percent annually in the case of Goldman and G.E., 6 percent for Bank of America. Mr. Buffett also received warrants giving him the right to buy common shares at an advantageous price.Goldman and G.E. each sought to repay Mr. Buffett as quickly as they could, though not without ultimately making hefty interest payments to their shared benefactor. Berkshire’s investment in Goldman ultimately yielded a $1.7 billion profit, while its stake in G.E. earned $1.2 billion.Mr. Buffett began demanding such onerous terms after learning hard lessons from his investment in Salomon. While his initial investment was an opportunistic one, he was forced to assume greater responsibility — including taking over as the bank’s chairman — in the wake of a bond-trading scandal that nearly forced Salomon into bankruptcy.Mr. Buffett stepped in to protect his investment, and eventually testified before Congress, a moment that has since played before every Berkshire annual shareholder meeting.In the case of Home Capital, Berkshire is already sitting on a paper profit from its new investment. It bought the common shares in the lender for 10 Canadian dollars each, a 33 percent discount from where the lender’s stock closed on Wednesday. By midafternoon on Thursday, Home Capital’s stock price had leapt to 17.28 Canadian dollars, up 72 percent from what Mr. Buffett paid.Home Capital shareholders will still have to vote to approve the bailout at a special meeting in September. But representatives for the company argued that the deal, as expensive as it is, was the best way to stave off disaster.Advertisement“The world is a dangerous place, and we’ve already seen what happens to a company like ourselves when there is a crisis of confidence,” Mr. Hibben said. “We don’t know what’s going to happen in the future.”Follow Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced.A version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Buffett Bails Out a Troubled Canadian Mortgage Lender.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.