By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDJULY 5, 2016
SAN FRANCISCO — Twinkies and Ho Hos are poised to find a new corporate home — and a listing on public stock markets.The owners of Hostess Brands announced on Tuesday that they had agreed to sell a majority stake in the company to a publicly traded affiliate of the Gores Group, an investment firm, for about $725 million.The transaction will be the second in which Hostess — a company born in 1919 with the Hostess CupCake and made famous with the seemingly indestructible Twinkie — has traded hands since emerging from bankruptcy protection three years ago.It also raises the stakes for Hostess, joining the public markets at a time when more consumers are shunning sweets in favor of more nutritious treats.AdvertisementSince 2013, Hostess has been under the ownership of the investment firm Apollo Global Management and Metropoulos & Company, which previously owned the maker of Pabst Blue Ribbon beer and specializes in reviving consumer brands.AdvertisementThe Gores Group, a private equity firm based in Los Angeles, is known for deals in an array of industries. In this case, the purchaser is Gores Holdings, a publicly traded arm of the Gores Group known as a blank-check company, having raised $375 million in an initial public offering last year to finance acquisitions.Gores will be coming in nearly four years after Hostess’s former parent company filed for Bankruptcy Court protection under Chapter 11 of United States bankruptcy law, prompting fears that Twinkies might become extinct. The 2012 filing marked the second time that the baker had sought bankruptcy, burdened by labor disputes and changing consumer tastes.Hostess’s former parent sold its cake business, which had outlived wars and low-carb diet fads, to Apollo and Metropoulos, both of which are seasoned corporate turnaround players, in the spring of 2013 for about $410 million. (The company also sold its Wonder Bread business to Flowers Foods for $360 million.)Apollo and Metropoulos focused on reviving a nearly dead brand. They restarted operations that had been dormant during Hostess’s bankruptcy and made the company’s shopping operations more efficient. Under the two owners, Hostess collected about $650 million in sales during the 12 months that ended May 31.Including Tuesday’s deal, Apollo and Metropoulos together stand to collect a return of about $1 billion on an initial equity investment of about $185 million. (During the three years that they owned Hostess, the two companies collected several hundred million dollars in dividends from the snack maker.)Hostess’s owners explored putting the baker up for an initial public offering in recent months, but the approach from Gores provided a more certain payout.Under the terms of the deal, Gores Holdings will pay out not only most of the $375 million that it raised in its I.P.O. last year, but also an additional $350 million that it raised from other investors. That includes $50 million of the additional capital that will essentially come from Metropoulos’s rolling over some of its existing holdings in Hostess.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Hostess presents a unique opportunity to invest in an iconic brand with strong fundamentals that is poised for continued growth,” Alec Gores, the chairman and chief executive of the Gores Group, said in a statement.AdvertisementBeing acquired by a blank-check company will give Hostess a listing on the Nasdaq stock market, where Gores Holdings trades. That would give Hostess the ability to raise capital from the stock markets to pay for acquisitions or pay down some of its debt.Other elements of the Hostess business will not change, including the company’s existing leadership. Both C. Dean Metropoulos, the bakery’s executive chairman, and William Toler, its chief executive, are expected to keep their roles under Gores’s lead ownership.Both Apollo and Metropoulos are expected to remain investors in the business, owning about 42 percent of the combined company, which will assume the Hostess Brands name.“This new phase in Hostess’s evolution and partnership with the Gores Group and our broader investor partners will continue to propel Hostess into a growing and innovative company with significant reach and potential long into the future,” Mr. Metropoulos said in a statement.Advising Gores Holdings were Deutsche Bank, Moelis & Company, Morgan Stanley and the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges. Hostess received financial advice from Rothschild, Credit Suisse and Perella Weinberg Partners.Apollo took legal counsel from the law firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, while Metropoulos received financial advice from UBS and legal counsel from the law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.A version of this article appears in print on July 6, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Hostess Brands, Maker of Twinkies, Selling Majority Stake for $725 Million.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.