
Breakingviews By                     
ROBERT CYRAN

JULY 8, 2016
Two American health care megadeals have been given grim diagnoses. Aetna’s $34 billion plan to buy rival Humana and Anthem’s $44 billion acquisition of Cigna are risky propositions to shrink the industry to three big insurers from five. Their stock prices now suggest zero chance either deal will succeed. If investors are correct, the companies will return to independence worse than when they started.Fresh fears arose this week that trustbusters have serious concerns about the Aetna deal, following similar competition worries regarding Anthem. The cases against them are relatively simple. When insurers consolidate, the premiums charged tend to rise. Being bigger might help the companies negotiate better deals with hospitals and drug makers, but regulators are often skeptical that the benefits will be passed on to consumers, who would have fewer providers from which to choose. A similar rationale has prevented additional mergers in other industries, including wireless.Both insurance transactions were announced with much fanfare within weeks of each other about a year ago. The gap between the offer prices and where the targets were trading on Friday surpassed 30 percent. Such spreads are indicative of extreme pessimism.Humana shares, for example, are trading 8 percent below where they were in April 2015. That’s when news of several possible insurer deals was reported. Cigna’s are 1 percent cheaper than their undisturbed price. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has increased by about 3 percent over the same period. That means investors assume the two targets are relatively worse off.The potential acquirers have not done any better. Aetna’s stock has returned a bit less than the S.&P. 500, while Anthem’s has been walloped, falling about 14 percent since April 2015. The only real winner has been the UnitedHealth Group, which sat out the deal market and instead concentrated on winning business from its distracted rivals. Its shares have gained 20 percent over this period.It may be that arbitrageurs, who have been burned badly multiple times in recent years, are being overly skittish. Many were caught wrong-footed when Pfizer’s $160 billion effort to buy Allergan fell apart earlier this year, and they took even heavier losses when AbbVie’s $55 billion purchase of Shire blew up in 2014. The insurers could yet stage a miraculous recovery, but the flatlining stocks are usually a telltale sign that it is time to start making other arrangements.Robert Cyran is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »