By LIAM STACK and DANIEL VICTORDEC. 23, 2016
Christmas is upon us! But perhaps you have run out of wrapping paper. Or you have to do some last minute shopping. Or you really need a cup of coffee that wasn’t made by someone you are related to. What do you do? Where can you go? Which stores are even open?Take a few deep breaths. It’s going to be O.K.. The New York Times is here for you. We called a bunch of America’s most popular retailers and asked them their holiday hours, so you don’t have to.First and foremost, coffee. Starbucks said most of its stores will be open on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day for those of you who need caffeine to power through late-night gift wrapping or the crack-of-dawn frenzy of kids unwrapping presents. (Also known as “the joy of a child’s Christmas.”)If you are more of a Dunkin’ Donuts person, you may be in luck. Michelle King, a spokeswoman, said many of its locations will be open until 6 p.m. on Christmas Eve and some will be open on Christmas Day too.For last minute gift-shopping and unforeseen household needs, Walmart will be open until 6 p.m. on Christmas Eve but is closed on Christmas Day. Target will close at 10 or 11 p.m. on Christmas Eve and will close on Christmas Day.AdvertisementWhat if those cousins you weren’t expecting suddenly show up for dinner, leaving you short on food? You might have a tough time, as several major grocery stores will be closed on Christmas.AdvertisementTrader Joe’s will close at 6 p.m. on Christmas Eve — unless you’re in Foxborough, Mass., in which case the store will close at 3 p.m. All locations will be closed on Christmas.You’ll have to buy your subs from Publix before 7 p.m. on Christmas Eve. It will be closed on Christmas Day.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Some Giant-Landover stores in Maryland, Virginia, Delaware and the District of Columbia will remain open on Christmas, and you can check if yours is one of them here. All will close at 7 p.m. on Christmas Eve.Giant-Carlisle stores in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia and West Virginia will close at 6 p.m. on Christmas Eve and remain closed on Christmas.You might be wondering if your local Giant is of the Landover or Carlisle variety — a fair question, since they’re sister companies. If so, you could look up your location on the store locators for Giant-Carlisle’s or Giant-Landover.If you need to buy in bulk, you’d better plan ahead. Costco and BJ’s will both be closed on Christmas; Costco will close at 5 p.m. on Christmas Eve, while BJ’s will close at 6 p.m.Christine Wilcox, a spokeswoman for Safeway and Albertsons, said anyone interested in stopping by to pick up some last minute groceries should call their local store first.AdvertisementThat was a common response we received from large retailers: many leave holiday scheduling up to local branch managers or individual franchise owners.CVS is also open on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, although hours will vary store to store. “It would be best for customers to check with their store,” said Stephanie Cunha, a spokeswoman.Tim Horton’s, the Canadian coffee spot with many American locations, is leaving schedules up to local franchises, too.Walgreen’s will be a sure bet, though. Its 24-hour locations will operate on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, and its non-24-hour stores will be open from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. on Christmas Day and until midnight on Christmas Eve. (Some but not all of the chain’s numerous Duane Reade stores in New York will be open on the holiday.)We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.