By LIZ MOYERJULY 6, 2016
Trying to put a turbulent nine months behind it, the parent of the prepaid debit card company RushCard is replacing its chief executive.Ron Hynes, a former head of global prepaid solutions at MasterCard and most recently president of global markets at the digital wallet start-up Mozido, is taking over for Richard Savard, who had been UniRush’s chairman and chief executive since early 2014. The change is expected to be announced by the company on Thursday, though Mr. Hynes was at its Cincinnati headquarters on Wednesday meeting with employees and management. UniRush owns RushCard.In a telephone interview, Mr. Hynes said he had a “passion for financial inclusion” and hoped to use RushCard’s existing business to speed up the introduction of new products and services. Prepaid cards are popular among lower-income workers and people who do not have traditional banking accounts; for many, they are a lifeline.Russell Simmons, the hip-hop celebrity who co-founded RushCard in 2003 as a way to give lower-income people access to financial services, said in an interview that some of those new products and services could be credit-related and aimed at more affluent consumers. One possibility he mentioned was virtual banking, for people who want access to banking services but don’t actually want to deal with a bank.AdvertisementRushCard had been making a push to build a processing business, but Mr. Simmons said he wanted to go in a different direction. “We have real work to do to build credit and other services,” he said. “We have a whole new chapter now, and we needed new blood.”AdvertisementMr. Savard was not immediately available for comment.RushCard was ensnared in turmoil last October, when a systems conversion led to account problems that prevented cardholders from using their money — in some cases for weeks. The incident  set off an outcry on social media, and Mr. Savard and Mr. Simmons scrambled to contain the damage. In May, RushCard agreed to pay $19 million to settle a lawsuit with cardholders, many times the amount the company initially pledged to repay customers whose checks bounced or who otherwise had to pay fees because their accounts were unusable.Regulators and lawmakers have raised concerns about prepaid cards and their potential to harm financially vulnerable consumers. Last month, two senators sent a letter to Green Dot, Walmart and MasterCard asking them to explain a malfunction in May that kept Green Dot customers from using their cards in Walmart stores. Green Dot is one of the biggest providers of prepaid cards in the United States.Prepaid cards lack the same consumer protections as bank accounts and credit cards, but the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has proposed new rules to improve fee disclosures and limit fraud liability. The regulator also wants to require prepaid card companies to investigate and resolve errors quickly. Final rules are expected in the coming months.A version of this article appears in print on July 7, 2016, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Marketer of Prepaid Debit Cards Names Chief.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.