By SYDNEY EMBEROCT. 31, 2016
Michael Golden, the vice chairman of The New York Times Company, will retire from his executive management role at the end of the year, the company announced on Monday. He will continue to serve on the board.“Words are inadequate to convey my deep appreciation to Michael for all he has done over his many years in management at The New York Times Company,” Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher and chairman of The Times and Mr. Golden’s cousin, said in a statement. “He’s been a true partner to me in leading this institution through multiple periods of monumental change.”Mr. Golden, 67, a member of the fourth generation of the Ochs/Sulzberger family that has controlled The Times since 1896, has been at the company for 32 years and has been its vice chairman since 1997. Among other leadership positions, he has served as president and chief operating officer of The Times’s Regional Media Group, which the company sold in early 2012 for $143 million, and was publisher of The International Herald Tribune from 2003 to 2008.Most recently, Mr. Golden played an important role in succession planning at the company, serving on a selection committee established to assess the candidates for deputy publisher and ensure an even playing field.The process concluded less than two weeks ago, when The Times named Mr. Sulzberger’s son, A.G. Sulzberger, deputy publisher, a position that sets him up to be the company’s next publisher and chairman.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The confidence I have in the management team and the next generation of family members at the company makes this the right time for me to step away from my management role,” Mr. Golden said in a statement.Though he is stepping down from a management role that included oversight of international operations and communications, Mr. Golden will remain as vice chairman. According to the company’s governance principles, board members cannot stand for re-election after age 70, though the board can make an exception.In 2015, Mr. Golden received $2.1 million in total compensation from The Times, according to a regulatory filing.A version of this article appears in print on November 1, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Vice Chairman  of Times Co.  to Leave Role.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.