By JOHN KOBLINFEB. 25, 2016
Over the last couple of years, as Netflix has crashed the gates of the television industry, the service has aimed to attract all age groups. It created adult-oriented dramas like “Narcos” and “Orange Is the New Black,” developed more than two dozen original series for children and started a comedy, “Grace and Frankie,” starring four actors in their 70s.Now, Netflix is prepared to go after another audience, one that it says has been forgotten and abandoned by traditional television networks: families.On Friday, Netflix will release “Fuller House,” a revival of the old ABC sitcom that will be the first of several new shows on the service intended for Mom, Dad and the kids. If Netflix has its way, families will watch these offerings at home together, just like in the old days.“Think about the mid-’80s,” Cindy Holland, the vice president for original content at Netflix, said in an interview. “There’s ‘Family Ties,’ ‘Growing Pains,’ ‘Who’s the Boss?’ What are the analogous titles today on linear television? There aren’t that many.”AdvertisementAs prominent family-friendly programming blocks like ABC’s “T.G.I.F.,” faded into oblivion and gave way to reality shows, “it left a significant hole in the market,” said Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer, one he said his service was seeking to fill.AdvertisementAt a time when there is more television than ever — there were 412 original scripted series last year, more than double the number seven years ago — Netflix is spending with abandon, both domestically and internationally.About 18 months ago, Netflix began to develop and invest in the kind of programming that is “exciting to younger adults and more than tolerable for adults,” Mr. Sarandos said. It has at least six new family-oriented shows poised to hit the service by the end of 2017, including yet another revival of a fan favorite (“Gilmore Girls”) and an animated series, “Trollhunters,” created by the filmmaker Guillermo del Toro.Ms. Holland said Netflix decided to go all-in after taking a look at rival networks’ programming and surveying trends on its own service. She said family-friendly fare from the 1980s like “The Karate Kid” and “Honey, I Shrunk the Kids” was getting a strong response on Netflix.“We do see movies taking more of a front seat on the weekend and those family films climbing up the ‘top list’ ladder,” Ms. Holland said. “Our conclusion was families are looking for things to watch together when they’re home.”Even though there are more shows than ever, the sort of family-first programming that used to dominate network lineups has become increasingly elusive. (There are exceptions, including ABC comedies like “Modern Family,” “Black-ish” and “Fresh Off the Boat.”)“There used to be the family hour,” said Preston Beckman, a former network executive at NBC and Fox. “You had family-friendly programming at 8 to 9, or 7 to 9 on Sundays. Is there less of that? There’s less of that on the big channels. It’s rarer, and it’s rarer that families sit down and watch anything together.”Ms. Holland said she thought this was partly because of the growth of darker dramas and unconventional comedies, as well as the rising number of cable networks. As that has occurred, family viewing has been increasingly limited to sports, reality competition shows like “The Voice” and “Survivor” and live musical events like “Grease: Live!” and “The Wiz Live!”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“The proliferation of cable channels really led to niche specialization,” she said. “Instead of a channel the whole family can watch, you saw the advent of a whole series of channels for each member of the household individually.”AdvertisementChannels like ABC Family emerged, but even that got a recent face-lift: The network is now called Freeform and is aiming at teenagers and viewers in their 20s, not families.Netflix is kicking off its new family slate this week with the reboot of “Full House,” the popular, syrupy comedy from the late 1980s and 1990s. “Fuller House,” which stars many of the actors from the original series, takes the first iteration of the sitcom and flips it around: Instead of three men (including a widower) raising three girls in San Francisco, three women (including a widow) raise three children in the same house they grew up in.“Fuller House” has received mixed reviews, and several critics have been pointed in their criticism when asking whether this brand of heartwarming television works anymore.“It’s made to be shared by families, and not necessarily by the media elite,” Ms. Holland countered.She emphasized the show’s fervent fan base and two online videos to explain why Netflix was bullish about the show. One trailer that gave away little more than a release date (it did not even show any of the actors) received more than 14 million views online, the most ever for a Netflix teaser; and a “Fuller House” skit on “The Tonight Show” last week has been viewed more than 27 million times on Facebook.Once “Fuller House” begins, measuring audience reaction will be difficult. Netflix does not disclose viewership numbers, which caused a heated back-and-forth between the streaming service and TV executives last month.Regardless, Netflix is convinced the family-friendly strategy will work for its 75 million subscribers worldwide, and it says user surveys suggest that families will watch the shows together.Netflix is also developing “Haters Back Off,” a show starring the popular YouTube character Miranda Sings, created by Colleen Ballinger-Evans; a revival of the old animated series “Voltron”; an animated series, “Green Eggs and Ham,” based on the Dr. Seuss book; and “Stranger Things,” starring Winona Ryder, which Ms. Holland likened to the 1980s movie “Stand by Me” with an added supernatural element.And if a lot of the programs tend to be inspired by or directly lifted from movies and TV shows from the 1980s and 1990s, providing that sort of catnip to Generation X viewers is not exactly an accident.Advertisement“There’s a little element of nostalgia at play in gaining parents’ interest,” Ms. Holland said. “It’s also thematically the kind of programming that was made of the time. Parents are searching for the evolution of that and the 2016 version of that kind of programming. That’s what we’re trying to provide.”A version of this article appears in print on February 26, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: All for the Family.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.