AdvertisementSupported byBy Elizabeth OlsonAs far as the economy goes, the literal meaning of holiday songs is hardly a typical indicator of consumer sentiment.Yet, there are hidden economic lessons, if you delve into the costs of goods and services. It is with this spirit (and some creative back-of-the-envelope calculations) that we have again turned our thoughts of fancy to the “The 12 Days of Christmas.” For those willing to give their true love extravagant memories for the days running from Christmas Day until Epiphany, act now!All told, the whimsical splurge will run a little less than 1 percent more than last year, largely because of slow economic growth. That works out to a grand total of just $34,363.49. The Christmas price index closely mirrors the government’s Consumer Price Index, which tracks the prices of more pedestrian goods and services such as housing and transportation. The C.P.I. rose 1.7 percent over the 12-month period ending in November. The good news is that prices for goods have remained static in the last year, according to the PNC index. But entertainers — including those 11 pipers piping and 12 drummers drumming — have enjoyed a bit of a boost in their paychecks, reflecting this year’s increase in average hourly earnings.All the same, gift givers are advised to act soon, said Thomas P. Melcher, chief investment officer for the PNC Asset Management Group, a division of PNC, because interest rates are likely to increase, leading to higher consumer borrowing rates.“As the economy continues to expand,” Mr. Melcher noted, “it is likely the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates this month or early next year. That will affect the Christmas index but not necessarily by much.”This year, there were wide fluctuations in the price of some products, based on the data that PNC gathered from retailers, hatcheries and dance companies.The true bargain in the gift package, the partridge price fell 20 percent, to $20, as a result of a larger supply of the game birds. Last year, the price soared because the partridge became a popular dish among foodies, but supply apparently met demand.Adding in the pear tree, which cost $190 — the same price as last year, according to Cinnaminson Nurseries in New Jersey — the grand total for the set is $210, or 2.3 percent less than last year.The costs of two turtle doves, sometimes considered a symbol of true love, are adding up this year. The brace of lovebirds cost $375, or 29.3 percent more than last year, because of a shortage of birds. According to PNC, a turtle dove lays eggs, called clutches, only two or three times a year, and each clutch has only two eggs.The brood of imported hens, sometimes called faverolles because the breed was developed in the 1860s near the French villages of Houdan and Faverolles, came in at $181.50, the same price as 2015.Once called colly birds — an ancient term for blackbirds — they are ringing up at $599.96, the same as last year. Prices for these, and other birds, can swing from year to year.The price of gold rings held steady for the fourth year in a row. Even though gold commodity prices dipped earlier this year, they later evened out. (According to some, the reference to five golden rings in the classic carol might have actually been to five ring-necked pheasants — which would be more in keeping with the lineup of birds in the song.)The gaggle of geese remained at $360, holding steady from last year. Prices of the birds, sometimes associated with Christmas dinner, have varied, according to information PNC gathered from a waterfowl farm.The cost for swans has historically been volatile. This year, the wedge of elegant birds had an impressive $13,125 price tag — or $1,875 each — the same as last year. But the price on their heads can be so variable that it skews the index’s outcome in some years.With no increase in the federal minimum wage — it’s been the same since 2009 — the eight maids received the same basic compensation as last year. Three decades ago, the maids earned an even more meager $26 for such toil over the holidays (not adjusting for inflation).As with the farm workers, the price tag for nine ladies dancing was static this year. The group (priced at a rate for professional modern or ballet dancers) was paid $7,552 this year, the same as 2015. Sorry, ballerinas — no raise in 2016.Male entertainers did not fare any better than their female counterparts this year. They were consigned to performing their athletic feats for the same price, $5,508, as in 2015. But compensation for their work has increased nearly continuously since 1984, when their performance ran about $1,600.The cost to have 11 of these lively wind-instrument players rose for the first time since 2013. It is up 2.8 percent from their previous level of $2,635, according to a Philadelphia union for musicians. Their pay began to get a boost in the early 2000s and has risen steadily since then.To have the dozen drummers at your true love’s doorstep will cost some 2.8 percent more than last year. Compensation for the dozen drummers will be $2,934, their first raise in several years. No calculations were factored in to compensate the neighbors for noise complaints.For Christmas shopping this year, it is significantly less expensive to gather your gifts in person rather than order them online. Assembling the parades of fanciful fowl and the troupes of entertainers from the comfort of home will cost the giver $10,239 more this year — bringing the grand total to a hefty $44,602.The overall price tag soars, however, if the sender of the gifts believes that the song requires that the presents have to be added each time the verse is sung. The cost of all the items repeated in the song’s verses means buying 364 gifts, and would put the giver out of pocket an eye-popping $156,507.The entire PNC index, including a coloring book, is available here. Advertisement