
Breakingviews By                     
QUENTIN WEBB

FEB. 25, 2016
The deal to put Sharp in Taiwanese hands would be a messy milestone.The future of the company, an ailing maker of display TVs, was shaping up to be an acid test of Japanese reform. Now, a putative deal with Foxconn of Taiwan has descended into farce.On Thursday, Sharp unveiled a long-awaited plan to sell control to various arms of the contract electronics giant for about 489 billion yen, or $4.4 billion. But hours later, Foxconn said it was poring over last-minute “material information” couriered over by Sharp and could not sign anything yet.It was not meant to be like this. When Foxconn recently overtook a state-backed rival, the Innovation Network Corporation of Japan, as the leading bidder, that seemed like a promising sign of change in corporate Japan. Victory would mean the board picked the most compelling pitch, not the establishment favorite – even if the bidder was a foreigner. In truth, the picture is more nuanced, because Foxconn’s bid is far more respectful of the status quo than Innovation Network’s breakup proposal, and softer on creditors, too.Failure at this stage would embarrass all concerned. And the communications breakdown does not bode well for any deal in the future. The two companies have already differed publicly about whether Foxconn was the preferred bidder. Sharp now looks either desperate in leaving it so late to share important data points, or confused in failing to understand Foxconn. Analysts who were already withering about the deal’s rationale will take even more convincing.Foxconn’s founder and chairman, Terry Gou, has to decide whether to seal his unlikely victory in the light of new information. If he does, further challenges await. He will have to create a lot of value despite limited direct overlap between the two businesses.Judging by operating profit at rivals, Sharp is probably worth just 700 billion yen or so on an enterprise value basis, Bernstein analysts reckon – less than the value of its net debt and preferred shares. Taking over Sharp was already bold. The last-minute surprise makes it even more so.Quentin Webb is an associate editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »