By LIZ MOYERFEB. 24, 2016
A long-running fight between regulators seeking to curb speculation in the commodities markets and traders is heading into its next round.An advisory committee of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission — composed largely of representatives from the energy and trading industries — has recommended that the regulator abandon its plans to limit the number of futures contracts a trader can hold on certain commodities, including oil and natural gas, according to a copy of the recommendation that was reviewed by The New York Times.Such a reversal on so-called position-limits rules, if ultimately adopted by the agency, would hand a big victory to Wall Street.The C.F.T.C. Energy and Environmental Markets Advisory Committee says in its report, being released on Thursday, that the regulator should not make the proposed limits final and that it finds “scant evidence” they are necessary. It adds that if the agency does proceed, it will need to make significant changes.AdvertisementEight of the nine members of the committee, which was created by the Dodd-Frank Act, approved the report. The holdout was an official of Public Citizen, a consumer advocacy group in Washington. In a dissent being circulated with the report to C.F.T.C. officials, Tyson Slocum, director of Public Citizen’s energy program, complained that the committee was dominated by representatives of the oil and gas production sector, for-profit exchanges and proprietary energy traders.Advertisement“The participation involved in approving the report is duplicative, and weighted in favor of interests that may have a predisposition to opposing the concept of position limits,” he wrote.The advisory panel’s members include two operators of futures exchanges — the CME Group and the Intercontinental Exchange — Morgan Stanley and the energy trading firm Vectra Capital, as well as representatives of the energy and power industries.The commission declined to comment.The report and the dissent underscore a yearslong battle between C.F.T.C. officials and Wall Street over position-limits rules.Those who want position limits say they would curb speculative trading by putting a cap on the number of derivatives contracts a trader can have in a given commodity. Speculation was blamed for a run-up in energy and food prices before the recent slump in commodity prices.Opponents have argued that limits threaten legitimate hedging and other risk-reduction strategies used by companies that have big exposure to commodity price swings, such as airlines and agricultural equipment makers.They also say position limits harm the ability of traders to react to market shocks and could worsen volatility in commodity price swings.A federal judge threw out the C.F.T.C.’s first set of rules on position limits in 2012 after a lawsuit by two Wall Street trade groups, the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association.AdvertisementNew rules were proposed in 2013, but the two sides have continued to battle over issues including how broadly the agency defines legitimate hedging activity and how limits are set for subsidiaries of the same parent company.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In January, Sharon Y. Bowen, a C.F.T.C. commissioner, said she believed the agency could complete rules this year.“Left to their own devices, people will try and game the system, and use market power to their own advantage, harming markets, other investors and consumers,” she said in a speech.The commission’s chairman, Timothy G. Massad, said in a speech this month that the agency was considering having the futures exchanges play a greater role in granting exemptions for hedges. He did not give a timetable for completing a rule.The advisory committee’s recommendations, which are not binding on the C.F.T.C., could throw another obstacle on the path.The report was prepared by James C. Allison, a retired executive of the energy giant ConocoPhillips, and Craig Pirrong, a professor at the University of Houston who has been a paid consultant to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association.The advisory committee was to meet on Thursday, in part to present its findings after two meetings last year during which position limits were discussed.The meetings are presided over by J. Christopher Giancarlo, who was named a C.F.T.C. commissioner in 2014 and calls himself a sponsor of the energy and environmental markets advisory committee. Mr. Giancarlo is a lawyer and former executive vice president of GFI Group, a wholesale derivatives brokerage firm that was recently acquired by BGC Partners.The report says that there is little evidence that excessive speculation in commodities trading exists and that the proposed rules would have unintended negative consequences.AdvertisementIt recommends that the C.F.T.C. address concerns about the hedging definition and narrow the scope of the proposed rule. It also says the agency should rely on the futures exchanges to police traders and set limits.Mr. Slocum, of Public Citizen, said in his dissent that the committee had failed to give equal time to presenters, academic or otherwise, who could speak to the other side of the debate and that the report ignores research showing that position limits are necessary.“We believe that Congress clearly understood the need for the C.F.T.C. to impose position limits to protect consumers from excessive speculation, and that it should be the priority of the commission to finalize the current position limits rule,” he wrote.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Commodities Regulator Advised to Drop Plan to Limit Futures Contracts.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.