By BEN PROTESSFEB. 24, 2016
John Gleeson, a prominent federal judge and former prosecutor who handled one of Wall Street’s biggest criminal cases, is set to become a partner at Debevoise & Plimpton, according to people briefed on the matter.Judge Gleeson announced last month that he was stepping down in March after more than 20 years on the bench. At the time, he did not indicate a next move.The people briefed on the matter said he planned to join Debevoise’s white-collar defense group in New York. A spokesman for the firm declined to comment.Judge Gleeson spent over two decades as a judge in the Eastern District of New York, an important jurisdiction that covers Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island.AdvertisementDuring that span, he was known for something of a maverick streak, challenging both government plea deals and harsh, mandatory sentences.AdvertisementOn Wall Street, he oversaw the government’s deferred-prosecution agreement with HSBC, which was accused of money laundering violations around the globe. Critics attacked the deal, which allowed HSBC to avoid indictment, as a slap on the wrist for one of the world’s biggest banks.Judge Gleeson approved the deal. But whereas many judges rubber-stamp such deals, he vowed to monitor it regularly, cautioning prosecutors that deferred-prosecution agreements were still subject to judicial oversight.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Last month, Judge Gleeson approved the public release of a report from an independent monitor who highlighted recurring problems at the bank. At the time, Judge Gleeson remarked, “I can’t for the life of me figure out why the sun shouldn’t shine,” referring to being transparent.His white-collar cases were not the only ones to draw headlines. In a number of street crimes, Judge Gleeson raised concerns about harsh sentences that he was forced to impose.In one case, Judge Gleeson wrote to the United States attorney in Brooklyn to request that the office vacate certain convictions.Before being appointed to the federal bench in 1994, Judge Gleeson was a federal prosecutor in Brooklyn. His cases included the prosecution of the Mafia boss John J. Gotti.Judge Gleeson is the latest in a string of prominent hires for Debevoise’s white-collar group. Last year, the firm hired David A. O’Neil, the former acting head of the Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington. And just this week, Debevoise announced that it had hired Julie M. Riewe, a former high-ranking enforcement official at the Securities and Exchange Commission.Judge Gleeson will not be the only former federal judge in the white-collar group.He will join Michael B. Mukasey, the former federal judge and United States attorney general under George W. Bush, who is of counsel to the firm.A version of this article appears in print on February 25, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Prominent U.S. Judge, Known as a Maverick, Is Expected to Join a White-Shoe Firm.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.