AdvertisementSupported byBy Bill VlasicDETROIT — Tesla Motors said on Wednesday that it was confident it could accelerate production to meet high demand for its forthcoming Model 3 electric vehicle, despite the departure of two top manufacturing executives.The carmaker’s chief executive, Elon Musk, said that Tesla expected to produce a total of 500,000 vehicles by 2018, two years sooner than previously announced.The goal represents a huge leap from Tesla’s production of about 15,000 vehicles in the first three months of this year. But Mr. Musk expressed confidence that the company could meet the ambitious target, and begin filling more than 325,000 orders for the Model 3 by late next year.“I think we have done a good job on the design and technology of our products,” Mr. Musk said in a conference call with analysts. “The big thing we need to achieve in the future is also to be the leader in manufacturing.”The expansion will take place without the help of Greg Reichow, Tesla’s vice president for production, who is taking a leave of absence after five years with the company. Also leaving the company is John Ensign, who had been vice president for manufacturing since 2014.Mr. Musk, who said he was recruiting new manufacturing executives, gave no reason for the unexpected departures.“We’re confident that with the strength of the team, high-quality manufacturing at Tesla will continue,” he said.The company said Mr. Reichow would assist in the transition.“My belief in Tesla’s ability to successfully deliver great cars and inspire the world to drive electric remains as strong as ever,” Mr. Reichow said in a statement released by the company.Tesla has had to confront quality concerns about its Model X sport utility vehicle, including a recall last month of all 2,700 vehicles to repair a latch that prevents rear seats from folding forward in a collision.Mr. Musk did not share details of how Tesla would increase vehicle production, but he said in a letter to shareholders that the move “will likely require some additional capital” to finance the expansion.The company is also building a major battery plant for its vehicles in Nevada, and expects to produce its first battery cells there by the end of this year.An expansion is necessary to meet the extraordinary demand for the Model 3, which will be the company’s first electric vehicle aimed at mass-market consumers.With a price of about $35,000 and a battery range of more than 200 miles, the Model 3 has generated enormous interest from potential customers. Tesla has received $1,000 deposits for more than 325,000 vehicles.One industry analyst said converting all the orders into sales could be a difficult task, particularly if new electric cars from other automakers hit the market before the Model 3.“While pre-orders suggest demand could be there, with recent executive departures and more competitive offerings, this may be tough to achieve,” Efraim Levy at S&P Global Market Intelligence said in a research note.Mr. Musk reiterated earlier forecasts that Tesla would sell up to 90,000 Model X S.U.V.s and Model S luxury sedans this year.For the first quarter, Tesla reported wider losses, but larger revenues, than in the same period in 2015. The company said that it lost about $283 million, on revenues of $1.15 billion, in the first three months of this year. During the same period last year, it reported revenues of about $940 million and a loss of $154 million.Advertisement