

      By JOHN KOBLIN

UPDATED March 8, 2016

There was a logjam of big-event television on Sunday night. Both the “Downton Abbey” series finale and the latest installment of “The Walking Dead” were on at 9 p.m., while the Democratic debate aired in a two-hour block beginning at 8 p.m. Several television executives say it is no longer relevant to review same-day ratings, but these programs are near-live events that ran head-to-head on Sunday. How’d they do?“The Walking Dead” usually sees big surges from delayed viewing, but AMC’s mega-hit once again stole Sunday night. It drew 12.8 million viewers, according to Nielsen, and for perspective on just how much better it did than the Democratic debate: In the 18-to-49 year old bracket important to advertisers, it had 7.8 million viewers, 2.3 million more than the debate had in total. The final episode of PBS’s “Downton Abbey” fell short of the all-time record for the series (that belongs to the fourth season premiere in 2014, which attracted 10.2 million) but it did draw more than a million viewers than last year’s season finale. “Downton Abbey” was PBS’s highest-rated drama ever. And while it went up against the Democratic debate Sunday, its dramatic plot lines of rivalry, jealousy and revenge might align more closely with the Republican candidates.Sunday’s Hillary Clinton-Bernie Sanders debate drew 5.5 million viewers on CNN, a steep drop-off from the previous Democratic debate in February. This was the seventh meeting of the Democratic candidates, and there are some signs of debate fatigue, at least on the Clinton-Sanders debates: The most recent one last month drew eight million viewers, though it had the added benefit of airing on both PBS and CNN.  The next Republican debate is on Thursday, but it won’t have the Donald J. Trump versus Megyn Kelly story line that very likely lifted ratings for Fox News last week. It’ll also be on CNN.  After a three-month layoff, ABC’s freshman hit “Quantico” returned on Sunday night but with a series-low 3.7 million viewers. That’s down from the 4.5 million figure it had for its midseason finale in December, and it also declined in the 18-to-49 demographic. One important note on “Quantico”: The ABC show has a younger audience and benefits greatly from delayed viewing. But there’s been a lot of speculation in the industry that the pretty long hiatus for the show between December and March would blunt all the momentum it had generated in the fall. There isn’t a lot of data to work with yet, but at first blush, it may have been a legitimate concern.   Netflix doesn’t disclose viewership figures — something that has seriously annoyed rival TV executives — so there’s no way to know how the fourth season of “House of Cards” did over the weekend (It became available on the service on Friday). There is, however, some evidence that Netflix is significantly cutting into traditional TV players’ ratings. There was a study released last week that said Netflix was responsible for half the decline in TV viewership time. Advertisement