By CHAD BRAYFEB. 24, 2016
BERLIN — Guy Hands, the British founder of the European private equity firm Terra Firma Capital Partners, on Wednesday joined the voices calling for Britain not to leave the European Union, saying remaining a member of the bloc was the “right thing” for Britain and for the rest of Europe.Speaking at SuperReturn International, an investors’ conference here, Mr. Hands said that much of the world from the postwar period through the 2008 global financial crisis had experienced a period of “predictability and a unique time of consistent development” that has now ended.“This period started after the Second World War really, with the end of British and French global ambitions, and the humiliation of those two countries during the Suez crisis — a humiliation which the right wing of both the U.K. and French political parties or class have never been able to get over,” Mr. Hands said.He was referring to the 1956 invasion of Egypt by Britain and France in an effort to regain Western control of the Suez Canal. Britain and France were forced to withdraw under pressure from the United States, the Soviet Union and the United Nations.Advertisement“That humiliation is actually key to understanding that ‘back to the future’ feel you see in the U.K. today with the attempt to pull up the drawbridge to Europe and the hope that by doing so that the problems of living in a global world will go away,” Mr. Hands said.British voters will go to the polls on June 23 for a referendum on whether to stay a member of the European Union, an issue that has divided Britain and that could have tremendous consequences for the country and for Europe as a whole.In recent weeks, David Cameron, the British prime minister, has lobbied other European leaders for concessions that he says give Britain a “special status” in the union. Now he is trying to convince voters — including members of his own cabinet — to stay in the 28-nation bloc.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Cameron’s campaign received a blow this weekend when Boris Johnson, the mayor of London and a fellow Conservative, said he would campaign to leave the European Union, supporting the so-called Brexit.AdvertisementThe vote comes less than two years after Mr. Cameron and other political leaders successfully fought to keep Scotland from declaring its independence from the United Kingdom in a referendum in September 2014.About a third of the companies listed on the FTSE 100, an index of Britain’s largest publicly traded companies, have signed a letter in favor of staying in the European Union.On Wednesday, Mr. Hands said the world had returned to a period where “uncertainty is normal.”“These conflicts and divisions of previous centuries are coming to the surface now, as we see America and, indeed, the European Union weaken,” Mr. Hands said.“And those people who are cheering those two things should think very, very carefully about what they’re wishing for and what might happen,” he added. “As this division increases amongst allies, our enemies look on, and they plan how they can take advantage of the chaos that is resulting.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »