By ELIZABETH OLSONFEB. 23, 2016
Squire Patton Boggs, a law firm that was built on powerhouse lobbying in Washington but later encountered turbulence as the legal economy shifted, is acquiring a smaller firm based in San Francisco, Carroll, Burdick & McDonough.The firms, which announced the deal on Monday, said the combination would become effective in March, joining the approximately 1,500 lawyers at Squire with Carroll Burdick’s 50.In 2014, Patton Boggs, started by Thomas Boggs Jr., merged with Squire Sanders as its future became shaky. The combined firm is one of the three largest in the country, but earnings from its best-known practice, lobbying, have been declining. Last year, $25 million of the firm’s annual revenue came from its lobbying practice, a 20 percent drop from its 2014 lobbying earnings of $32 million. The firm reported $870.5 million in annual revenue in 2014.The new matchup with Carroll Burdick, which has an international focus, gives the firm a broader base and taps into that firm’s strength in product liability and class-action litigation. That is useful expertise for Squire Patton Boggs, which represents the auto-parts supplier Takata, which has faced congressional inquiries into accusations that its airbag inflaters have serious defects that have led to 10 deaths and the recall of millions of airbags.AdvertisementAmong Carroll Burdick’s clients are two German car giants, Volkswagen and Mercedes-Benz.“With this combination, and the new relationships that come with it, we have even greater opportunities to better serve our clients with strong and developing global businesses,” Mark J. Ruehlmann, the Squire Patton Boggs chairman, said in a statement.AdvertisementThe chairman of Carroll Burdick, Matthew Kemner, will serve as a board member of Squire Patton Boggs.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“As we looked to grow and expand the range of services we could offer clients,” Mr. Kemner said, “joining a firm with the scale, practice breadth and global reputation of Squire Patton Boggs was a logical step,”The smaller firm, which does not disclose its annual revenue, has offices in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Beijing, Hong Kong and Böblingen, Germany, near Stuttgart. The merger means the new entity will have 45 offices in 21 countries.The merger is part of the continued consolidation of legal practices in recent years as firms seek to bolster their market shares. There have been 16 such combinations this year, according to Altman Weil, the legal consultancy that keeps tabs on the numbers.The combined firm gives Squire Patton Boggs more of an international outlook, allowing it to edge away from any reputational or other reliance on its lobbying practice, which has struggled in recent years despite having a roster of notable names, including two former senators, Trent Lott and John Breaux.One major blow came after the firm, which lost its driving force when Mr. Boggs died in 2014, had to terminate a major source of income, the sugar industry’s multimillion-dollar court case against corn syrup manufacturers. That was a result of a conflict stemming from representation by the firm of corn syrup manufacturers in another dispute.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.