By AMIE TSANGFEB. 23, 2016
HONG KONG — Standard Chartered, an Asia-focused bank based in London, reported on Tuesday an unexpectedly large loss of $2.36 billion for 2015 after being pummeled by its exposure to emerging markets and bad loans.It was the latest in a series of weak performances by global banks, amid concerns over a slowing world economy.Standard Chartered also warned that more than 150 current or former executives were at risk of having their bonuses clawed back if they were found to be responsible for the bank’s poor performance.The bank posted a pretax loss of $1.52 billion for 2015, compared with a pretax profit of $4.24 billion the year before, and it confirmed that it would not pay a final dividend for 2015.AdvertisementThe results signaled a difficult 12 months for Standard Chartered, which is in the midst of a shake-up. It has been trying to streamline its businesses since William T. Winters was hired as chief executive last year to turn things around and is aiming to cut costs by $2.9 billion by 2018.AdvertisementThe bank has been hit hard by weakness in emerging markets. Its chief financial officer, Andy Halford, said a decline in income had been partly driven by weaknesses in emerging market currencies as well as by a crash in commodity prices. He noted that the bank had reduced its exposure to commodities by 28 percent.Standard Chartered’s operating income was $15.4 billion in 2015, a 15 percent drop from $18.2 billion the year before. Operating expenses were $9 billion in the period, down 7 percent from $9.7 billion in 2014.The bank said its bad loans increased 87 percent, to $4 billion, because of falling commodity prices and a plunge in Indian financial markets.“While 2015 performance was poor, the actions we took on capital throughout last year and in particular in December have positioned us strongly for the current macro environment,” Mr. Winters said in a news release. “We have a balance sheet that is resilient, and we are in the right markets.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Partly as a result of the sharp increase in bad loans, the bank is carrying out “accountability reviews” on more than 150 current and former executives and may claw back their bonuses, Mr. Winters added in a conference call after the earnings announcement.Standard Chartered’s “executive directors have already paid a price for the underperformance,” Mr. Winters said, referring to cuts in bonuses for senior staff members.“Apart from that, we have got a quite a robust system of accountability reviews,” Mr. Winters said, warning that bonus clawbacks could come “pending the conclusion of investigations that we’re doing around the real accountability for some of the mistakes that have been made.”Standard Chartered had said in October that it planned to cut a quarter of its senior staff, while reducing costs and reshaping the company. This meant about 1,000 management positions out of 4,000 were cut by the end of November.AdvertisementAlso in November, it said it planned to raise up to $5.1 billion in new capital and to cut 15,000 jobs, as well as to invest $1 billion in strategic businesses, including private banking, wealth management and renminbi services in China. It added that it would write off $3 billion for restructuring by the end of 2016.Shortly after the bank announced that it would raise new capital, the Bank of England singled out Standard Chartered and the Royal Bank of Scotland for failing to meet capital thresholds in stress tests that examined their ability to withstand financial shocks. The crisis situation for this particular evaluation was a potential deterioration in economic conditions in Asia and the eurozone. Despite the warning, both banks still passed the test and were not required to raise additional capital.Standard Chartered has also had to contend with increasing nervousness about the banking sector. Bank stocks sank this month in the face of fears that financial institutions might become more vulnerable to global economic weaknesses and increasing volatility. Standard Chartered’s stock joined the plunge.Standard Chartered shares in London initially dropped more than 11 percent after the earnings were published, before paring back those losses to close 4 percent lower.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.