
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

FEB. 22, 2016
It’s hard to believe, but after all these years, the Yahoo board is still a contender for America’s worst corporate board.The announcement last week that the board is officially exploring “strategic alternatives” — code for a sale — and hiring advisers is confirmation that it is still stumbling, refusing to take a stand as its chief executive, Marissa Mayer, flounders.Yahoo’s decision is something of an about-face from only a few months ago. Then, the board had decided that a spinoff of Alibaba stock was too risky. The issue was tax — the I.R.S. had stopped approving these transactions — and although its law firm was willing to bless the transaction, the Yahoo board decided not to go forward.Instead, the company said that “market perceptions” dictated that it do another transaction. The board would spin off Yahoo itself and, for good measure, said it would consider “alternatives.”AdvertisementAt the time, the announcement of this “reverse spin” was seen as a sop to the market and a way to buy time, perhaps up to a year, for Ms. Mayer to enact yet another turnaround plan. One hedge fund, SpringOwl Asset Management, argued in a 99-slide deck that to sell Yahoo now would be to do so on the cheap before the full value of a platform that has almost a billion users could be exploited.AdvertisementBut only a few months later, the board has again shifted course, this time initiating a full-fledged process to sell the company. An independent committee of the board has been formed, and lawyers and three investment banks — Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and PJT Partners — have been hired. Even the hiring of three banks shows the bloat at Yahoo as it searches for someone to lead it somewhere.The company says that this is only one option, but independent committees have a life of their own. The train has started and it will probably stop at a sale.Moreover, it is nearly impossible to run a turnaround plan when you are actively exploring a sale and are contacting bidders. The board knows this, and so the talk of a sale being “only an alternative” is cheap.It’s exactly what a weak board would do at this time — throw its hands up, despite the possible value of waiting.This is a result in part of the failures of Ms. Mayer. A rock star hire, one of her ideas was that Yahoo could be a top-tier player again if it acted like her old employer, Google. That meant spending billions of dollars on acquisitions, giving employees free food and free iPhones, sponsoring the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and throwing multimillion-dollar holiday parties.Marissa Mayer, chief executive of Yahoo, and Maynard Webb, the chairman, discuss the company's decision to spinoff of its core Internet business, leaving the Alibaba stock in the old company.All of this would be fine if you are Google or Facebook and are minting cash. But it seemed wrong for Yahoo to again sponsor the World Economic Forum this year. You may suspect that many at the forum were looking at the Yahoo executives and thinking that this would be their last year there. What a waste of money, and what bad public relations.Instead, what Yahoo is left with is a new strategy, one that is focused on “Mavens” (Silicon Valley shorthand for mobile, video, native and social platforms), while struggling with cost-cutting and an employee morale situation that Ms. Mayer describes as “complicated.” The sale announcement is only going to make the situation worse as more employees head for the doors. All that free food buys loyalty only as long as you are a winner, and Yahoo is now in triage mode.AdvertisementAll this would make it hard for any board to maintain control. The default, of course, is to pull the ripcord. I had thought that the Yahoo board was taking a stronger stance by trying to buy a year with the Yahoo spinoff, but the board has buckled under pressure, with a potential proxy contest from the hedge fund Starboard Value looming.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.And indeed, watching videos of Ms. Mayer and the chairman, Maynard Webb, talking about the company’s future gives you more a sense that they are more at odds than working together. (Watch the video and make your own conclusions.)Yahoo’s bankers will now call the usual subjects and run an auction. This typically takes about one to two months, although given the fact that everyone knows the situation here, it may go more quickly.During that time, indications of interest will be received and the field will be narrowed to a few bidders. Private equity players will undoubtedly bid, but so will strategic ones like Verizon, which bought AOL.The irony is that in the glory days of the 1990s, Yahoo bought GeoCities for $3.57 billion and broadcast.com for $5.7 billion. Ms. Mayer herself has spent more than $3 billion on acquisitions and, according to SpringOwl, has wasted another $6.5 billion in stock buybacks and failed research and development.Yahoo is likely to sell for less than all of the money Ms. Mayer spent. If she had sought to liquidate Yahoo as soon as she took over and distributed the proceeds, Yahoo shareholders would have fared much better than they will now.Whatever the outcome, Ms. Mayer will be able to parachute out of Yahoo with a big paycheck — more than $28 million, according to company’s last proxy statement, although a decline in the stock price will make this less. And that is on top of the more than $100 million she has already earned at Yahoo for her years there. The notion of pay for performance loses out once again.This does not mean that an agreement of the Yahoo board to sell the company is the end of the Yahoo story. Some hedge funds like SpringOwl are likely to oppose a sale as insufficient. Other funds like Starboard are salivating for a sale. Indeed, Starboard is likely to try to unseat the Yahoo board in a proxy contest, if only to make sure the board does not again change its mind and decide not to sell.So the next fight to come at Yahoo will be whether the company is selling too cheaply.It all brings to mind a truism on Wall Street, that once you are at the mercy of financial engineers and schemes, it is over. Say good night, Yahoo.Steven Davidoff Solomon, a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley, is the author of “Gods at War: Shotgun Takeovers, Government by Deal and the Private Equity Implosion.” Email: dealprof@nytimes.com | Twitter: @StevenDavidoffWe’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »