By SYDNEY EMBERFEB. 22, 2016
Margaret Sullivan, the public editor of The New York Times, is leaving to join The Washington Post as its media columnist, the two newspapers announced on Monday.Ms. Sullivan assumed her role at The Times in 2012, and her tenure was scheduled to end in August. In a memo to the staff, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., The Times’s publisher, praised Ms. Sullivan, saying she had “ushered the position into a new age.”He said that she would remain at the paper for “a number of weeks” and that the search for a successor was underway. “We will be in a position to name Margaret’s successor very soon,” he wrote.As the fifth public editor appointed by The Times, Ms. Sullivan wrote about journalistic issues and ethics in regard to Times coverage, addressing a range of subjects including fairness and stereotyping.Advertisement“It’s been a real privilege and an honor for me to represent the readers of The Times as their advocate,” Ms. Sullivan said in an interview. “It’s been really enjoyable at times and really difficult at times, but over all a great experience and one that I’m extremely grateful to have had.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ms. Sullivan, who worked as editor and vice president for The Buffalo News before joining The Times, said she strove to hold the organization to “its own high standards.” Among the issues she particularly remembered writing about were the use of anonymous sources and the practice of allowing sources to approve quotations in articles after the fact. She has also tackled the tension between speed and accuracy as organizations like The Times move into the fast-paced realm of digital news, most recently in a column about reporting on the death of Justice Antonin Scalia.Her position as public editor, Ms. Sullivan said, had prepared her well for her new role as a media columnist.Advertisement“I’ve been immersed for the past three and a half years in the hotbed of the New York media world,” she said. “I’m well aware of many of the issues that are the most pressing right now, so I feel as though this new position is a really natural outgrowth of what I’ve been doing.”A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Washington Post Hires the Public Editor at The Times to Be a Media Columnist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »