By LESLIE PICKERFEB. 22, 2016
Sysco said on Monday that it had agreed to acquire the Brakes Group, a European food distributor, for $3.1 billion.The transaction includes the repayment of about $2.3 billion of the Brakes Group’s debt. Sysco plans to finance the acquisition with new debt and cash, and expects it to be immediately accretive to earnings.The deal comes less than a year after Sysco terminated its $3.5 billion deal with US Foods after regulators determined that the combination would be harmful to consumers by leading to higher prices and lower service. Shortly after, the activist investor Nelson Peltz took a stake in the company and later obtained a board seat for himself and an executive at his Trian Fund Management.The Brakes Group deal has been approved by Sysco’s board, but will be subject to review by European Union competition authorities.AdvertisementBain Capital has owned the Brakes Group since 2007, when it acquired the food distributor from another private equity firm, Clayton, Dubilier & Rice. The Brakes Group itself is nearly six decades old, having been started by three brothers in 1958, to sell poultry to caterers in Britain.AdvertisementThe company expanded into producing ready-made meals for the pub market in Britain, eventually growing large enough to list on the London Stock Exchange in 1986 until taken private in 2002. Today, the Brakes Group serves 50,000 customers across Europe, including restaurants, hotels, hospitals and schools.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Last year, we said we would look for the best strategic option for Brakes Group’s next stage of development.” Ken McMeikan, the company’s chief executive, said in the statement on Monday. “Our mission is simple: to help businesses who serve food to thrive, and becoming part of the Sysco family will help us get closer toward achieving that great outcome for our customers, colleagues and suppliers.”The Brakes Group’s revenue was about $5 billion in 2015, a 6.5 percent increase from the previous year. At closing, expected by July, the combined companies will have annualized sales of about $55 billion.The Brakes Group will give Houston-based Sysco a foothold into Europe, with operations in Belgium, Britain, France, Ireland, Luxembourg, Spain, and Sweden. The Brakes Group will operate as a stand-alone company within Sysco and will continue to be led by Mr. McMeikan. The Brakes Group’s employee base of 15,000 is not expected to change.Deutsche Bank was the sole financial adviser to Sysco and is also arranging the financing for the acquisition. Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer served as Sysco’s legal adviser, while Ernst & Young provided advice on due diligence. Goldman Sachs was the financial adviser to Bain Capital and the Brakes Group, while Baker & McKenzie provided legal advice.A version of this article appears in print on February 23, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Food Deal.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.