By EMILY STEEL and BROOKS BARNESMAY 2, 2016
Hulu, until now primarily a rerun service for episodes of broadcast television shows, is working to create a more robust offering that would stream entire broadcast and cable channels to consumers for a monthly fee.The still-unnamed service was described by three executives with direct knowledge of Hulu’s plans, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Mike Hopkins, the chief executive of Hulu, may discuss the concept at Hulu’s presentation for advertisers on Wednesday.Hulu is planning to introduce the service early next year. While exact pricing details are still being determined, the new service is expected to cost about $40 a month.News of the service was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal.Hulu wants to offer what is known as a “skinny bundle” of broadcast and cable channels — in particular those operated by 21st Century Fox, the Walt Disney Company and Comcast’s NBCUniversal. Those three media companies co-own Hulu.Advertisement“We believe the important takeaway is that this is a way for programmers to take more control of their destiny in a fragmented pay TV ecosystem with heightened risk of ‘skinny’ bundle inclusion/exclusion,” Steven Cahall, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets, said in a research note on Monday.AdvertisementTwo executives described the development as part of an effort to rethink the way TV companies approach streaming video to make the experience easier for viewers.The new service would not look like a regular cable channel, instead offering a more intuitive, personalized experience, one person said. It also would allow for more targeted commercials, where advertisers could select particular audiences to see their messages. An ad for cat food, for example, would be aimed at cat owners.Offering a combination of live and recorded programming to streaming services required changing traditional rights agreements, and the TV companies are expected to start making their programs available to other streaming services in a similar fashion, one executive said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Other such slimmed-down streaming television services include Sling TV, available for about $20 a month, and PlayStation Vue, which starts at about $40 a month.The services are aimed at younger consumers who prefer a more tailored streaming experience over a traditional cable or satellite subscription package and customers known as “cord cutters” who resist paying for bundles of hundreds of cable channels.Todd Juenger, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein, said in a recent research note that while a new Hulu offering would allow TV companies the chance to capitalize on the push toward more tailored bundles, it also would come with a number of risks.One major risk could be that traditional cable and satellite distributors might see the new Hulu service as a declaration of war. That could put at risk the billions of dollars the TV networks receive each year from those traditional distributors.Mr. Juenger painted a picture of future negotiations. “We expect every future distribution negotiation would start like this: ‘Why should we carry your networks at all? If consumers want them, they can buy them directly from you? Thanks for making our decision easy — you’re dropped.’”Another risk is that the networks left out of the new offering might join together to create their own lower-cost competitor, he said.A version of this article appears in print on May 3, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Hulu Expected to Start a TV ‘Skinny Bundle’  as a Cable Alternative.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »