
Breakingviews By                     
OLAF STORBECK

MAY 19, 2016
There is one thing the shareholders of the chemical company BASF should fear more than consolidation between its German rival Bayer and the American seed maker Monsanto: their own board wading in with a counterbid.Bayer’s bid for Monsanto puts BASF’s chief executive, Kurt Bock, on the spot. With agricultural revenue of 5.8 billion euros ($6.5 billion), BASF is one of the world’s big players in an industry where everyone seems to be enthusiastically coupling. Think of Dow Chemical’s merger with DuPont, and Syngenta’s planned takeover by ChemChina. Only BASF would be left on the shelf.Moreover, a Bayer-Monsanto tie-up may put BASF’s collaboration with the Americans at risk. BASF and Monsanto work together on research and development in plant biotechnology, giving a strong reason, perhaps, to spoil Bayer’s plans.Yet the math of a BASF counterbid would be a stretch. A 30 percent sweetener on Monsanto’s undisturbed share price would mean an interloper paying around $51 billion. That’s a premium equivalent to $12 billion. Jefferies analysts estimate that BASF could generate around $720 million of annual cost synergies from merging with Monsanto by 2020, but their $5.4 billion net present value — what they would be worth as a lump sum today — falls far short of justifying such generosity. By leveraging up to 3.5 times the combined entities’ earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, BASF could comfortably take on only about $30 billion of new debt.Unlike BASF, Bayer sells seeds, which suggests greater room for synergies. Yet Bayer’s chief executive, Werner Baumann, is already struggling to persuade his shareholders that an offer for the American seed group makes sense, even as his company’s shares have fallen 10 percent in a week. Mr. Bock sat on his hands while other potential merger targets like Syngenta and DuPont were snapped up. He can afford to do it again.Olaf Storbeck is a columnist for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »