AdvertisementSupported byThe Week AheadBy The New York TimesHere’s what to look for this week.The drug maker Allergan will report its fourth-quarter earnings on Monday, but most analysts will probably be looking ahead, not back, for updates on its proposed merger with Pfizer. The two companies made big news in November with their roughly $150 billion merger, which they have said they intend to close in the second half of this year. The union would create the world’s biggest drug maker and would be the biggest tax inversion deal in history. W hen the deal is completed, Pfizer’s headquarters will move from New York to Dublin, where Allergan is based.Earlier this month, the companies shared the roster of executives who would run the new entity: Pfizer’s chief executive, Ian C. Read, would become the chief executive and chairman, while Allergan’s chief, Brent Saunders, would become the chief operating officer. —Katie ThomasMore than 90,000 technology and telecommunications insiders will gather in Barcelona, Spain, starting on Monday for a four-day trade event at which many companies like Samsung will show off their latest wireless gadgets, including smartphones and so-called wearable devices. The conference will also give tech heavy hitters like Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, an opportunity to schmooze with telecom executives, as both industries — in search of new revenue — increasingly encroach into each other’s territory. —Mark ScottPrivate equity leaders from around the world will gather in Berlin starting on Monday for SuperReturn International, a four-day showcase for the industry.The speakers include Leon Black, the founding partner of Apollo Global Management; Steve Koltes, the co-chairman of CVC Capital Partners; David M. Rubenstein, the co-founder of the Carlyle Group; former Vice President Al Gore; and Guy Hands, the chairman of Terra Firma.A recurring theme at the conference in recent years has been the industry’s desire to have the public view private equity firms as helping the companies they take over and as generally benefiting the economy, including investors like pension funds and sovereign wealth funds. —Chad BrayEven as earnings season winds down in the United States, it will be another busy week in Europe as several of Britain’s biggest banks report their annual results.The lenders HSBC, Standard Chartered, Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland are all expected to update their investors on how they performed in the fourth quarter and for all of 2015.The results come as HSBC, Standard Chartered and the Royal Bank of Scotland are each in the middle of major efforts to reshape their operations in hopes of improving their profitability and reducing their costs.They have also watched as several of their European rivals have reported mounting costs for legal and regulatory matters and outflows in client investments in response to market turmoil in the fourth quarter. —Chad BrayOn Thursday morning, the Commerce Department will release the latest figures on durable goods orders in January.Economists are expecting a big jump in the headline figure, driven by a rise in volatile aircraft orders. The core data for durable goods will be more telling, with economists forecasting little change. Whatever the data show, they will be closely watched following weakness in the fourth quarter and fears of recession lately. A jump in core activity would allay those worries, and lift hopes for better growth in the current quarter. —Nelson D. SchwartzOn Friday at 8:30 a.m., the Commerce Department will announce its revised estimate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2015. The government’s initial estimate showed growth of 0.7 percent, and that figure was expected to be revised downward to 0.5 percent. The drop is probably a result of lower-than-estimated inventory levels, which held back growth last quarter but could actually help the pace of activity in the first quarter of 2016. —Nelson D. SchwartzFinance ministers and central bank governors from the world’s leading economies will gather in Shanghai on Friday and Saturday for a Group of 20 meeting to discuss how to respond to the darkening global economic and financial landscape. Among the many issues facing them will be the plunge in world commodity prices, the potential losses at banks that have lent heavily to commodity producers, the weakening of many emerging market currencies and the slowdown of the Chinese economy. The finance ministers will try to agree on a communiqué on Saturday setting out their policy responses.Before the ministerial meeting starts, a long list of prominent policy makers will speak at the Institute of International Finance’s conference on Thursday and Friday, also in Shanghai, including Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, and Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China. —Keith BradsherAdvertisement