MAY 1, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.21 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.39 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.16 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida, $241.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Missouri State Board of Public Buildings, $100 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Dallas County Community College District, $123.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Seattle, $107.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementVirginia Public School Authority, $67.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Glendale Electric, Calif., $74.1 million of revenue bonds. CompetitiveAdvertisementMesa Utility System, Ariz., $90.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New Hampshire Health and Education Facilities Authority, $51.2 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Virginia Commonwealth Transportation Board, $276 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Milwaukee, $133.5 million of promissory note general obligation bonds. Competitive.ONE DAY DURING THE WEEKAmerican Municipal Power, Ohio. $137 million of Greenup hydroelectric project revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Ames, Iowa, $65 million of hospital revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Camas, Wash., School District No. 117, $60 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Cleveland, $53 million of general obligation bonds.Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $172 million of hospital revenue and hospital revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Henry County School District, Ga., $205.1 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Illinois Finance Authority, $484.9 million of revenue bonds. Ziegler.Jacksonville, Fla., Office of Economic Development , $125 million of health care facilities revenue refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.AdvertisementLos Angeles Department of Water and Power, $275 million of debt security. Siebert Brandford Shank.Louisiana Public Facilities Authority, $150 million of Ochsner Clinic Foundation revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Missouri Health and Educational Facilities Authority, $251.8 million of health facilities revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Monterey Peninsula, Calif., Community College District, $100 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New Hope, Tex., Cultural Education Facility Financial Corporation, $171.2 million of senior living revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.New York State Dormitory Authority, $219.3 million of school district and financing program revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New York State Dormitory Authority, $52.4 million of Pratt Institute revenue bonds. Janney Montgomery Scott.New York State Housing Finance Agency, $105.2 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York State Thruway Authority, $800 million of general revenue indebtedness bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.North Carolina University, $53.9 million of revenue bonds. PNC Capital Markets.North Texas Tollway Authority, $947 million of revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementOhio Housing Finance Agency, $112 million of residential mortgage revenue and mortgage-backed securities program bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Portage Public Schools, Mich., $147.6 million of Kalamazoo County, school building, site and refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Public Finance Authority, Wis., $143 million of solid waste disposal project revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Regents of the University of Colorado, $153.2 million of enterprise revenue and enterprise revenue refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, $475 million of consolidated bonds. Ramirez & Company.Washington State University, $89.3 million of general revenue and refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.West Hollywood, Calif., $82.6 million of lease revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Whiting, Ind., $120 million of BP Products environmental facilities project revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.A version of this schedule appears in print on May 2, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.