By CHRISTOPHER JENSENFEB. 16, 2016
John J. Riccardo, who as chairman and chief executive of Chrysler recruited Lee Iacocca before stepping aside as the automaker neared bankruptcy, died on Saturday in Ann Arbor, Mich. He was 91.His family confirmed his death.Chrysler was in turmoil by the time Mr. Riccardo took over in 1975.The Arab oil embargo had sent shock waves through the American auto industry in 1973, as high gasoline prices and long lines at the pump prompted many consumers to turn to foreign-made imports that were more fuel-efficient. Chrysler, at the time, was caught flat-footed, with cars like the New Yorker, a four-door sedan that was a shade over 19 feet long and weighed more than two tons.Beyond that, Chrysler did not have the resources of its much bigger domestic rivals, General Motors and Ford, and it faced safety and environmental regulations from an increasingly assertive government.Lynn A. Townsend, Mr. Riccardo’s predecessor, said Chrysler needed a new leader because it faced a new era in which “it will have to change substantially.”AdvertisementMr. Riccardo, an accountant who joined Chrysler in 1959, did not have an easy time ahead. He was known as “the flamethrower,” in recognition of the tough, aggressive way he approached his job and demanded performance from those under him, The New York Times reported when he was named chairman and chief executive on July 8, 1975.AdvertisementOne of his biggest priorities was to fight back against what he saw as excessive government regulation. Within weeks of becoming chairman, he made a speech in Michigan in which he argued that the federal government’s increasing interest in safety and the environment imposed unnecessary burdens on manufacturers like Chrysler and were a threat to the nation’s prosperity.Chrysler’s research, he contended, showed that new emissions standards were “substantially more stringent than necessary to protect the public health.” Failing to bring that research to the attention of the public, he said, would be “the worst form of corporate irresponsibility.”Still, it was Mr. Riccardo who gave the green light to develop a new generation of smaller, more fuel-efficient cars. He approved $700 million to build the new front-wheel-drive vehicles known as K-cars, introduced in 1980. The alternative was to spend about $300 million less on an existing rear-wheel-drive design.“For a company facing the genuine possibility of bankruptcy, it was an almost unbearable call, and it was John Riccardo’s responsibility to make,” David Halberstam wrote in his 1986 book about the auto industry, “The Reckoning.”But it would not be Mr. Riccardo who made the K-car a success. That job fell to Mr. Iacocca, the brash Ford executive who was largely responsible for the Mustang, and whom Mr. Riccardo recruited to be Chrysler’s president in 1978.Mr. Riccardo retired in September 1979, as Chrysler was trying to persuade the federal government to bail it out of its financial problems. The company’s request for a $1.2 billion package of loan guarantees had already been denied once by President Jimmy Carter.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In announcing his retirement, Mr. Riccardo cited poor health. But he also worried that remaining as chairman might make winning approval for government aid more difficult.“In the minds of many I am closely associated with the past management of a troubled company,” he said.AdvertisementHe was replaced by Mr. Iacocca, who quickly championed the K-car. To the federal government, he offered it as evidence that Chrysler could adapt. To consumers, he appeared in advertisements with the daring line, “If you can find a better car, buy it.”Mr. Riccardo’s bet would pay off. The next year, Chrysler was given $1.5 billion in federal loan guarantees. And in 1983, Chrysler paid off its loans, about seven years early.K-cars like the Dodge Aries and Plymouth Reliant had been “instrumental in the financial recovery of the company,” Chrysler said at the time. They would also pave the way for the company’s next success. In 1984, the mechanical underpinnings would form the basis for an innovative family vehicle the automaker called a minivan — a new form of car that would be broadly imitated.Mr. Riccardo was born on July 2, 1924, in Little Falls, N.Y., to Mary and Peter Riccardo. His father was a bicycle maker.Mr. Riccardo, who lived in the Detroit suburb of Birmingham, Mich., is survived by his wife, Thelma; and five children, Mary Kay Billington, Terry Riccardo, Lynn Duffy, Peter Riccardo and the Rev. John Riccardo.In World War II, Mr. Riccardo drove a truck for the Army on the Burma Road. He received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in economics from the University of Michigan.After joining Chrysler in 1959, he rose quickly through the ranks to become president in 1970, five years before becoming chairman. But his departure was swift as well — driven, Mr. Iaccoca would later say, by Mr. Riccardo’s desire to see Chrysler get the government bailout and survive.“But one thing was perfectly clear: John was sacrificing himself to save the company. He was over his head and he knew it,” Mr. Iacocca wrote in “Iacocca. An Autobiography” (1984). “He blew himself out of the water to bring Chrysler back to life. And that is the test of a real hero.”A version of this article appears in print on February 17, 2016, on Page B16 of the New York edition with the headline: John J. Riccardo, the Former Chairman  of a Chrysler in Turmoil, Is Dead at 91.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.