AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersConsumer prices in the United States were unchanged in July thanks to falling gasoline costs, but solid gains in industrial output and home building suggested a pickup in economic activity that could allow the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates this year.Tuesday’s mixed reports came as William C. Dudley, the influential president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said the central bank could increase rates next month, citing a tightening labor market that he said was starting to spur faster wage growth.Millan Mulraine, deputy chief economist at TD Securities in New York, said: “The strong housing starts and industrial output performance will bolster the Fed confidence that growth momentum has rebounded, potentially supporting the bias for a near-term hike. Nevertheless, with inflation continuing to miss to the downside, the case for caution remains strong.”July’s flat reading in the Consumer Price Index from the Labor Department was the weakest since February and followed two straight monthly increases of 0.2 percent. In the 12 months through July, the C.P.I. rose 0.8 percent after increasing 1.0 percent in June.The so-called core C.P.I., which strips out the volatile food and energy components, edged up 0.1 percent in July. It had risen by 0.2 percent in each of the previous three months. The year-on-year core C.P.I. increased 2.2 percent in July after advancing 2.3 percent in June.The Fed has a 2 percent inflation target and tracks a measure of inflation that has been stuck at 1.6 percent since March. “It’s possible” for the Fed to raise rates at its policy meeting on Sept. 20 and 21, Mr. Dudley told Fox Business Network.There were increases in the costs of hospital services, doctor visits and prescription medicine. Rents increased a solid 0.3 percent. But Americans got some relief from gasoline prices, which dropped 4.7 percent last month, the first decline since February, reflecting renewed declines in crude oil prices.Despite benign inflation, economic growth is picking up after output averaged 1.0 percent in the first half of the year. In a separate report, the Fed said industrial production shot up 0.7 percent last month after rising 0.4 percent in June.Production was bolstered by a 0.5 percent jump in manufacturing output, the largest gain since July 2015. Warmer-than-usual weather caused utilities to raise production by 2.1 percent while mining output increased 0.7 percent.In a third report, the Commerce Department said housing starts increased 2.1 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 1.2 million units in July, the highest level since February.Last month’s increase in groundbreaking activity supports the view that investment in residential construction will rebound after slumping in the second quarter for the first time in more than two years.Groundbreaking on single-family homes, the largest segment of the market, rose 0.5 percent to a 770,000-unit pace in July, also the highest level since February.Housing starts for the volatile multifamily segment increased 5.0 percent to a 441,000-unit pace. The multifamily segment of the market continues to be supported by strong demand for rental accommodation as some Americans shun homeownership after the housing market collapse.Advertisement