By SYDNEY EMBER and GARDINER HARRISJUNE 22, 2017
The Wall Street Journal is conducting a review of hundreds of articles by Jay Solomon, who was the paper’s chief foreign affairs correspondent. He was fired on Wednesday after evidence emerged that he had possibly become entangled in the commercial dealings of an Iranian-born aviation titan who was a key source for some of his stories.Karen Miller Pensiero, who oversees newsroom standards, is leading the review.It is part of The Journal’s response to an article published by The Associated Press on Wednesday that described communications between Mr. Solomon and the businessman, Farhad Azima, about a possible business venture involving aerial espionage in Iran and a $725 million defense-related contract with the United Arab Emirates.The Associated Press contacted the newspaper on Monday about documents that appeared to connect Mr. Solomon and Mr. Azima. That day, Paul Beckett, The Journal’s Washington bureau chief, was summoned to the company’s New York headquarters, where he met with top editors on Tuesday about The A.P.’s impending story.Early Wednesday, employees in The Journal’s D.C. bureau sensed that Mr. Solomon, 49, was in some trouble. Around 3 p.m. Mr. Beckett sent an email calling for a staff meeting. The meeting was brief. Mr. Beckett told the employees that he wanted them to hear from him that Mr. Solomon had been fired and that The A.P. was going to publish a story that would raise some questions about him.Advertisement“I clearly made mistakes in my reporting and entered into a world I didn’t understand,” Mr. Solomon said in a statement to The A.P. “I never entered into any business with Farhad Azima, nor did I ever intend to. But I understand why the emails and the conversations I had with Mr. Azima may look like I was involved in some seriously troubling activities.”AdvertisementThe Journal said on Wednesday that Mr. Solomon had “forfeited our trust.” The company declined to comment further Thursday. Mr. Solomon could not be reached for comment.Mr. Solomon’s firing over apparent ethical conflicts comes at time when the journalism industry is already fighting to preserve the public’s trust.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Heartbreaking,” one person wrote on The Journal’s alumni Facebook page, about Mr. Solomon’s dismissal.The firing was discussed Thursday at The Journal’s regular morning news meeting attended by top newsroom editors, bureau chiefs and other staff members. As of Thursday night, some staff members said, no memo or explanation of the firing had been sent to the newsroom as a whole.The son of a prominent diplomat, Mr. Solomon, who worked at The Journal for 23 years, commanded respect in Washington because of his foreign-affairs scoops about North Korea, Iran and other Middle East countries.But his closeness with some of his sources made some colleagues uncomfortable. During United Nations General Assembly meetings in New York, Mr. Azima often invited journalists to join him for drinks and dinner. Mr. Azima also appeared in Vienna in 2015 during negotiations on the Iran nuclear deal. In each setting, Mr. Solomon was a fixture at the bar and restaurant table with Mr. Azima, according to other journalists who attended and who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the meetings.In Washington, Mr. Solomon sometimes bragged about afternoons spent on Mr. Azima’s yacht and showed pictures around the newsroom of himself and his young son in sun-washed locales with the businessman, according to people who worked in the bureau who spoke on the condition of anonymity.In recent months, cryptic blogs surfaced that promised to reveal fraud between Mr. Azima and Mr. Solomon. There was no indication who was behind the sites, and no evidence emerged until The A.P. made The Journal aware of the documents it had obtained.An earlier version of this article referred incompletely to communications within the Journal newsroom about Jay Solomon’s departure. While no staffwide memo or other communication had been issued by Thursday night, the firing was discussed at the Thursday morning news meeting attended by top editors, bureau chiefs and other staff members.Michael M. Grynbaum contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on June 23, 2017, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Wall St. Journal Reviews Articles by Fired Reporter.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.