By JACK EWINGJUNE 25, 2017
The sometimes creaky machinery of the European Union moved swiftly on Sunday to keep the struggles of two small Italian banks from undercutting confidence in the country’s fragile banking system.The European Commission approved plans by the Italian government to provide 4.8 billion euros, or $5.4 billion, in cash and 12 billion euros in guarantees to protect depositors of the troubled lenders, Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca. The action came after the European Central Bank said late Friday that the two banks had failed or were likely to fail, a precondition for winding them down.Together, the two banks account for only 2 percent of Italian deposits. But there was a risk that their troubles could undermine confidence in other Italian banks, many of which suffer from bulging portfolios of problem loans and thin capital cushions.The move to protect the two banks comes less than three weeks after the first test of a new system created to dissolve ailing banks with minimal disruption to the European Union financial system. Markets reacted calmly this month to the failure of Banco Popular, Spain’s fifth-biggest bank, in part because the system seemed to work smoothly. Banco Popular was sold to Banco Santander, a much larger rival.AdvertisementBut Spanish banks are considered generally more resilient than Italian lenders. The risk of market turmoil in reaction to the difficulties of Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca helped account for the unaccustomed speed displayed by the European authorities over the weekend, as well as the large injection of aid, which the Italian government said would initially amount to €5.2 billion. The Spanish government did not spend any taxpayer money to rescue Banco Popular.AdvertisementBy late Sunday, the European Central Bank, the European Commission and the Italian authorities had moved to make sure Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca would open for business as usual Monday. In addition to protecting depositors from losses, the plan will also spare investors who own so-called senior bonds in the two banks — debt that is supposed to be the safest from losses.However, owners of junior bonds, which earn a higher interest rate but are riskier, will lose their money. So will shareholders in the banks, which will eventually be liquidated. Intesa Sanpaolo, Italy’s second-largest bank, after UniCredit, is expected to acquire the healthy operations of the two banks for a symbolic purchase price.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The money in the rescue plan will come out of a €20 billion fund established by the Italian government for the banking system. The fund, which recently received preliminary approval from Brussels, has been criticized for being at odds with vows by the government authorities not to spend taxpayer money to save sick banks.But in Italy, there is fear that imposing pain on middle-class depositors and investors — such as those who bought senior bonds in Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca — might drive people who suffered losses into the arms of extremist parties on the left or the right, adding to political turmoil in the country.The official explanation on Sunday for the state aid was that the failure of the two banks would be a threat to the economies of the northern Italian regions they serve. The Italian authorities said there was a good chance that the aid would eventually be recovered.The European Commission approved the rescue plan for Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca but also said it would be up to the Italian government — rather than the European bank resolution agency, the Single Resolution Board — to liquidate the lenders. It would not be in the public interest for the Single Resolution Board to wind down the banks, the commission said in a statement on Sunday.“The commission decision allows Italy to take measures to facilitate the liquidation of the two banks,” Margrethe Vestager, the European commissioner in charge of competition policy, said in a statement.A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: E.U. Approves Billions in Aid for Troubled Italian Banks.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.