By CHAD BRAY and ANDREW POLLACKAPRIL 28, 2016
The French drug company Sanofi said on Thursday that it had made a nonbinding offer to acquire the prostate cancer drug maker Medivation for about $9.3 billion in cash.Sanofi, based in Paris, publicly announced the offer on Thursday after it said that Medivation, a San Francisco biotechnology company, had not responded to a letter Sanofi sent nearly two weeks ago offering to acquire the company. Sanofi, which has been suffering from declines in sales of its main diabetes drugs, has said it is interested in making medium-size acquisitions. Analysts describe the company’s existing portfolio as weak.Under the terms of its offer, Sanofi said on Thursday that it was willing to pay $52.50 a share for Medivation, the maker of the prostate cancer therapy Xtandi. That would represent a premium of more than 50 percent over Medivation’s two-month volume-weighted average share price before takeover rumors, Sanofi said.Shares of Medivation closed on Wednesday at $52.05.“Last November, Sanofi outlined our midterm strategy, which includes rebuilding our position in oncology, one of the largest and fastest-growing therapeutic areas in the biopharmaceutical sector,” Olivier Brandicourt, the Sanofi chief executive, said in a news release.Advertisement“With Medivation’s best-in-class offerings in prostate cancer, we believe a combination would benefit patients and, at the same time, generate value for shareholders of both companies,” he added.AdvertisementIn a separate letter to Medivation on Thursday, Sanofi said that it first discussed a possible takeover in a phone call with David T. Hung, Medivation’s chief executive, on March 25 and in a subsequent conversation on April 3.Medivation expressed no interest in discussing a transaction at the time, and Sanofi sent a letter on April 15 offering to pay $52.50 a share for the company, Sanofi said.Medivation has not responded other than to acknowledge the letter’s receipt, Sanofi said.“We do not understand the delay in responding to our letter,” Mr. Brandicourt said on Thursday. “The price we put forth represents a very substantial premium, and it would be all cash without any financing condition. In these circumstances we believe it is appropriate to make this letter public, which we are doing today.”Medivation said on Thursday that its board began an evaluation of the Sanofi proposal with its independent financial and legal advisers when it was contacted by Sanofi on April 15.The company said that it expected the board to complete the review at a meeting on Thursday and it would “provide an update promptly thereafter.”“There are no assurances that a transaction will be reached or on what terms,” Medivation said in a news release. “Medivation stockholders are advised to take no action at this time.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Mr. Brandicourt, who took over as chief executive last year after Christopher A. Viehbacher was abruptly ousted, has said that Sanofi is interested in medium-size acquisitions, and that cancer treatment is an area of interest.Sanofi already sells two drugs to treat prostate cancer: Taxotere, also known as docetaxel, which now faces competition from generics, and the newer Jevtana. But both are considered chemotherapy, with the attendant side effects, and many men with the disease prefer other drugs.AdvertisementOver all, Sanofi’s portfolio of marketed cancer drugs is “weak and populated by undifferentiated also-rans,” Timothy Anderson, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, wrote in a note on Thursday.Xtandi is among the fairly new, so-called targeted drugs that are not considered chemotherapy and that have been shown in clinical trials to extend the lives of men with advanced prostate cancer. The drug, marketed by the Japanese company Astellas Pharma, had global sales last year of $1.9 billion, with Medivation’s share at $943 million.Sales could grow if the company succeeds in winning approval for the drug’s use in earlier stages of prostate cancer. But it faces competition from Zytiga, made by Johnson & Johnson, and possibly from agents under development.Xtandi has already provided a windfall for the University of California, Los Angeles as the development of the drug was based on discoveries by campus researchers. In March, U.C.L.A. sold its rights to future royalties from the drug to the investment firm Royalty Pharma, for $1.14 billion in cash and potential additional payments based on Xtandi sales. U.C.L.A. will retain $520 million of that. The rest will go to the researchers and to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, which financially supported the research.Xtandi, however, has also become one of the latest symbols of the controversy over high drug prices. Two activist groups have asked the federal government to essentially pre-empt Medivation’s exclusive patent rights and allow other companies to manufacture the product to lower prices. Some members of Congress, including Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, are also pressing the Obama administration to consider this.The federal government has so-called march-in rights because taxpayers helped pay for the drug’s development, in this case through research funding from the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense. Under federal law, the government can exercise its rights to patents if the benefits of a federally funded invention are not made “available to the public on reasonable terms.”The activist groups, Knowledge Ecology International and the Union for Affordable Cancer Treatment say that Xtandi meets this criterion because of its high price. The drug has a wholesale list price in the United States of about $88 a capsule, or $129,000 for a year of treatment, the groups say, two to four times the price in other high-income countries.In the past, however, the National Institutes of Health has declined to exercise such march-in rights merely because a drug is expensive, saying that they were not an appropriate means of controlling prices.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.