By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 25, 2017
In its pursuit of growth, Unilever is moving away from mayonnaise and toward makeup.The latest sign of the company’s shift from stalwart products came Monday, when Unilever announced plans to buy Carver Korea, an Asian skin care specialist, for 2.27 billion euros, or $2.7 billion.The deal also highlights how aggressively the British-Dutch conglomerate is pushing to expand in Asia, where the skin care market has been growing quickly. By Unilever’s estimates, South Korea is the fourth-biggest skin care market in the world. And the country’s beauty sales could reach as much as $13 billion in sales this year, according to the research company Mintel.Perhaps more important, Korean beauty products have growing fan bases in other major markets like China and Japan.Unilever struck its acquisition despite the geopolitical frost that has descended onto the relationship between Beijing and Seoul. Some Korean skin care manufacturers have suffered from China’s halting group tours into South Korea, amid anger over that country’s deploying an antimissile shield to guard against North Korea.AdvertisementWithin the Asian beauty products industry, Carver has become one of the most popular manufacturers around. Its A.H.C. line of products stretches from moisturizers to eye creams to sunblock.Advertisement“It is an impressive business that is completely aligned to our personal care strategy,” Alan Jope, the president of Unilever’s personal care business, said of Carver. “A.H.C. has been strongly gaining popularity thanks to its efficacious, innovative and premium products, and it therefore offers great opportunities for growth.”Among Unilever’s main focuses in recent years has been personal care, which is the company’s biggest sales category. The division collected €20.2 billion in revenue last year, or about 38 percent of the conglomerate’s overall sales.But Unilever has come under increasing scrutiny over its ability to grow, especially after the company spurned a $143 billion takeover bid by Kraft Heinz in February. Weeks later, it said it would undergo a major restructuring, review its dual legal structure and carry out a hefty stock buyback to appease investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company, which makes products like Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Lipton tea, has sought to shrink its exposure to slow-growth commodity businesses like food spreads, a line of products that it is in the process of selling.Under the direction of its chief executive, Paul Polman, Unilever has made acquisitions a central part of its strategy.“They help preserve our market position in attractive segments where we can bring our global scale and local strengths to bear,” the company said in its most recent annual report. “They also bring us disruptive business models and business styles that are entrepreneurial, helping transform our business culture.”In recent years, Unilever has acquired Dollar Shave Club, the men’s shaving darling, as well as the skin care product makers Murad and Dermalogica to help expand its premium offerings.Unilever is buying Carver from its current owners, Bain Capital and Goldman Sachs, who bought the beauty care specialist in 2016. That year, according to Unilever, the Korean company reported €321 million in sales and €137 million in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.“This has been a great opportunity for us to partner with a leading Korean company in an exciting segment of the cosmetics space and to help support its brand, operations and growth around the world,” Ed Han, a managing director at Bain Capital, said in a statement.Follow Michael J. de la Merced on Twitter: @m_delamerced.A version of this article appears in print on September 26, 2017, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Unilever to Buy South Korean Skin Care Specialist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.