
Breakingviews By                     
ANTONY CURRIE

AUG. 8, 2016
An unorthodox American bank deal has provided the industry with a timely reminder on mergers and acquisitions. TIAA, the giant pension fund, is acquiring EverBank, a small bank that does business primarily online, for $2.5 billion.TIAA, a nontraditional buyer, should be able to slash enough costs to justify the price tag, and regular lenders might find even more costs to cut. With earnings under pressure, such acquisitions are bound to become increasingly necessary.EverBank is a prime example of a target. Despite operating mostly as an internet bank, it bears similar characteristics to Main Street rivals: Its revenue is struggling to grow; it spends about 67 cents of each dollar of revenue on expenses, more than U.S. Bancorp and Wells Fargo, which usually spend at least 10 cents a dollar less; and its return on equity rarely pitches over the 10 percent mark generally considered sufficient to cover the cost of capital.At 1.4 times book value, TIAA is paying a fairly high premium. The price at least falls roughly in line with other deals, like BB&T’s late 2014 takeover of Susquehanna Bancshares. Covering the 26 percent premium to EverBank’s undisturbed share price would require about $80 million in cost savings, or just 13 percent of the target’s annual expenses, based on first-half figures. Standard bank-to-bank mergers often seek 30 percent or more, as BB&T did with Susquehanna.AdvertisementAs a private company, TIAA is under less pressure to make such promises. And its rationale for the deal is far more about supercharging the growth of its four-year-old internet bank, TIAA Direct. It has just $4 billion in deposits, compared with $19 billion at EverBank, which is headquartered in Jacksonville, Fla.TIAA — whose $889 billion in assets under management derive mostly from teachers, academics and government employees — has added a new wrinkle to bank deals: It is paying all cash. Banks like BB&T have sprinkled some of their deals with cash as well as stock.AdvertisementThat ups the ante for banks in general, with the opportunity for growth a rare luxury that most financial institutions only can dream about. However, lifting the bottom line with M.&A.-driven cost cuts may be the best they can hope for.Antony Currie is an associate editor at Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »