By VICTORIA FINKLEDEC. 13, 2016
Big banks are fighting tens of billions of dollars of potential legal costs linked to at least a dozen pending lawsuits arising from the financial crisis. Now they want the Supreme Court to weigh in, arguing that regulators took too long to file their claims.A handful of banks, including Wells Fargo, Credit Suisse and Deutsche Bank, have asked the Supreme Court to review a lower court decision that said the regulators filed their claims on time despite a Depression-era securities law that gave them only a three-year window.The Justice Department is pushing back. In a brief submitted last week, it says the banks’ argument lacks merit and asked the court not to take up the case.Damages related to some $37.5 billion in securities are at stake in the pending lawsuits, the banks say, in addition to billions of dollars in disputed prejudgment interest. That sum includes nearly $32 billion for cases in the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which most commonly decides securities cases. The banks say these lawsuits should have been barred under the strict three-year window and extensions should not have been allowed. The Second Circuit voted 2-to-1 against the banks last May.Advertisement“In terms of financial crisis litigation, the stakes are enormous,” said Robert Giuffra, a partner at Sullivan & Cromwell and lead attorney for the banks. “If there’s a future downturn and the federal banking agencies want to start bringing lawsuits, they would get the benefit of this favorable decision.”AdvertisementThe case involves the August 2009 failure of the Colonial Bank of Montgomery, Ala. The bank had $25 billion in assets and its collapse was among the largest in American history. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation later sued the institutions that issued or underwrote the roughly $300 million in mortgage-backed securities purchased by Colonial that led to its ruin, arguing that the disclosures on those securities contained false information or misrepresentations about the health of the underlying mortgages.The government argues that the lawsuits were timely under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act, a 1980s law coming out of the savings and loan crisis that provides the F.D.I.C., when acting as a receiver, additional time to bring claims to court by overriding other statutes of limitations. Nearly identical provisions exist for regulators overseeing credit unions and mortgages.More broadly, Firrea has proved to be a key tool for the government after the mortgage meltdown. Other provisions of the law were used to help secure billion-dollar settlements from JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and others.The banks say the F.D.I.C., along with the Federal Housing Finance Agency and the National Credit Union Administration, has incorrectly relied on so-called extender provisions to bring cases to court years after certain troubled securities were sold.They point to the Securities Act of 1933, which imposes the stricter three-year deadline, called a statute of repose. They argue that the extender provision does not explicitly override such statutes. The intent of the deadline is to provide greater certainty to financial institutions about when they are exposed to costly litigation.Regulators filed their lawsuit over Colonial in August 2012, which the banks contend was about five years after Colonial purchased the securities.A lower federal court judge sided with the industry in 2014 before the Second Circuit panel split, 2 to 1, in favor of the government last May. The appeals court found that Firrea does supersede all applicable time limits, including statutes of repose.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The appellate court correctly held that the Firrea extender provision “establishes the sole time limit applicable to suits brought by the F.D.I.C. as receiver,” the government’s brief filed last week says. “That holding does not conflict with any decision of this court or of another court of appeals.”Advertisement“To the contrary,” the brief adds, “it is consistent with the unanimous view of all of the other appellate courts, including the Fifth, Ninth and Tenth Circuits, that have considered the issue” under the extender provision “or under virtually identical provisions governing suits by other federal entities.”A F.D.I.C. spokesman, David Barr, declined to comment on the case.The financial industry has previously petitioned the Supreme Court twice to hear related cases, and has been denied both times. The court receives thousands of petitions every year, and the odds of being granted a hearing are generally very low.In their latest attempt, the banks pointed to a 2014 decision in an environmental case over contaminated drinking water, CTS Corp. v. Waldburger, in which the justices voted, 7 to 2, that an extender provision did not displace a statute of repose. The banks argued that lower courts are misapplying the law by not following the reasoning laid out in that case.“There is nothing about the CTS decision that suggested that it would apply only to that particular statute and that the principles that were announced there shouldn’t be of general application,” said Michael Dell, a partner at the law firm Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel, who is representing several trade groups in the case.The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the American Bankers Association and the Clearing House Association together filed a brief in support of the banks’ petition in November.The earlier petitions to the high court, the banks say, included key differences: One was filed shortly after the CTS decision, before there was a record of how lower courts would respond, and the another dealt with a state statute of repose, not the federal securities law at issue in the current lawsuit.The government argues that no new issues have come to light that require further examination.“This court has twice denied petitions for writs of certiorari that raised essentially the same arguments as this one,” the Justice Department says in its brief. “Petitioners identify no changed circumstance that would warrant a different result here.”Critics who would like to see the banks pay for their actions urge the court to focus on the broader policy considerations stemming from the crash.“Those who were most guilty of causing the financial crash in 2008 have fought tooth and nail to avoid being held responsible — and they have been wildly successful at doing that,” said Dennis Kelleher, president and chief executive of Better Markets, an advocacy group focused on financial markets. “One of the reasons we’re seeing political earthquakes in the U.S. is the lack of accountability on Wall Street.”A version of this article appears in print on December 14, 2016, on Page B5 of the New York edition with the headline: Big Banks Fight to Block Lawsuits Linked to Crisis.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.