By SYDNEY EMBER and DANIEL VICTORFEB. 18, 2016
Soon after the sports website SB Nation published an article on Wednesday about Daniel Holtzclaw, a former Oklahoma City police officer convicted of raping multiple women, an editor who worked on the piece sent a laudatory email to a group of writers.The article was “a nuanced portrait that never loses sight of the fact that women were victimized,” the editor, Glenn Stout, wrote. “I think people will be talking about this one.”He was right, but not in the way he had hoped.The nearly 12,000-word article immediately ignited unfettered outrage, with readers condemning its sympathetic tone toward Mr. Holtzclaw, a former college football player who was convicted on Dec. 10 of 18 counts of sexual assault against 13 black women. In particular, many objected to how much of the article was focused on Mr. Holtzclaw’s supporters, including his father and former teammates, with little space given to his victims.In a blistering critique, the sports website Deadspin wrote, “Basically, this is the local news interviewing the shocked neighbors — ‘He always seemed like such a nice kid’ — over and over again for 12,000 words.”AdvertisementSB Nation, which is owned by Vox Media, removed the article from the web just hours after it was published. In a note that went up in its place, SB Nation’s editorial director, Spencer Hall, said the article was “tone-deaf, insensitive to the victims of sexual assault and rape and wrongheaded in approach and execution.”AdvertisementHe added: “There is no qualification: It was a complete failure.”The article, which Mr. Stout had described in his email on Wednesday as “tough, insightful and timely,” was pitched in December as a story about Mr. Holtzclaw’s background as a football player at Eastern Michigan University. “The fact that he was a football player — and a pretty good one, who fell just short of the N.F.L. — seemed to have escaped all other coverage,” Mr. Stout wrote.For two months, the writer, Jeff Arnold, a freelancer with more than 20 years of experience, worked with SB Nation and Mr. Stout to write a story about how Mr. Holtzclaw, once an N.F.L. prospect, had turned into the Oklahoma City police officer convicted of sexual assault.What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.(Mr. Arnold has written several articles about hockey, golf and college football in recent months for The New York Times. Mr. Stout is best known for being the series editor for the annual Best American Sports Writing books, which highlight notable work published by newspapers, magazines and websites during the previous year.)In some ways, the article was a classic attempt to tell an untold story. It was also an example of so-called long-form journalism — narrative-driven stories that run many thousands of words and often draw much praise on social media. SB Nation has a long-form vertical, for which Mr. Stout is the editor.The Holtzclaw article is, of course, not the first story to prompt widespread vitriol. In early 2014, Grantland, the now-defunct sports and pop culture site, published a roughly 7,000-word article titled “Dr. V’s Magical Putter” — about a transgender inventor of a golf club who killed herself — that was swiftly pilloried for invading her privacy and possibly playing a role in her suicide. Gawker retracted a story last summer that accused a married male executive at a prominent media company of seeking to pay for sex with a gay escort. Critics of the story had condemned it as having no news value and being an invasion of privacy. Rolling Stone retracted a 9,000-word article, published in November 2014, about a gang rape at the University of Virginia after the veracity of the events described in the story were seriously questioned.The specific editorial process that the Holtzclaw article went through before SB Nation decided to publish — and why the article was so quickly removed from the site — is still unclear. Reached by phone on Thursday, Mr. Arnold said, “I really have no comment on it.”In his note on Wednesday, Mr. Hall, who was on vacation last week, wrote that the article “was not up to our standards as a website. It was not up to our standards as a part of Vox Media. It is not reflective of our ideals, or who we want to be as an organization in the future.” He also said there had been “objections by senior editorial staff that went unheeded,” but he did not elaborate on what those objections were.AdvertisementVox Media is planning to conduct an internal review that will be led by Lockhart Steele, the company’s editorial director. Until the review is complete, executives and editors are not willing to say much about the editorial process or about what mistakes were made.“A major editorial miscalculation was made, and it’s on us that we figure out why and limit the chances of it happening again,” said Mr. Steele, who was at a conference on Thursday in Dana Point, Calif. Jim Bankoff, the chief executive of Vox Media, was on a plane and not available to comment, according to a spokeswoman for Vox Media.In a brief phone call, Mr. Hall said: “All the help I can give you right now is our editorial note that we posted yesterday.” Reached by phone, Mr. Stout referred questions to Mr. Hall.A version of this article appears in print on February 19, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Site Removes Article Seen as Sympathetic to Rapist.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.