By SAM ROBERTSFEB. 17, 2016
Acel Moore, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who co-founded the National Association of Black Journalists and awakened his white colleagues and their readers to everyday life in black communities, died on Friday at his home in Wyncote, Pa., near Philadelphia. He was 75.The cause was complications of diabetes and chronic lung disease, his wife, Linda Wright Moore, said.Mr. Moore, who was hired as a copy boy by The Philadelphia Inquirer and worked his way up to reporter, columnist and associate editor, blazed the trail for countless protégés by lobbying for more minority hiring in newsrooms, mentoring prospective reporters and advocating more coverage of black life.“I saw how racism and the exclusion of blacks from both employment and news coverage by The Inquirer and other news agencies impacted on the events daily,” Mr. Moore recalled in his column, Urban Perspectives, in 1981.Advertisement“I saw how blacks were only featured in crime stories, how stories about the masses of blacks were ignored,” he continued. “Only the extreme elements of the black community were news. Blacks never died, never married, never did the normal things that whites did.”AdvertisementTo Mr. Moore there were no ordinary people, just people whose voices would not ordinarily have been heard — like Winifred Mitchell, who, when President Ronald Reagan died, watched on television as other men eulogized him as a great American.“And she said: ‘I must have been living in a different America than those men,’ ” Mr. Moore wrote. “Mitchell is also a great American. She is a black, middle-class, educated 74-year-old widow of a World War II veteran. She is a retired teacher and an active churchgoer who tutors children. And she’s conservative about many things; she’s no radical ideologue. She felt left out of Reagan’s America. And I know how she feels.”Acel Moore was born in Philadelphia on Oct. 5, 1940. His father, Jerry Acel Moore (the name Acel, pronounced ACE-el, was believed to be a variant of Asa), was an electrician at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard. His mother was the former Hura Mae Gordon.In addition to his wife, a former journalist, he is survived by a son, Acel Jr., from a previous marriage; his daughter, Mariah; his sister, Geraldine Fisher; and his twin brother, Michael.After high school, Mr. Moore joined the Army and served as a medic.In 1962, a time when a group of black ministers was threatening a boycott of The Inquirer for the almost total absence of blacks in its newsroom, he was hired as a copy boy.He helped change the newsroom’s culture when he refused to answer an editor’s perfunctory summons, “Boy!”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“I stood my ground by not answering to what was not my name — and took the fellow aside who yelled ‘Boy’ loudest and most frequently,” Mr. Moore recalled in 2011 when he accepted a lifetime achievement award from the National Association of Black Journalists. “I told him, quietly and privately, that calling a black man ‘boy’ was a classic, racist insult, and if he said it again that night, I would meet him after work and we could discuss it outside.”The association grew from the 44 members who gathered for its founding assembly in 1975 to more than 3,000. It provides education and career development opportunities and promotes diversity in hiring and coverage.AdvertisementMr. Moore was promoted to reporter in 1968, a month before the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated. He was the paper’s fourth black reporter.“I do what I do for two reasons,” he said in an interview with Butch Ward of the Poynter Institute, a former Inquirer editor. “First, to tell the true story of black people in Philadelphia and across America, because 40 years ago, that was not done. And second, to make a difference, to erase stereotypes that go beyond race, and to have an impact on the world because of what I write.”In the 1970s, he interviewed distraught mothers whose sons were victimized by gang violence.“They trusted Acel to tell their story because he was not a stranger to their fears,” said Arlene Morgan, a former colleague and now assistant dean of the School of Media and Communication at Temple University.He collaborated in producing “Black Perspectives on the News” for public television in the 1970s and shared the 1977 Pulitzer Prize for local investigative specialized reporting with Wendell L. Rawls Jr. for exposing abuses at Farview State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. The Inquirer’s findings prompted reforms.In 1979, he was awarded a Nieman fellowship at Harvard. He later joined the editorial board of The Inquirer and was named associate editor and a columnist.Before retiring in 2005, he introduced his readers to other emblematic blacks, like Eula Cousins, who gathered 30 guests for brunch one day to celebrate her 101st birthday and urged them to focus on “the present and the future, whatever time I have left.”Mr. Moore paused to ponder her past. He wrote: “In many ways, Eula Cousins’s story is the story of black Philadelphia during a time when the white media and others who recorded the city’s social history ignored the accomplishments of African Americans. I am happy to tell her story now.”A version of this article appears in print on February 18, 2016, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Acel Moore, 75, Pulitzer Prize Winner.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.