By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 28, 2016
WASHINGTON — Earnings for Gilead Science tumbled 17 percent in the first quarter as steeper discounts and rebates on its blockbuster hepatitis C drugs cut into sales.Gilead, maker of Harvoni, the first once-daily, single-pill regimen for hepatitis C, said on Thursday that sales of the best-selling drug fell 15 percent to $3 billion in the quarter, with the steepest drop-off in the United States and Japan.The drug maker attributed the decline to discounts given to private insurers and higher rebates for patients in government-controlled health plans like Medicaid. Harvoni’s decline was offset in part by higher sales for an older hepatitis C drug, Sovaldi, which grew to $1.28 billion.Gilead, based in Foster City, Calif., has grown into one of the world’s biggest drug makers because of its breakthrough treatments for hepatitis C, a liver-destroying virus estimated to affect about 185 million people worldwide.AdvertisementHowever, use of the drug has been slowing in the United States, where many of the patients who are eligible and able to afford the drugs have already received them. Additionally, many private insurance plans and government health programs have been limiting which patients they will cover, often waiting until the patients have suffered significant liver damage.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But Gilead has also become an unwilling symbol of soaring drug prices because of the high list prices for the hepatitis drugs: about $94,000 for Harvoni and $84,000 for Sovaldi. Insurers in the United States have demanded steep discounts — as much as 45 percent — to cover the two drugs but, even so, the prices strain health care budgets.AdvertisementFor the period that ended March 31, the drug maker posted revenue of $7.79 billion. Profit slipped to $2.53 a share, compared with $2.76 in the year earlier period. Adjusted for one-time costs and adjustments the company would have earned $3.03 a share.Gilead sells the top-selling H.I.V. treatments Truvada, Viread and Stribild, and others. Sales of those drugs continued to climb. The company reported $150 million for a single-tablet H.I.V. combination called Genvoya, which was released in November.The company’s shares have fallen 3 percent since the beginning of the year. The stock closed regular trading at $97 and shed more than 5 percent in after-hours trading.A version of this article appears in print on April 29, 2016, on Page B7 of the New York edition with the headline: Discounts on Hepatitis C Drug Dent Gilead’s Earnings.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.