By AMIE TSANGAPRIL 4, 2017
President Trump has promised to overhaul taxes, a pledge that has cheered investors.But there’s a problem: He hasn’t yet named the people who would do it.Any changes would be more difficult to enact without the right people in place. The last successful tax revamp, under Ronald Reagan in 1984, was a mammoth task. It took the Treasury Department 10 months to report back with possible paths.Apart from Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, none of the 27 other political appointees to the Treasury Department have been confirmed, according to the Partnership for Public Service’s nomination tracker.Mr. Trump has announced only six other Treasury appointees and has yet to name anyone as assistant secretary of tax policy. The six appointees, though, have been well received on Capitol Hill.AdvertisementAt the current pace, Mr. Trump’s Treasury picks might not be in place until summer or later. Mr. Mnuchin has so far done most of the heavy lifting.AdvertisementRepresentative Kevin Brady of Texas, the Republican chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, where tax legislation originates, said he had mostly been dealing with Mr. Mnuchin and with Gary D. Cohn, Mr. Trump’s top economic adviser.A federal regulator has ordered Wells Fargo to pay $5.4 million to a former manager who said he had been fired after reporting what he suspected was fraudulent behavior. The Labor Department’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration also said that the bank must hire him back.The sum is the largest individual award ever ordered through OSHA’s whistle-blower protection program, said Barbara Goto, the agency’s regional administrator in San Francisco.The manager was not named, but he worked in the bank’s wealth management group. It is also not clear whether the suspected fraud he was trying to report was part of the scandal over fake accounts that has engulfed the bank in recent months.Wells Fargo said that it would fight the ruling and that it did not yet know whether the former employee would return to his previous position.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The bank has been in turmoil since admitting that its employees opened as many as two million fraudulent accounts, and it has drawn criticism for not heeding what appear to have been years of internal warnings about the problem.Former employees have said that they were penalized or fired after trying to raise alarms, and the bank has hired outside investigators to look into claims of retaliation.AdvertisementInvestors may be getting more bearish on traditional auto stocks, but Tesla is surging as investors make a bet on the potential of electric cars.As Tesla’s sales have risen, conventional automakers have struggled to convince investors that they are at the forefront of the new technology being developed for self-driving vehicles or electric cars.“It’s almost like Tesla is positioned in people’s minds as an energy storage company that happens to put most of its batteries on wheels,” said Andrew Stewart, chief investment officer at Exchange Capital Management.Still, the road ahead may not be so smooth for Tesla, which has set some ambitious goals to sell its new, cheaper model at far greater volumes.Ferdinand Piëch, the former chief executive of Volkswagen, has agreed to sell most of his 15 percent stake in the family holding company to his relatives, averting the turmoil that might have ensued if an outside shareholder had come in.The stake was valued at more than $1 billion and would have been attractive to Chinese investors, among others.The Porsche and the Piëch families own Porsche Automobil Holding, which owns 52 percent of Volkswagen’s voting shares.Mr. Piëch’s dictatorial management style was seen as a contributing factor in the emissions cheating scandal that has roiled the company since 2015. But the families have been reluctant to appoint outsiders to top management positions at Volkswagen.“Billion+ Consumers, 20+ Brands, Unstoppable Team. #TakeTheOath. Summer 2017.”— Tim Armstrong, the head of Verizon’s AOL division, on Twitter.Verizon’s plan to house AOL and Yahoo together under the new name Oath after the acquisition of Yahoo is complete was met with bewilderment.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.