By ELIZABETH OLSONAUG. 9, 2016
It is official. The American Bar Association says it is professional misconduct to discriminate against or harass opposing counsel, or anyone else for that matter, in the course of practicing law.The ethics rule now forbids comments or actions that single out someone on the basis of race, religion, sex, disability and other factors. Nearly two dozen state bars and the District of Columbia bar have similar rules. But there has been no national prohibition of such behavior, which, many female lawyers complain, results in too many “honeys,” “darlings” and other sexist remarks and gestures toward them while they are trying to practice their profession.Without a flat prohibition, advocates of the rule said, using demeaning and misogynistic terms and actions to undermine opposing counsel and others too often does not have consequences.Any penalties would be determined by state bar associations and might include fines or suspension from practice, depending on the severity of the offense.AdvertisementWhile critics argued that such a broad rule would impair free speech while representing clients and impinge on the freedom to reject potential clients, no lawyers signed up to speak against the revised rule, which was passed Monday afternoon by a voice vote at the A.B.A.’s annual meeting in San Francisco.AdvertisementTo address objections by litigators who argued that the change could hinder vigorous representation of clients, the drafters added qualifiers. The amended ethics rule now bans the offensive conduct only if the lawyer knows or reasonably should know it is harassment or discrimination, and does not apply to “legitimate” legal advice or advocacy. That gives offenders some wiggle room to contend that they did not know their conduct or remarks were prohibited.The guidance that comes with the rule, however, defines discrimination as “harmful verbal or physical conduct that manifests bias or prejudice toward others.”
            As the American Bar Association took up this issue, we asked female lawyers on Facebook about their personal experiences. We received dozens of responses and hundreds of comments. Below are a handful. Read More » “Harassment includes sexual harassment and derogatory or demeaning verbal or physical conduct,” the guidance says.The guidance also spells out what constitutes sexual harassment and the settings that are included while practicing law. Those settings not only include the courtroom, but also “interacting with witnesses, co-workers, court personnel, lawyers and others” and “managing a law practice or law firm” or “participating in bar association, business or social activities in connection with the practice of law.”Myles V. Lynk, a law professor from Arizona who leads the association’s Standing Committee on Ethics and Professional Responsibility, which pushed for the change, said during the debate at the annual meeting that the American Bar Association needed “to catch up” with the states, which had already adopted such a prohibition.“The states have not waited for the A.B.A. to act. They have been laboratories of change,” Mr. Lynk said. “It is time for the A.B.A. to catch up.”A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: No More ‘Honey’ in Court: A.B.A. Says Harassment Is Professional Misconduct.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.