By SYDNEY EMBERAUG. 3, 2016
Kevin Roberts, the executive at the advertising company Publicis Groupe who was recently put on leave over dismissive comments he made about gender diversity in the ad industry, said that he would leave the company on Sept. 1 “so that we can all move forward.”In a statement provided to The New York Times, Mr. Roberts apologized for his remarks, which he made in an interview with Business Insider that was published on Friday, and said he had “failed exceptionally fast.”“My miscommunication on a number of points has caused upset and offense,” he said in the statement, his first public comments since the interview was published. “For this I am sorry.” He did not specifically address any of the statements he had made in the interview.Mr. Roberts, 66, had agreed through a public relations agency on Monday to speak with a reporter for The New York Times, but the agency said on Tuesday that he had decided against the interview and would only provide a statement.In the interview with Business Insider, Mr. Roberts, chairman of the Saatchi & Saatchi agency and head coach at Publicis Groupe, its parent company, said that the debate about gender diversity in the advertising industry was “all over.” He also said he did not spend “any time” on gender issues at his agencies and suggested that women were happier in nonleadership roles.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.His comments immediately prompted criticism on Madison Avenue, which has been struggling to publicly redefine its culture after a lawsuit filed several months ago raised questions about whether the industry was still stuck in the “Mad Men” era.Women make up almost 50 percent of the advertising industry, but only 11 percent of creative directors, according to a survey by the 3% Conference. Twenty-five percent of women in advertising said they had personally experienced gender discrimination, according to the survey.Publicis executives quickly condemned Mr. Roberts’s statements and placed him on leave. In an internal memo on Saturday, Maurice Lévy, the chief executive of Publicis, who himself has made dismissive comments about gender diversity in the industry, called Mr. Roberts’s remarks “extremely disappointing, shocking, uninformed and counter to the spirit of Publicis Groupe.”Mr. Roberts’s full statement is below:Statement by Kevin Roberts“Fail Fast, Fix Fast, Learn Fast” is a leadership maxim I advocate.When discussing with Business Insider evolving career priorities and new ways of work/life integration, I failed exceptionally fast.My miscommunication on a number of points has caused upset and offense, and for this I am sorry.I have inadvertently embarrassed Saatchi & Saatchi and Publicis Groupe, two companies I love and have been devoted to for almost 20 years.I have expressed my regret and apology to the companies for the furor my remarks and language stimulated, and I extend this to colleagues, staff and clients.So that we can all move forward, I am bringing forward my May 1, 2017, retirement from the company, and will leave the Groupe on September 1, 2016.There is a lot of learning to reflect on, and within the thousands of tweets, comments and articles there are many powerful and passionate contributions on the changing nature of the workplace, the work we do, what success really looks like, and what companies must do to provide women and men the optimal frameworks in which to flourish.I believe that new thinking, frameworks and measures are needed to make more rapid progress on diversity in all its forms, in all professions and occupations. Hopefully, the focus on this serious and complex issue will gather momentum.A version of this article appears in print on August 4, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Apologizing, Publicis Executive Is Set to Resign.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.