By RANDALL SMITHAUG. 9, 2016
When the activist investor Carl C. Icahn bought 15 percent of the organic and natural products maker Hain Celestial in 2010, the company’s chief turned for advice to Mr. Icahn’s own Wall Street banker, Richard Handler, the chief executive of the investment bank Jefferies.When Mr. Icahn decided to sell that stake at a big profit three years later, Jefferies was the buyer. It quickly resold the shares to its clients in two bites for a total of $611 million.In the six years since regulators forced Wall Street banks to rein in risk-taking, Jefferies has emerged with an appetite for risk and a set of relationships to rival bigger Wall Street firms. It never took federal bailout money. Now, as a subsidiary of the conglomerate Leucadia National, Jefferies is not subject to the trading restrictions and capital requirements imposed on other investment banks that did take bailout funds and became part of bank holding companies. That gives it room to make bolder moves than some of its larger peers.It is easier for Jefferies to do deals that exceed “cookie cutter” debt limits, said Chris Kotowski, an analyst at Oppenheimer.AdvertisementAlthough Jefferies’s $37 billion in assets remain tiny next to Wall Street giants like Goldman Sachs at $878 billion, its share of Wall Street trading has doubled since 2006, and Leucadia “can write a significant equity check at a moment’s notice,” Mr. Kotowski said.Jefferies and Leucadia scored profits on a $125 million “rescue” equity injection that helped save Knight Capital in 2012, a $300 million rescue of the online currency dealer FXCM in 2015, and a 23 percent stake to stabilize ownership of HRG, a remnant of the hedge fund Harbinger Capital. Leucadia nearly doubled its money on the three stakes, according to company reports.Leucadia’s willingness to provide such capital relatively quickly “stands in contrast with big bank holding companies which have shrunk and retreated,” said Bill Ford, the chief executive of General Atlantic, which manages $17 billion and invested alongside Jefferies in Knight.AdvertisementMike Holland, a money manager, said Leucadia was “not afraid to go there wherever there is and have a look.”Some of its risks have backfired, however. Leucadia, which bought Jefferies in 2012, has since booked losses from the investment bank’s exposure to energy, junk bonds and Bache, the commodity division that it bought from Prudential in 2011 and sold to Société Générale last year. Leucadia also stumbled because of its own 79 percent stake in National Beef, a meat-processing business that has been struggling.Shares of Leucadia fell 46 percent from their peak in May 2013 through last year, while those of 13 business peers rose an average 14 percent. This year, despite battling volatile markets early in the year, Leucadia has outperformed as results started to rebound. At Jefferies, profit for the second quarter, which ended in May, was 10 percent lower than the same period a year ago but compared favorably with a $167 million first-quarter loss. In a statement announcing earnings, Mr. Handler said conditions were returning to “a more normal level.”Mr. Handler, who became the Jefferies chief executive in 2001 and chairman the following year, does not court media attention or like to be photographed. He dresses casually in polo shirts as he works in his Manhattan corner office, which is decorated with a picture of him and a fellow New Jersey native, Bruce Springsteen, on the wall.Under his leadership, Jefferies had the best stock performance of any investment bank through 2012, Mr. Kotowski said, sailing relatively unscathed through the financial crisis, in part by selling a 14 percent stake to Leucadia in early 2008.This helped Jefferies pick up bond teams from Merrill Lynch and the former First Albany Capital, and a group of 36 bankers from UBS in 2009, including the  health care banker Benjamin Lorello. Troubled by the crisis, UBS had slashed banker bonuses by 80 percent.The trading and merchant banking risks the firm now takes are no greater than those for other Wall Street dealers, say people at the firm. Jefferies says it has cut its leverage, or the ratio of assets to equity capital, from 17 in 2010 to a current 10. The current level is below that of competitors, Moody’s Investors Service said.This year, Jefferies’s interests in the growing financial technology field put it back in the spotlight. Jefferies has packaged loans for resale to investors from upstart lenders including Avant, CircleBack Lending and OnDeck. The firm ranks an outsize No. 5 in underwriting such loan packages, according to PeerIQ, which tracks marketplace lending. Jefferies has also taken venture capital-style equity stakes in two financial tech lending start-ups, Affirm and Bond Street.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Jefferies is also linked to Lending Club, the peer-to-peer lender that has been in turmoil since an internal investigation revealed improprieties in the sale of loans and a separate disclosure issue, which resulted in the ouster of its chief executive in May. About $22 million in loans sold to Jefferies did not meet the investment bank’s criteria, and the company bought them back.AdvertisementBut Jefferies did end up leading a deal that packaged Lending Club loans for investors. On Monday, Lending Club announced that the near-prime $134 million deal had three times as much investor demand as needed. This heavy interest came about even though the entire marketplace lending sector has also been hit with turbulence this year as rates for new loans rose to reflect rising delinquencies.Leucadia’s other non-Jefferies-related assets remain a grab bag, including an Italian broadband company, a plastic net maker, auto dealers, timber and real estate. And the jury is out on more than $500 million in postmerger investments in energy and gold mining, and another $500 million in hedge funds.Mr. Kotowski of Oppenheimer is bullish, but some investors shun the stock. Ted Hart, who follows financial stocks at Tufton Capital Management in Baltimore, said the new Leucadia with Jefferies as its core was highly correlated with the high-yield debt market. In its former life as a multi-industry conglomerate, “If one business wasn’t doing well, you had another that was picking up the slack,” Mr. Hart said.But now, he added: “The outlook for Leucadia is kind of the outlook for the high-yield market, which isn’t too rosy. With oil prices remaining low, Leucadia may continue to struggle in high-yield debt underwriting and trading. It looks cheap on a price-to-book-value basis, but it’s an entirely different company.”Jefferies stock swooned in late 2011 after the collapse of the commodities broker MF Global raised some concerns about its exposure to European debt, which it quickly got off its balance sheet. MF Global’s fate had raised similar questions about investor exposure at Jefferies’s commodity business, Bache.The son of a tax preparer from Fair Lawn, N.J., Mr. Handler, 55, sold vacuum cleaners door-to-door and life insurance at a bank before graduating from the University of Rochester. After a stint as a junior analyst at First Boston during its Wasserstein Perella mid-1980s heyday, he got an M.B.A. from Stanford and worked in the Los Angeles office of Drexel Burnham Lambert before that firm’s demise in 1990. He built the Jefferies junk-bond desk before he became chief executive.At Jefferies, trading and banking often rest partly on relationships, trust and loyalty — a culture set by Mr. Handler. His dealings with Mr. Icahn, once a prominent Drexel client, illustrate that point. Jefferies led or helped lead bond sales of $3.7 billion in 2014 and $2 billion in 2010 for Icahn Enterprises, Mr. Icahn’s main investment vehicle.Jefferies also stood ready to arrange debt financing for attempts by Mr. Icahn to buy Clorox in 2011 and Dell in 2013. Both deals were ultimately abandoned.AdvertisementMr. Handler’s Drexel relationships were on display at an 80th birthday gathering he hosted for Mr. Icahn at a New York steakhouse in February.On hand were Michael Milken, Drexel’s onetime junk-bond chief; Leon Black, a former top Drexel banker who is now chief executive of the private equity firm Apollo Global Management; and the former Drexel client Bennett LeBow, now chairman of the Vector Group, another staunch Jefferies client.The same group, minus Mr. Milken, meets monthly, said an attendee, Howard Lorber, chief of the Vector Group, a tobacco producer and majority owner of the Douglas Elliman real estate brokerage firm. Mr. Handler values his close relationship with Mr. Milken, longtime associates say.Irwin Simon, chief of Hain Celestial, recalled that as he got to know Mr. Icahn and Mr. Handler, he wound up having dinner at Mr. Icahn’s beachfront mansion in East Hampton. And after he had knee surgery, Mr. Handler visited him at home. “He’s a tough negotiator and good businessman,” Mr. Simon said. “I believe he is a very honest and loyal person, but I wouldn’t want to cross him.”A version of this article appears in print on August 10, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Behind a Bold Bank: an Appetite for Risk  and Room to Move  .  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.