
Breakingviews By                     
RICHARD BEALES

SEPT. 26, 2017
“Move fast and break things” may have been Facebook’s mantra, but few companies have taken the slogan to heart like Uber Technologies. The ride-hailing company, which not long ago was valued at nearly $70 billion, has pushed aggressively into one market after another.In London, watchdogs are now pushing back, and the Silicon Valley invader is finally seeking permission to continue operating, rather than asking for after-the-fact forgiveness for breaking rules.Dara Khosrowshahi only recently took over as chief executive from Travis Kalanick, an Uber founder who was forced out of the top job for allowing, with an insufficiently vigilant board, a frat-boy culture to permeate the rapidly growing company.With Uber’s reputation tarnished and its valuation in danger of falling, Mr. Khosrowshahi came into the job on a damage-limitation mission. That was even before London’s transportation regulator, Transport for London, dropped its bombshell last week, declining to renew the company’s license to operate in the British capital.AdvertisementMany Londoners are up in arms. A “Save Your Uber” petition begun by the company — a tactic that previously helped reverse regulators’ decisions in London and New York — has attracted nearly 800,000 signatures.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Aside from valuing the usefulness and cost-effectiveness of the service, some Uber users fear that Transport for London’s decision suggests that London isn’t as open for business as it likes to appear, especially with the so-called Brexit looming. Yet officials elsewhere have shown themselves even less accommodating. Uber executives were arrested in France, for example. And rules mostly exist for a reason.AdvertisementIt is true that the operators of London’s famous, and famously pricey, black cabs, and labor groups, have long lobbied against Uber and its tech-savvy rivals. But the young company has a record of doing whatever suits it best and only answering questions later. Transport for London is right to take doubts about customers’ safety and security seriously, and to consider questions about software that could hamper effective regulation.Mr. Khosrowshahi’s plea for another chance and offer to “work with London to make things right” attest to a more inclusive, stakeholder-friendly approach than the one exhibited by his prickly predecessor; it also contrasts with the initial response from top company executives in Britain. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and others seem to be receptive.As Uber tries to turn its dramatic market-share success into something profitable, the company needs more of that kind of approach. Starting on the Thames, compromise could become its reboot strategy.Richard Beales is deputy editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »