By AMIE TSANG and MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDSEPT. 26, 2017
The Singaporean sovereign wealth fund Temasek will take a minority stake in the talent agency CAA, in a deal expected to be announced today, DealBook is the first to report. TPG Capital will remain the agency’s biggest shareholder.CAA’s president, Richard Lovett:“As one of the most successful and sophisticated investors in the world, Temasek provides an extraordinary level of insight and resources as we continue to provide the best opportunities for the company and our clients.”The Context• Both CAA and WME, another major talent agency, have drawn billions of dollars in investment as they push to expand globally and into the digital realm.• CAA took an investment earlier this year from CMC Capital Partners of China that also created a Chinese joint venture.• It isn’t just Jared Kushner. At least six of Mr. Trump’s closest advisers — including Ivanka Trump, Stephen K. Bannon, Reince Priebus and Gary D. Cohn — also used private email addresses to discuss White House matters, according to The New York Times’s Matt Apuzzo and Maggie Haberman.Advertisement• The billionaire investor Peter Thiel is under consideration for chairman of the president’s Intelligence Advisory Board, according to Vanity Fair's Adam Ciralsky:Another senior official had this to say: “What Peter has been offered” — the P.I.A.B. role — “is a hugely important position. It’s the only meaningful executive-branch oversight of the intelligence community. This P.I.A.B. will have more authority than it did under Obama.• Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, under the gun on a tax overhaul, lacks the political experience of hs predecessors, The Wall Street Journal's Richard Rubin and Kate Davidson write:He didn’t follow the trajectory of Henry Paulson or Robert Rubin, who acquired Washington contacts while leading Goldman Sachs. And while Mr. Mnuchin has a close relationship with the president, it doesn’t appear to be like that of James Baker with Ronald Reagan, which allowed Mr. Baker to manage the last major revamp of the tax code.Some of the N.F.L.’s deep-pocketed sponsors have openly sided with the players over President Trump in the controversy over kneeling during the national anthem.AdvertisementOthers are trying to straddle the divide.Bloomberg’s Jeff Green and Eben Novy-Williams:• Nike said it “supports athletes and their right of freedom of expression on issues that are of great importance to our society.”• Hyundai said it would “stand for and respect individuals’ freedoms to express their First Amendment rights in any peaceful manner in which they choose.”• Ford Motor said that it respected “individuals’ rights to express their views, even if they are not ones we share. That’s part of what makes America great.”But Denver’s CBS4 reports that kneeling during the anthem appears to have cost the Denver Broncos linebacker Von Miller an endorsement from a local car dealership.Worth NotingTwo of Mr. Trump’s friends in the N.F.L. have rebuked the president’s comments.• The New England quarterback Tom Brady to a Boston sports radio show: “Yeah, I certainly disagree with what he said. I thought it was just divisive.”• The Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones linked arms with his players and knelt before the anthem played in last night’s game against the Arizona Cardinals.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.CBS’s ratings for the N.F.L. games it carried on Sunday were up 4 percent from last week, according to Yahoo Sports’s Frank Schwab. NBC’s were down slightly, NBC News reports.AdvertisementThe initiatives that the embattled investment bank announced on Monday come as its shares have fallen nearly 73 percent over the last five years.The Terms• Goldman Sachs will provide $300 million financing to buy back stock.• Greenhill’s founder, Robert Greenhill, and its chief executive, Scott Bok, will buy $10 million worth of stock. Mr. Bok is taking a 90 percent salary cut.• Greenhill will buy as many as nine million outstanding shares for $17 each, an 18 percent premium to the stock’s closing price on Monday.The ContextThe Financial Times's Sujeet Indap and James Fontanella-Khan point out that newer firms like Moelis & Company and Centerview Partners have grown faster in recent years.And The Wall Street Journal's Liz Hoffman notes: Mr. Greenhill has stepped back from the business in recent years, friends and employees say. Key relationships that spurred deals in the firm’s early years have gone quiet as key contacts retire. The former president’s speech at the brokerage firm Cantor Fitzgerald didn’t include swipes at the Trump administration.What it did include: A sober look at what the Affordable Care Act accomplished and what needs fixing.More from The Times’s Kate Kelly, who was on the scene: Mr. Obama ended up fielding only one inquiry — about technology and government health care costs — and answered it soberly and at length, running out the clock. Mr. Obama then beseeched the audience of health care business professionals to keep the sick and scared at the core of what they did.“If you’re going to make money this way, you better think about it,” he said.Kaleil Isaza Tuzman, a former dot-com entrepreneur and Goldman Sachs banker, faces trial in October in federal court in Manhattan on charges of conspiracy to commit security and wire fraud.But he had already spent 10 months in a Colombian prison, where, he says, he was abused and raped.Mr. Tuzman recounted his experience to DealBook’s Andrew Ross Sorkin:“They pushed me down to the floor by my head and shoulders. One of them had a knife at my Adam’s apple. I tried to leave my body, pretend that I wasn’t living it. I wanted to die. I’ve regretted at times since then that I didn’t jerk my head away and let my throat be cut.”Cities are going to extreme lengths to draw the e-commerce titan’s attention, according to The Times’s Nellie Bowles:• Getting an Amazon Echo to suggest your city when asked where the company should build its second headquarters (Danbury, Conn.; Washington)Advertisement• Building war rooms to analyze what Jeff Bezos likes (Detroit; Tulsa, Okla.)• Sending delegations to Seattle (Philadelphia; Ottawa)Jeff Cheney, the mayor of Frisco, Tex., made a video: The video opens on him holding an Amazon box and saying, “Amazon, you’re growing your business, and we want to grow with you.” Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, is seen talking about catching the “Frisco Flu,” which the mayor’s office said was a phrase Mr. Jones came up with. Mr. Cheney also gets a Jamba Juice (Jamba Juice is based in Frisco).“While Uber has revolutionized the way people move in cities around the world, it’s equally true that we’ve got things wrong along the way. On behalf of everyone at Uber globally, I apologize for the mistakes we’ve made.”— Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, in an open letter in London’s Evening StandardFollow Amie Tsang @amietsang and Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.