
Breakingviews By                     
KEVIN ALLISON and


FIONA MAHARG-BRAVO

DEC. 13, 2016
Exxon Mobil’s next chief executive will confront a weakened empire in 2017. With its current boss, Rex Tillerson, selected as Donald Trump’s secretary of state, the likely successor, Darren Woods, will take charge of the $380 billion oil giant in the face of still-weak prices and falling reserves.With Saudi Aramco hoping to take over as the world’s biggest listed oil group and rival Shell coming up fast, Exxon’s days as Big Oil’s unparalleled heavyweight are numbered.Known for its high-quality assets and investment discipline, Exxon was worth $350 billion when Mr. Tillerson became chief executive in 2006, more than double its next-closest listed competitor, the $150 billion Shell.That was before the shale oil boom redrew the global petroleum map. Exxon was late to the party, then overpaid when it finally jumped in with a $39 billion deal for XTO Energy in 2009. Two years of low prices and natural declines in production from Exxon’s more conventional fields have also taken a toll.AdvertisementThe Texas giant’s oil output was flat at 3.9 million barrels per day in the third quarter as crude held below $50 a barrel. Exxon has warned it might cut the crude reserves reported in its books by nearly 20 percent if the recent OPEC-inspired price rebound fizzles out.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The company’s market cap of around $380 billion is not much changed from a decade ago, and could soon be dwarfed by the state-owned Aramco, which analysts estimate could be worth up to $1 trillion if it goes ahead with an expected 2018 initial public offering.Shell — now valued at more than $200 billion thanks to its 2015 acquisition of BG Group — may produce more barrels than Exxon by 2019. Shell’s leader, Ben van Beurden, also wants to beat his larger rival in terms of total shareholder return.AdvertisementThe good news for Mr. Woods is that Exxon still dominates in one key respect: return on average capital employed. Its low-cost assets and famed efficiency allowed Exxon to generate a return of about 8 percent on the share capital and debt provided by its investors as prices slumped in 2015, well ahead of Shell’s 2 percent. Over the last five years, Exxon’s return on that measure has bested Shell’s by nearly 7 percentage points on average. That is one imperial feature that will take time to erode.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »