By KATIE THOMASDEC. 14, 2016
Two former executives at a New Jersey pharmaceutical company were charged with conspiring to fix prices on generic drugs, the Justice Department said Wednesday.Federal prosecutors said Jeffrey Glazer, a former chief executive of Heritage Pharmaceuticals, and Jason Malek, a former president, were involved in a scheme to artificially inflate the price of an antibiotic and a diabetes medication.Prosecutors said the charges, filed in federal court in Philadelphia, are part of a broad antitrust investigation into price fixing in the generic drug industry. Most of the major generic drug companies have received subpoenas for information on the topic. Some, including Mylan and the Indian drug maker Sun Pharma, have disclosed that they were asked about doxycycline, a treatment for bacterial infections and one of the drugs involved in the case.According to the court filings, Mr. Glazer and Mr. Malek conspired with other companies to set the price of the drugs and then divide up customers, preventing competition. The price-fixing activities for doxycycline occurred between April 2013 and at least December 2015, prosecutors said, while the activities for glyburide, the diabetes drug, began in April 2014.AdvertisementThe charges were made as part of an information, which is filed when the suspect pleads to a charge before indictment. It usually happens after a criminal complaint is filed or can be filed in the case of someone who is cooperating. No plea agreement has been filed.AdvertisementA lawyer for Mr. Glazer declined to comment, and a lawyer for Mr. Malek did not return a call seeking comment. In a statement, Heritage, a New Jersey company owned by the Indian manufacturer Emcure, said it was cooperating with the authorities and fired the two men in August. “We are deeply disappointed by the misconduct and are committed to ensuring it does not happen again,” the statement read.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In November, Heritage sued the two former executives in federal court. The lawsuit argued that they had violated racketeering laws and had “looted” tens of millions of dollars from the company over seven years, using several schemes involving dummy corporations they had secretly formed.These companies were solely controlled by Mr. Glazer and Mr. Malek, the suit said, but they went to great lengths to make it appear otherwise, using private email servers, fake offices and separate bank accounts. Mr. Malek once even pretended to be a sales representative for one of the companies, giving his name as “Judy Jones,” the suit said.The suit contends that the men engaged in one particularly “audacious” scheme, in which they arranged deeply discounted sales of Heritage products to the dummy companies they had set up.Heritage’s customers, including wholesalers and distributors, were deceived into buying the products from the dummy corporations at market value, the lawsuit claimed. Mr. Glazer and Mr. Malek, who is Mr. Glazer’s brother-in-law, kept the profit, it said.The lawsuit claimed that the two men redirected more than $9 million in sales through one such dummy company, Dorado Pharma, from 2012 to 2015.Matthew Goldstein contributed reporting.A version of this article appears in print on December 15, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Charges 2 Ex-Officials With Fixing Drug Prices.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.