By SYDNEY EMBERAPRIL 3, 2017
The New York Times continues to add to the ranks of its top newsroom editors.On Monday, the company announced that Sam Dolnick would become an assistant editor on the masthead. In his role, Mr. Dolnick, who has overseen many digital and mobile initiatives at The Times, including podcasts and virtual reality, will look to identify new opportunities to distribute Times journalism.In a note to employees, Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times, and Joseph Kahn, the managing editor, said that Mr. Dolnick would “lead the charge” in guiding the newsroom toward new platforms. His “greatest strength,” they added, was “his desire to say yes as often as possible to new ideas, and to then nurture them through the entire organization.”Mr. Dolnick, 36, a member of the fifth generation of the Ochs/Sulzberger family that controls The Times, will be rooted in the newsroom, but he will also work with The Times’s product, marketing and advertising teams.The promotion highlights the deep changes taking place at The Times as it tries to adapt to a more digital future. Along with impending staff reductions, The Times is aggressively seeking out new revenue opportunities as print advertising continues to drop.Before joining The Times in 2009, Mr. Dolnick worked for The Associated Press as a foreign correspondent in New Delhi and as a reporter in New York. As a reporter at The Times, he conducted an investigation into New Jersey’s halfway houses that won a George Polk Award. He has also served as deputy sports editor.Mr. Dolnick is one of three cousins in the Ochs/Sulzberger family who had been candidates to become deputy publisher of The Times and successor to the current publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr. A.G. Sulzberger, the publisher’s son, was named to the role in October.A version of this article appears in print on April 4, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Editor Picked for Masthead  to Broaden  Times’s Reach.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.