AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.24 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.37 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida, $241.70 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Collier County, Fla., Water and Sewer District, $50.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Horry County, S.C., School District, $125 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Regional Transportation Authority, Ill., $150 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Sewanhaka Central High School District, N.Y., $62.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Virginia Public School Authority, $97.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Rhode Island, $112.8 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Utah, $56.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Arlington, Tex., Higher Education Finance Corporation, $54.6 million of education revenue bonds. Raymond James.Ascension Health, Mo., $1.9 billion of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Beaver, Pa., $115.2 million of general obligation bonds. M&T Securities.California Communities Development Authority, $883 million of general obligation bonds and general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.California, $155 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Colorado Health Facilities Authority, $109.1 million of hospital revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Connecticut Housing Finance Authority, $149 million of housing mortgage finance debt securities. J. P. Morgan Securities.Denver, $142.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.District of Columbia, $67.1 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Harris County, Tex., $140 million of college medical facilities mortgage revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Hudson County, N.J., Improvement Authority, $160 million of debt securities. Roosevelt & Cross.Kentucky Bond Development Corporation, $85 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Minnesota, $183.8 million of health care revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Mission Economic Development Corporation, Tex., $248 million of economic development revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New Hanover County, N.C., $54.3 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Agency, $127 million of multifamily revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.New Mexico Finance Authority, $69.1 million of revolving fund revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Ohio, $56.7 million of capital facilities lease appropriation refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Plano, Tex., $93.1 million of general obligation refinancing and improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Public Power Generation Agency, Neb., $136 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Riverside, Calif., Unified School District, $53.3 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Santa Clara, Calif., $148 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Texas Private Activity Bond Surface Transportation Corporation, $272 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Virginia Housing Development Authority, $83.8 million of rental housing bonds. Raymond James.Advertisement