AdvertisementSupported byBy Michael J. de la MercedSAN FRANCISCO — Starboard Value is an activist investor on a roll.Starboard, a New York hedge fund, claimed two victories on Wednesday alone: settlements in its long-contentious battle with the Internet giant Yahoo and in a short-lived campaign at the chip maker Marvell Technologies.Starboard’s newly won board seats are the latest achievements for a hedge fund that has become one of the most prominent practitioners of shareholder activism, in which investors prod company management to change corporate strategies.It is a field that already includes such well-known names as Carl C. Icahn, Daniel S. Loeb and William A. Ackman. But in recent years, Starboard and its chief executive, Jeffrey Smith, have risen in prominence.Starboard, which was spun off from the financial firm Ramius five years ago, built up its successes gradually. In 2011, it sought to pressure the Internet company AOL, demanding that it shut down its Patch local news arm and sell off its trove of patents.While Starboard did not gain board seats in that campaign, AOL eventually sold off Patch and sold its patents to Microsoft for more than $1 billion.In 2014, Starboard succeeded in ousting the entire board of Darden Restaurants, the owner of the Olive Garden chain — a rare achievement by any activist. That came after a campaign marked memorably by a nearly 300-page presentation that castigated the company for a host of sins, including not salting the water in which it cooked pasta and profligate breadstick distribution.Mr. Smith of Starboard stepped down as chairman of Darden this month, having presided over a nearly 60 percent rise in the company’s share price. (The restaurant operator, however, still does not salt its pasta water.)The hedge fund also pressed Staples and Office Depot, the two office supply giants, to merge. The companies agreed to the move last year, though they contend that such a deal was in the works before Starboard raised the issue. The deal is in limbo after the Federal Trade Commission sued in December to block it on anti-competitive grounds.Early this year, Starboard publicly urged the department store chain Macy’s to pursue deals for its real estate, bringing in partners to generate cash from its valuable holdings, such as the flagship Herald Square location in Manhattan.And three weeks ago, the hedge fund began a fight at DepoMed, a specialty pharmaceutical concern, calling the company unfriendly to shareholders. Mr. Smith cited DepoMed’s efforts to fend off an unwanted takeover bid with a so-called poison pill strategy and a plan to relocate its incorporation to Delaware from California to limit the ability of investors to call special meetings.DepoMed later dropped the Delaware move, though Starboard said it wasn’t satisfied.Wednesday’s achievements are notable in their own ways. Combined with the two directors Yahoo added earlier this year, the four new directors gained by Starboard mean that more than half of the technology company’s board seats have changed over in 2016. Moreover, Mr. Smith will gain a valuable seat on the special board committee that is reviewing Yahoo’s efforts to sell itself.In addition, Starboard has gained four seats on the board of Marvell, a chip maker that has been besieged with problems, including an internal inquiry into the company’s accounting. This month, the company ousted its founders as chief executive and president.Starboard has not always been successful. The hedge fund sought to block the $4.7 billion sale of Smithfield Foods to a Chinese meat processor in 2013, but it failed to put together a rival offer.A representative for Starboard declined to comment.Advertisement