By SYDNEY EMBERAPRIL 26, 2016
The New York Times Company said on Tuesday that it was planning to close its editing and prepress print production operations in Paris, a move that would result in the elimination or relocation of up to 70 jobs.The changes are part of a proposal to redesign the international print newspaper and simplify the editing and production process, according to an internal memo sent to the staff of The International New York Times.The Times will concentrate editing and prepress print production in New York and Hong Kong, according to the memo. The Paris news bureau and advertising department will not be affected by the proposal. And a print edition of The International New York Times will still be published and distributed in Europe.“Only by moving ahead with this proposal can we assure our ability to maintain our international print presence for the coming years and do so in a way that will best serve our international readers,” Stephen Dunbar-Johnson, the international president; Joe Kahn, an assistant masthead editor for international; and Dick Stevenson, The Times’s Europe editor, wrote in the memo.AdvertisementDean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times, said in an interview that the proposal “is about changing the way we’re built so that we’re not just built for print.”Advertisement“I think we need to free up resources to build a digital report, and I think that’s what it boils down to,” he said.Echoing past statements he has made, Mr. Baquet said this meant the Times newsroom would probably be smaller and configured differently in the future. But he added, “There are no layoffs planned this year for the newsroom.”“Do I think we’re going to have to figure out ways to cut things that are legacy print without hurting the print New York Times? Yes,” he said. “Do I think that The New York Times will end up having a ginormous, robust newsroom? Yes, absolutely, it will.”Like most print publications, The Times continues to wrestle with how to offset falling circulation and declining print advertising dollars. In February, The Times announced it would conduct a sweeping examination of the newsroom to identify areas for cost cuts and determine a strategy that made sense for the digital age. Mr. Baquet said the Paris proposal was separate from the newsroomwide strategy review.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The proposal to close the editing and production operations in Paris comes less than two weeks after The Times announced it would invest more than $50 million over the next three years to support an ambitious plan to increase its global digital revenue and grow its international audience. The Times formed a new team called NYT Global to lead the effort. “The NYT Global plan, which is going full steam ahead, is about our news coverage and digital reach around the globe,” Mr. Kahn said. “Today’s announcement is about making sure that print remains a vital and profitable part of a global presence for years to come.”He emphasized that the plan was intended to “extend the life” of the international print product. “The cost structure of print wasn’t viable,” he said. “We intend to produce print at a lower cost for many years.”In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, The Times said it had “initiated discussions with the relevant employee works council in Paris regarding the proposed measures.” It also said it expected to incur costs related to the measures totalling roughly $15 million, including about $13 million of relocation and severance-related charges.“France remains a vital market for us and we will maintain a robust news bureau in Paris as well as a core international advertising office there,” Arthur Sulzberger Jr., The Times’s publisher; Mark Thompson, its chief executive; and Mr. Baquet wrote in a note to employees.Advertisement“We regret that the proposal includes the elimination of jobs in Paris and we want to express our appreciation to colleagues — past and present — who through their hard work have contributed to maintaining a tradition of excellence in global journalism at the I.H.T. and I.N.Y.T.”The roots of the paper’s Paris operation go back to 1887, when the European edition of The New York Herald was established. It has been published continuously since then, except for the four years of the German occupation of Paris in World War II.After the demise of the parent paper, which had become The New York Herald Tribune, the Paris-based paper became in the mid-1960s The International Herald Tribune, with The Washington Post Company and The New York Times Company as part owners.The Times took full control in 2003, and rebranded the publication as The International New York Times in 2013.A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Times to Close Paris Editing and Press Units.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.