
Breakingviews By                     
JENNIFER SABA and


RICHARD BEALES

MARCH 22, 2017
The last chapter for Sears looks to be at hand.The troubled retailer warned that it could be headed for bankruptcy if it cannot reverse a brutal decline in annual sales and rising losses. The long quest by Edward S. Lampert, the chief executive, to turn Sears around seems destined to fail. The fate of investments made over the years by Mr. Lampert, a hedge fund boss, may be different.Once famed for a mail-order catalog hawking everything from curtains to washing machines and even, back in the day, opium, Sears is struggling mightily. As of Wednesday morning, its shares had lost some 90 percent of their worth over five years and the company’s market value is now under $1 billion. Revenue has tumbled more than 40 percent over the same span to about $22 billion. The last time it reported an annual profit was in its 2010 fiscal year.
            In 1886, Richard W. Sears opened a mail-order-catalog company in Minneapolis that became the nation’s largest retailer from 1964 to 1991.        Sears admitted in its annual report, filed on Tuesday, there was a chance it may not be able to continue as a going concern. If its operating environment continues to deteriorate, and there are few signs of improvement, it may have trouble borrowing more money. The liabilities on its balance sheet top $13 billion, including more than $4 billion of debt or debt-like obligations and nearly $2 billion more earmarked for pensions.As well as owning 48 percent of Sears, Mr. Lampert and his hedge fund, ESL Investments, have provided a drip feed of debt funding, keeping the cash-burning business afloat. That means that while Mr. Lampert’s equity holdings — which date back more than a decade — could end up worthless, he has collected interest on the debt and he will be near the front of the line of creditors if the company goes under.Mr. Lampert, meanwhile, has deconstructed the company, spinning off the Lands’ End clothing business and a portfolio of property, among other things. Mr. Lampert and ESL own 59 percent of Lands’ End, a $630 million publicly traded company, and slugs of the $1.3 billion real estate vehicle Seritage Growth Properties, and related entities. Another investment firm, Bruce Berkowitz’s Fairholme Capital Management, also holds hefty stakes.That means there are paths by which Mr. Lampert can recoup some of what he has sunk into Sears. Barring a miracle, the retailer’s own stock may only go one way, but its boss’s financial bets are at least partially hedged.Jennifer Saba is a columnist and Richard Beales is deputy editor for Reuters Breakingviews. For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »