AdvertisementSupported byBy Matthew GoldsteinThe criminal case arising from the collapse of the once-prominent law firm Dewey & LeBoeuf has been cut in half, with Manhattan prosecutors agreeing to a deferred prosecution agreement with another of the four original defendants.Prosecutors announced the agreement with Zachary Warren, a 31-year-old lawyer, during a court hearing on Tuesday afternoon that came just weeks before he was to go on trial in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan.Mr. Warren will be required to perform 350 hours of community service as part of the one-year agreement.Last month, prosecutors working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, reached a similar deal with Steven H. Davis, the former chairman of Dewey. Mr. Vance’s prosecutors agreed to the deferred agreement with Mr. Davis after a jury deadlocked on dozens of charges against him and two other former executives at the law firm, Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders.The hung jury in their trial was a blow to Mr. Vance and his prosecutorial team, which had said the three men were the architects of a huge accounting fraud that enabled Dewey to defraud its lenders and creditors during much of the financial crisis.Mr. Warren, who was a low-level employee at Dewey and not yet a lawyer at the time the firm collapsed in spring 2012, early on had his trial separated from that of the three former executives. His scheduled trial in March was seen as another test of the strength of the prosecution’s case in the planned retrial of Mr. DiCarmine, 59, and Mr. Sanders, 57, in September.The state judge overseeing the Dewey criminal proceedings, Justice Robert M. Stolz, has indicated he may rule next week on motions by lawyers for Mr. DiCarmine, the firm’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, its former chief financial officer, to dismiss some of the grand larceny charges still pending against them.A deferred prosecution agreement typically calls for the charges against someone to be dismissed after a period of time if that person does not violate the deal or commit other crimes.The deal with Mr. Davis was much tougher. That agreement runs for five years and Mr. Davis is not permitted to practice law in New York during that time.The agreement with Mr. Warren, who is currently working for a small law firm in Pittsburgh, does not come as a complete surprise after the hung jury and the deferred prosecution given to Mr. Davis. The decision by prosecutors to indict Mr. Warren, who was a client relations manager at the 1,300-lawyer firm, was criticized by some in the New York legal community as a heavy-handed move by Mr. Vance’s office.After leaving Dewey, Mr. Warren went on to graduate from the law school of Georgetown University and clerk for a federal judge. He is to begin working as a lawyer with Williams & Connolly, a large Washington-based law firm, in the fall.“We are deeply pleased that the district attorney’s office has decided to dismiss the charges,” said Paul Shechtman and William Murphy, the lawyers representing Mr. Warren, in a statement.Prosecutors have said that Mr. Warren played a pivotal role in the Dewey accounting scandal because he attended a steak dinner at Del Frisco’s in Midtown Manhattan in December 2008, when Mr. Sanders and Frank Canellas, the firm’s former finance director, discussed ways to overcome a shortfall of more than $50 million in the firm’s net income.Mr. Vance’s prosecutorial team has said that at that dinner, a multiyear scheme began to make Dewey look more profitable than it was to bank lenders and insurance companies that invested in debt offerings by the law firm.Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for Mr. Vance, said in a statement, “The deferred prosecution agreement is unrelated to the strength of the case.” She added that prosecutors “are confident that, had this case proceeded to trial, we would have met our burden of proof.”Neither Mr. Davis nor Mr. Warren is expected to testify at the coming trial of Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders.Both Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders rejected plea deals that would have required them to plead guilty to at least one felony charge. Mr. Sanders also would have had to serve a prison term as part of his plea deal, with Mr. DiCarmine being sentenced to community service.Advertisement