By MICHAEL J. de la MERCEDFEB. 16, 2016
After joining the American International Group nearly two decades ago, Brian Schreiber became a major executive in building the insurance giant up — and then, after the financial crisis, in helping it shrink.But as A.I.G. continues to overhaul its management after avoiding a prolonged fight with two big investors, Mr. Schreiber will be the latest executive to depart.A.I.G.’s chief executive, Peter D. Hancock, disclosed in an internal memorandum late Monday that Mr. Schreiber, who was named chief strategy officer last year, and Seraina Maag, who led the company’s regional management operations, will leave A.I.G.The moves, which were accompanied by news of a reorganization of A.I.G.’s top leadership, are the latest changes by the insurer as it grapples with improving its operations and its stagnant stock price.AdvertisementThe company’s financial performance drew the ire of two big investors, the billionaires Carl C. Icahn and John Paulson, who received seats on A.I.G.’s board last week as part of a settlement meant to forestall a potentially noisy board fight.AdvertisementThe departures of Mr. Schreiber and Ms. Maag signal the latest shake-up/shake up after A.I.G. reviewed its internal operations.Since joining A.I.G. in 1997, Mr. Schreiber rose from a portfolio manager in the insurer’s global investment group to chief of the company’s strategic planning, putting him in charge of many of its acquisitions. Among them was the roughly $23 billion takeover of American General, another huge insurance provider.In that role, he played a prominent part in efforts to save A.I.G. during the financial crisis. Mr. Schreiber and Robert Willumstad, then the company’s chief executive, sought out different options to bail out the insurer, including a brief effort to woo Warren E. Buffett as the linchpin of a rescue effort led by private investors.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Ultimately, however, the Federal Reserve stepped in with an $85 billion bailout.After that, Mr. Schreiber helped A.I.G. sell off nonessential businesses as it sought to become more focused and pay back its taxpayer-financed lifeline.He later served as deputy chief investment officer of the insurer. He was promoted last year to chief strategy officer, overseeing long-term planning, mergers and communications.“Brian has demonstrated his deep knowledge of the company and industry expertise at every turn, and most recently, was instrumental as chief strategy officer in developing and driving the rollout of our new strategy,” Mr. Hancock wrote in the memo.Mr. Schreiber previously worked for Taylor & Company, a part of the Bass brothers’ financial empire, and Booz Allen and Hamilton.Ms. Maag, who joined A.I.G. in 2013, oversaw the management of all countries in which the insurer operated. She joined the company from the XL Group.Below is the text of the memo announcing the departures of Mr. Schreiber and Ms. Maag.Dear Colleagues,As we focus with enthusiasm on creating the A.I.G. of the future, we must not lose sight of those who played an important role in bringing us to this point. Today, I want to take a moment to acknowledge the many and lasting contributions made by Seraina Maag and Brian Schreiber, two of our senior leaders who will be leaving the company.Seraina joined A.I.G. in 2013 as the chief executive officer of EMEA and has consistently proven herself as an invaluable asset to my leadership team, and toward the success of EMEA. Seraina has been highly respected for her creative leadership and strong commitment toward helping further initiatives throughout the region, and most recently, in A.I.G.’s organizational design work. Throughout his almost two-decade career at A.I.G., Brian served with passion and dedication in several key operating and transactional roles, including as deputy chief investment officer, as treasurer, and as head of strategic planning. As a key member of the leadership team that designed and executed A.I.G.’s restructuring plan, he helped the company navigate through some of its most challenging days to successfully repay America with a profit. Brian has demonstrated his deep knowledge of the company and industry expertise at every turn, and most recently, was instrumental as chief strategy officer in developing and driving the rollout of our new strategy.We owe both Seraina and Brian a debt of gratitude for their leadership and many contributions to this company. Their work will have a lasting impact on A.I.G. for years to come.Please join me in thanking Seraina and Brian and in wishing them success in the future.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.