By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSFEB. 15, 2016
World stocks rallied on Monday, led by a jump in Japan’s main index, as investors began to be encouraged by signs of more stimulus from central banks in Europe and Japan.The Nikkei 225, Japan’s benchmark, soared 7.2 percent, to close at 16,022.58, rebounding from last week’s slump to post its second biggest one-day gain in three years.That led to big gains in Europe, where the FTSE 100 of Britain closed 2 percent higher at 5,824.28, and the DAX of Germany gained 2.7 percent, to 9,206.84. The CAC 40 of France rose 3 percent, to close at 4,115.25. Wall Street was closed for Presidents’ Day.Stocks began to rally after government data showed that Japan’s economy shrank 1.4 percent on an annualized basis last quarter because of weak consumer demand and slower exports. It was a setback for Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic revival program, but it gave the government more reason to expand stimulus measures to restore growth, economists said.AdvertisementInvestor sentiment was also bolstered by comments from Zhou Xiaochuan, China’s central bank chief, in which he played down the likelihood of a one-off devaluation of the renminbi.AdvertisementMr. Zhou, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, signaled in a Caixin magazine interview published over the weekend that there was no basis for further depreciation of China’s currency, providing relief for the country’s exporting neighbors.Later in the day, stocks were nudged higher and the euro fell sharply after the European Central Bank reiterated that more stimulus would be considered at the next policy meeting in March.The euro was down 1 percent to $1.1138 after Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank president, said on Monday there were “a variety of instruments” that policy makers could employ if they decided more stimulus was needed. They could pump more money into the economy or cut rates further, something that would weigh on the value of the euro.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.United States futures rose. Dow futures were up 1.3 percent. Those for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index up 1.5 percent.Elsewhere, the Kospi of South Korea climbed 1.5 percent, to 1,862.20, and the Hang Seng of Hong Kong was up 3.3 percent, to 18,918.14. The S&P/ASX 200 of Australia rose 1.6 percent, to 4,843.50. Taiwan’s benchmark was flat, while markets in Southeast Asia gained.The Shanghai composite index in mainland China, though, lost 0.6 percent, to close at 2,746.20, after reopening after the Lunar New Year holiday.Chinese shares were also weighed down by the latest monthly trade figures. Exports fell 11 percent, while imports slid by nearly a fifth, according to customs data, highlighting persistent weakness in China, the world’s second biggest economy.Economists, however, were reserving final analysis until figures for February were out because the timing of the Lunar New Year holiday may distort China’s economic data at the beginning of the year.In energy trading, benchmark United States crude oil futures rose 29 cents, to settle at $29.73 a barrel, in electronic trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange. The contract climbed $3.23 on Friday. Brent crude, a benchmark for international oils, gained 5 cents, to $34.04 a barrel, in London.A version of this article appears in print on February 16, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Global Shares Buoyed by Investor Faith.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.