APRIL 2, 2017
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.76 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.90 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.73 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues, valued at $50 million or more, are scheduled for pricing this week:  Alief Independent School District, Tex., $80.5 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.Brookhaven, N.Y., $60.2 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.Hempstead, N.Y., $79.5 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMetropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, Ga., $99.2 million of debt securities. Competitive.California Municipal Finance Authority, $52.6 million of insured revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.AdvertisementCalifornia Municipal Finance Authority, $75 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.California Municipal Finance Authority, $126.5 million of revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.California Public Works Board, $537 million of lease revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Chico Unified School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.Colorado Department of Transportation, $58.1 million of certificates of participation. Piper Jaffray.Desert Community College District, Calif., $128 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Douglas County, Ga., $61 million of general obligation sales tax bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Hackensack, N.J., Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $620 million of Meridian Health Obligated Group revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Hackensack, N.J., Meridian Health, $300 million of taxable bonds. Goldman Sachs.L’Anse Creuse Public Schools, Mich., $96.9 million of refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.AdvertisementMaryland Department of Housing and Community Development, Community Development Administration, $263 million of residential revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts, $778 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Massachusetts Clean Water Trust, $305 million of State Revolving Fund bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Million Air Township L.L.C., $149.7 million of General Aviation Facilities Project special facility revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, $170 million of multifamily revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.New York Environmental Facilities Corporation, $415 million of Clean Water and Drinking Water Revolving Fund bonds. Jefferies.North Dakota Housing Finance Agency, $91.1 million of Housing Finance Program and Home Mortgage Finance Program bonds. RBC Capital.Ohio, $70 million of capital facilities lease appropriation bonds. U.S. Bancorp Investments.Oregon, $296 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Philadelphia, $288.6 million of water and wastewater revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Philadelphia Industrial Development Authority, $63 million of University of the Sciences revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Pittsburgh, $60 million of general obligation bonds. PNC Capital Markets.Rhode Island Health and Educational Building Corporation, $66.8 million of Public Schools Revenue Bond Financing Program revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Chase.AdvertisementRhode Island Student Loan Authority, $50 million of Student Loan Program revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.San Antonio, $307 million of electric and gas systems refinancing and revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.San Joaquin County Transportation Authority, Calif., $207.8 million of Measure K sales tax revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.Shelby County, Tenn., Health, Educational and Housing Facility Board, $138.5 million of revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan.Solano Community College District, Calif., $90 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Stanford University, Calif., $500 million of taxable bonds. Goldman Sachs.Suffolk County, N.Y., $151 million of refinancing serial bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Wisconsin Public Financing Authority, $181 million of senior-living revenue and refinancing bonds. Zeigler.A version of this article appears in print on April 3, 2017, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.