DEC. 11, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.54 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.64 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.39 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues, valued at $50 million or more, are scheduled for pricing this week:DuPage County, Ill., Central High School District No. 88, $73.4 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.Florida Atlantic University Board of Governors, $54.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementFlorida Department of Transportation Turnpike Enterprise, $137.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.AdvertisementMinneapolis-St. Paul School District No. 1, Minn., $56.1 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.Douglas County, Neb., School District No. 1, $141 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.Kern County, Calif., $75.4 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Competitive.Arizona Industrial Development Authority, $73.7 million of education revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Atlanta, $148.8 million of tax allocation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.California Pollution Control Financing Authority, $70 million of San Jose Water Company Project revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Canyon Independent School District, Tex., $65.9 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Chicago Board of Education, $500 million of capital improvement tax bonds. Barclays Capital.Colorado, $70 million of Colorado Department of Transportation headquarters facilities lease purchase agreement certificates of participation. Wells Fargo Securities.Dominion Water and Sanitation District, Colo., $89 million of revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Franklin Pierce School District No. 402, Wash., $80 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.AdvertisementMinnesota Housing Finance Agency, $86.4 million of residential housing finance bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Montebello Unified School District, Calif., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.New York Housing Finance Agency, $223 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Pell City, Ala., Special Care Facilities Finance Authority, $50 million of revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Sun Prairie Area School District, Wis., $89.5 million of bond anticipation notes. Robert W. Baird & Company.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $130 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.Tuscaloosa, Ala., Board of Education, $160 million of special tax warrants. Piper Jaffray.University of Pennsylvania, $200 million of revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Weld County Keenseburg Re-3J School District, Colo., $62 million of general obligation bonds. George K. Baum & Company.Wyoming Municipal Agency, $70.3 million of power supply system revenue refinancing bonds. George K. Baum & Company.AdvertisementYuba County, Calif., Levee Financing Authority, $72.6 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Raymond James.A version of this schedule appears in print on December 12, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Treasury Auctions to Be Held the Week of Dec. 12.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.