AdvertisementSupported byBy ReutersWASHINGTON — Wholesale inventories in the United States unexpectedly rose in January as sales tumbled, suggesting that efforts by businesses to reduce an inventory overhang could persist well into 2016 and restrain economic growth in the coming quarters.The Commerce Department said on Wednesday that wholesale stocks increased 0.3 percent after being unchanged in December. Sales declined 1.3 percent, extending December’s 0.6 percent drop.The weak sales pace in January means it would take wholesalers 1.35 months to clear shelves, the highest inventory-to-sales ratio since April 2009, when the economy was in recession.“Plenty of inventory pain remains in the pipeline. Wholesale inventory growth has beaten sales growth since mid-2014 to leave a steep inventory-to-sales ratio spike that is usually only seen in recessions,” said Michael R. Englund, chief economist at Action Economics in Boulder, Colo.Inventories are a crucial component of gross domestic product change and have been a drag on G.D.P. growth since the third quarter of 2015.But economists were little concerned that the high inventory-to-sales ratio might signal a recession, noting that the jump had been driven by a rise in the stocks of nondurable goods like drugs, paper and farm products.In addition, strong consumer spending and a firmer housing market, against the backdrop of a tightening labor market, are keeping the economy on steady ground.“We take limited signal on the overall economy from such an outturn,” said Jesse Hurwitz, an economist at Barclays in New York. “That said, stronger inventory growth mechanically boosts current quarter G.D.P. estimates.”Government data last week showed that businesses had made less progress than initially thought in reducing the inventory accumulation in the fourth quarter. Inventories subtracted just over o.1 percentage points from fourth-quarter G.D.P. growth.The component of wholesale inventories that goes into the calculation of G.D.P., wholesale stocks excluding autos, edged up 0.1 percent in January.The surprise rise in wholesale inventory investment in January prompted economists to increase their first-quarter G.D.P. growth estimates as much as 0.2 percentage points to as high as a 2.4 percent annualized rate. The faster growth will, however, come at the expense of output in the second and third quarters of 2016. The economy grew at a 1 percent rate in the fourth quarter.Wholesale drug inventories rose 3.3 percent in January, while sales slipped 0.2 percent. That left the inventory-to-sales ratio for that component at its highest level since March 2005.There were also increases in automobile inventories, which rose by the most since last June. With wholesale auto sales dipping 0.1 percent, the inventory-to-sales ratio hit its highest point since May 2009.Inventories also remained elevated at apparel, lumber, machinery and furniture wholesalers.Advertisement