AdvertisementSupported byIn “Build, Baby, Build” (April 17), Conor Dougherty wrote of a San Francisco activist group, the Bay Area Renters’ Association, or BARF, and its founder, Sonja Trauss. As the city’s tech boom clashes with tough development laws and resentment from established residents, Ms. Trauss’s group is pushing for more housing, of all kinds, to be built. Tactics have included speaking out at government meetings, counterprotests against those fighting new development and a lawsuit against one suburb, Lafayette.The article drew 837 comments on nytimes.com. The following have been edited and condensed.I think they should “close” the Bay Area. It’s full.Robert Woodcox, CaliforniaThe answer is to build, obviously. The progressives and environmentalists already have theirs. Their solution is to keep everybody else out. If they want to stop development, all they have to do is buy up all of the property, at market rates, and let it lie fallow, while paying sky-high property taxes.ebmem, MemphisWhat a shamefully superficial article. Who is funding this gal? The C.E.O. of Yelp? The image of her writing her own petition to sue the City of Lafayette sounds so charmingly grass-roots, go-girl gumption-y, but reeks of Koch Brothers funding or the like. New York Times, you need to follow the money and get back to us with a real article.amer_icongrl, San Francisco Bay AreaI’ve lived here over 25 years and I think one of the primary issues of housing tension in San Francisco is since World War II a lot of the newer residents were cultural and humanities-oriented, drawn to arts, music, theater and dance scenes. They were content to find affordable neighborhoods, improve them and live modestly.The recent influx is largely businesspeople, investors, marketers and engineers who want to live in these same neighborhoods and often project the following attitude: “I’m here now, move and get out of my way.”Steve, San FranciscoAs a professional geologist, I have to ask: Have you all gone mad? Attractive as it may be, San Francisco (and surrounding areas) is near the top of the list for American cities facing major natural disasters. We know the region will suffer a globally significant earthquake in the next few decades, and the human tragedy will only worsen as this expansion madness continues.Bob Krantz, HoustonHas anyone ever heard of planned growth? Slapping up high-rise buildings without improving public transportation will not solve any problems but will simply cause pollution and traffic gridlock, and decrease quality of life.Tony, BostonBARF has something right — people need to challenge San Francisco and other municipalities whose planning department policies actively inhibit change and development. A demolition permit in San Francisco is guaranteed to take a minimum of one year — not for proper review or architectural merit, but to actively discourage the idea.Mike d, Noe ValleyWhy don’t the corporations move? They have the money and resources to locate anywhere. There are many cities in the country that need big companies. Lots of places would love to have that kind of growth.Allison, Austin, Tex.Letters for Sunday Business may be sent to sunbiz@nytimes.com.Advertisement