AdvertisementSupported byBy John KoblinThe great scripted-TV boom is showing no signs of abating.By year’s end there could be anywhere from 430 to 450 scripted television shows, which would serve, once again, as a record for the industry, said John Landgraf, chief executive of FX Networks.In 2015 there were 417 scripted TV shows — nearly double the 210 that were on the air in 2009, FX’s research department said.And who is responsible for all the growth? Streaming services like Amazon, Hulu and Netflix.Through July, 322 scripted shows were broadcast, a 6 percent rise from the 304 at this point last year. And while basic cable, premium cable and the broadcast networks are relatively steady in volume year over year, digital services have had enormous increases: 49 shows have appeared on streaming services so far this year versus 24 at the same time last year.Mr. Landgraf, who unveiled the numbers at a Television Critics Association media event in Beverly Hills, Calif., on Tuesday, said he believed that by next year there could easily be 500 TV shows, pointing specifically to the huge growth at Netflix, which he said had 71 original adult scripted series that were either currently available on the service or had been announced.“For reference, that’s more than the announced future output of HBO, Showtime, Starz and FX combined,” he said at the event. “And this list does not include Netflix’s dozens of original children’s series or documentary series or late-night series or even fully scripted series produced primarily in a language other than English — say, for example, a high-end French-language crime drama like ‘Marseille’ — because we are deeming a dubbed or subtitled show to be fundamentally noncompetitive in the U.S. with a show in English.”A spokeswoman for Netflix declined to comment.When Mr. Landgraf spoke about the number of scripted shows last year, he started what has turned into a yearlong conversation in the industry about whether for viewers and for the networks themselves, there is simply too much television. Ratings continue to decline, and the future of cable and its expensive and large bundles is uncertain.Sharing Mr. Landgraf’s concern, some TV executives have said that they also felt audiences were becoming fatigued and having a difficult time finding the best shows out of the glut. Other executives argued that it was their responsibility to overwhelm the audience with choice, and that television had never been stronger creatively or offered greater diversity in terms of casting and programming.Despite the crowded landscape, FX is having a particularly strong year. It received the most Emmy nominations in its history — 56, second only to HBO — and its limited series “The People v. O.J. Simpson” became the highest-rated new show in the history of the network.But as he said a year ago, Mr. Landgraf is skeptical that this sort of scale can be justified economically. Scripted TV costs a great deal to produce and therefore requires a large audience.He reinforced that argument on Tuesday, saying there was a greater supply of television “than can be produced profitably given the demand and the business model.”“I also believe,” he continued, “that there is so much U.S. television, we’ve lost much of the thread of a coherent, collective conversation about what is good, what is very good and what is great.”Advertisement