AdvertisementSupported byBy Erin McCannOver time, airline passengers have been deprived of comfortable seats, passable food, space for some carry-on luggage, leg room, head room, arm room and any other amenities that may separate humans from cattle.But the federal Transportation Department appears to be drawing a line in the aisle at one creature comfort: the ability to travel free from listening to other people’s phone calls.On Thursday, the department proposed a rule that would require airlines to tell passengers before they buy tickets that they may be “unwillingly exposed” to mobile voice calls while in the air.Actual cellular calls are prohibited in the air — for now, at least — by the Federal Communications Commission, which originally adopted the ban over concerns that such phone use could affect a plane’s operation.And, regardless of the regulations, most airlines already forbid internet-based calls over in-flight Wi-Fi and say they have no plans to change that.The two federal agencies have been wrestling over what to do about airborne phone calls for years.In 2013, Tom Wheeler, the F.C.C. chairman, called the rules for mobile devices then in place “outdated and restrictive.” The agency subsequently relaxed some of those rules, and said it would begin exploring the idea of allowing people to make phone calls while aloft.Soon after, the F.C.C. and the Transportation Department, which through the Federal Aviation Administration has authority over flights, appeared to be at odds over how, exactly, passengers should be allowed to use their mobile devices while in the air. As the F.C.C. took steps toward relaxing its rules, the Transportation Department, apparently reacting to a public outcry, moved to keep voice calls from being allowed.The development on Thursday seemed to open a new chapter in the debate. In making its announcement, the Transportation Department cited a loophole in current F.C.C. rules, which it said “do not cover Wi-Fi and other means by which it may become possible to make voice calls.”Barring other changes in F.C.C. regulations, the Transportation Department wants the airlines to tell passengers before buying a ticket whether calls are allowed in flight. The idea is to provide fair warning to a potential passenger that she may have to listen to the guy next to her fighting with his mother or taking part in a conference call.The Wall Street Journal reported on Thursday that this might be a first step by aviation regulators toward allowing in-flight calls. A spokeswoman for the Transportation Department said in an email that it had become concerned that the F.C.C. would lift its in-flight cellular ban, or that changes in Wi-Fi technology might prompt the airlines to change their policies.She said the public would have 60 days to comment on the proposal.“Consumers deserve to have clear and accurate information about whether an airline permits voice calls before they purchase a ticket and board the aircraft,” Anthony Foxx, the transportation secretary, said in a statement announcing the rule. The proposal, he added, would ensure that air travelers were not “unwillingly exposed” to voice calls.For its part, the F.C.C. did not respond to an emailed request for comment.Airlines for America, an industry lobbying group, does not believe the Transportation Department should regulate how people use their phones, said Vaughn Jennings, a spokesman.“We believe airlines should be able to determine what services can be safely offered in flight and make those decisions based on what is in the best interests of their passengers and crew members,” he saidIndividual airlines suggested that no changes were on the horizon.“The terms and conditions of our free Fly-Fi high-speed internet do not allow Wi-Fi calls to be made in flight,” a spokesman for JetBlue, Philip Stewart, said. “And we do not have plans to install technology on our aircraft that would enable cellular calls in the air.”Delta Air Lines, Southwest Airlines and Alaska Airlines all told The Associated Press that they had no plans to allow voice calls. An Alaska Airlines spokesman told The A.P. that the carrier had surveyed passengers several years ago and had gotten “a strong reaction” that phone conversations would be an unwelcome intrusion during flights.In a 2013 poll, The A.P. found that 48 percent of Americans opposed allowing cellphones to be used for voice calls on planes. Among the most-frequent fliers, that figure rose to 78 percent.“There’s enormous opposition by passengers,” said Paul Hudson, president of Flyers Rights, an advocacy group for passengers. That’s one reason airlines stopped offering calls for a fee over built-in Airfones, which used radio technology.“You see what happens in theaters and on trains and on buses. They have restrictions or prohibitions on this stuff,” Mr. Hudson said. “When they don’t and when people violate it, it causes often altercations, sometimes even violence.”Some foreign airlines have allowed voice calls for years, without incident.By early Friday afternoon, there were dozens of new public comments on the Transportation Department’s proposal. Nearly all opposed allowing voice calls in the air:• “Please no,” one commenter said. “For the love of humanity, do not allow planes and cellphone calls to mix!”• “Worst. Idea. Ever.”• “I can assure you that fights will break out.”• “No, no, please no.”Advertisement