AdvertisementSupported byGlobal ManagerBy Nazanin LankaraniRaphaël Gorgé  is chairman and chief executive of Groupe Gorgé, a French high-tech company that is family- controlled and publicly traded.Q. What is your family background?A. My father is a civil engineer and my mother a psychoanalyst. My father worked in the French public sector for years before joining large French industrial groups including Alstom and Rhône-Poulenc. At 50, he founded Groupe Gorgé, specializing in industrial robotics and assembly-line machinery.By the time he became an entrepreneur, I had already completed my studies, so I cannot say that I was driven by my father’s entrepreneurial spirit.Q. What is your educational background?A. I studied chemistry and engineering and obtained a master’s degree from the École Centrale in Marseille. I had an affinity for science and chemistry in particular, without it being a passion. Though I was generally a good student, I was often bored at school. Surfing was a much greater passion.Q. What career objectives did you have early on?A. I started out as a chemical engineer. After a year of working in research, I realized that becoming the world expert in a single molecule known only to 12 people was not terribly interesting. So I made a radical change. I took a job with a French brokerage firm specializing in corporate finance and I.P.O.s. In the late 1990s, there was great interest in high-tech companies just as the Euronext exchange was being launched. Engineers were sought after by finance firms to evaluate technology in target companies. My timing was perfect. I had no expertise in finance, but I understood technology. We were so busy that I learned a lot on the job quickly. Most importantly, I discovered that my true passion was working in finance.Q. What did you learn in finance?A. It helped me to become an entrepreneur. We worked closely with company C.E.O.s and analyzed the ingredients of their companies’ success. We helped executives during critical periods to obtain funding or prepare a public offering. After a few years, I switched to venture capital. There again, I looked closely at companies to decide whether to invest capital. It was a job I really enjoyed.Q. Why did you leave a job you loved to join your father’s company?A. In 2004, when I joined the Gorgé Groupe, I had spent 10 years in finance. My father had offered, two years earlier, to hire me as a development or strategic manager in one of the group’s affiliates, to learn the ropes. But I felt that such a position would not carry with it significant authority. I wanted a top executive position where I could bring added value. Finally, two years later, at age 33, I joined as the Groupe’s chief operating officer.Q. Did you land that top executive position because you were the boss’s son?A. Undoubtedly, but there is no shame in that. I had a clear idea of what I wanted to do. At the time, the Groupe had some 1,200 employees and about €150 million in revenue. Seventy percent of our activity revolved around the automobile industry, delivering automated assembly line machinery to automakers in France and Europe. I spent the first few months on the job analyzing the business. I concluded that we could only expect slow growth in the auto industry. From my finance experience, I knew that in a difficult market, if you are very good, you will be the last to die. I did not want the company to die a slow death in a declining market battling against strong competitors and demanding clients.So over the next four years, I implemented an exit strategy and steered the business toward growth sectors.In 2008, when the global crisis hit the auto industry, all of our competitors collapsed. But our exposure had been reduced to 3 or 4 percent, and we were less impacted. I was perhaps too young to realize what a bold and risky decision I had taken, but the result turned out to be positive.Q. What was the outcome of your strategy?A. I have now repositioned the company in high-tech industries. We develop robotics, subsea drones, and blast doors for the defense and nuclear industries. We also launched a new 3-D printing division. Being a decision-maker helped establish my authority within the company. Being the boss’s son had given me access but not legitimacy. I had to prove that I was worthy of my position. My father remained C.E.O. until 2008, when I took the title. Three years later, I also became company chairman.Q. You were rewarded by President François Hollande for your spirit of enterprise.A. In 2014, I received the Prix de l’Audace Créatrice from the French president. I am convinced now that what you need in business is a good dose of measured boldness. That is possible only when you control the company and have the necessary agility.Q. How do you manage across cultures?A. We have 1,550 employees, 85 percent of whom work in France. I do not demand uniformity. Our employees are not required to wear a Groupe Gorgé T-shirt. Our foreign teams are good at what they do, they keep their local mode of operation with the support of the Groupe.Q. What is your leadership style?A. It is important to have self-confidence as a manager. I surround myself with high-quality people who are far better than myself in their respective roles. I believe in putting together the best team possible and creating an ecosystem were individuals can strive.Q. What lessons have you learned along the way?A. I value boldness and enthusiasm, but only if measured with objectivity. Analysis must be devoid of emotion. For me, the numbers must add up. There are many potential investments we pass up because the numbers make no sense, as is the case with many Internet-based companies. In those cases, I will not take the risk.Q. Do you apply the same discipline to your life outside of work?A. I compete in Ironman triathlons. For the last competition, I trained for six months, eight to 15 hours per week. I would get up early, run in the morning and swim at night. Training is all about being organized. I also have a high pain threshold. When I decide to do something, I do it seriously.Q. What is the difference between a good leader and a great leader?A. A good leader can motivate his or her teams. A great leader has the vision for where to go next.Q. What would you tell your young self?A. There are many complex parameters to running a business today, from dealing with changing technology to establishing crucial relationships and securing adequate financing. Early experience is key, both situational and in negotiation. Mastering today’s business parameters gets more difficult with age. To succeed as an entrepreneur, you must start early.Advertisement