By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED and JAD MOUAWADMARCH 8, 2016
Gordon Bethune, the former chief of Continental Airlines, said that the current board of United Continental has a “country club atmosphere.”After years of seeing United Continental struggle, two hedge funds have begun an insurrection against the airline’s board — and have turned to a well-regarded figure from the company’s past to lead the charge.In picking Gordon M. Bethune, who as chief executive of Continental during the 1990s led that company’s last turnaround, as one of six director nominees announced on Tuesday, the investors are hoping to highlight what they argue are continued operational problems at one of the country’s biggest airlines.The looming board fight posed by the two hedge funds, Altimeter Capital Management and PAR Capital Management, comes at an awkward time for United.The airline named a new chief executive in September after the surprise dismissal of Jeff Smisek during a corruption investigation involving officials at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. But shortly after his appointment, the new chief, Oscar Munoz, had a heart attack and was hospitalized for a heart transplant. He is scheduled to return to work full time on Monday.AdvertisementThe saber-rattling on Tuesday followed months of discussions with United’s board. People close to United said that the airline had been willing to explore potential compromises, including the extension of a Friday deadline to nominate directors, to allow for more time for talks. They added that the company was willing to consider some of the hedge funds’ candidates.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.But the point of resistance was over the hedge funds’ insistence that Mr. Bethune be made nonexecutive chairman, according to people briefed on the discussions.AdvertisementThe prospect of a proxy fight — one that could still be averted if the two sides can reach a settlement — comes after years of trouble at United, the product of a 2010 merger of United and Continental that has run into turbulence.Since then, United has lagged its rivals in the industry. The combination has been dogged by computer and technical problems and the worst operational and on-time performance among big carriers. Differences in corporate cultures and labor disagreements have thwarted a unified approach in the company’s operations.Shares of United, while doubling since 2013, have underperformed those of other airlines. Shares of Delta Air Lines, for example, have quadrupled over the same time period. On Tuesday, United shares fell 2.2 percent, to $56.34.Neither Altimeter nor PAR, which together own just over 7 percent of United’s shares, has run an activist shareholder campaign before. But the two focus on investing in transportation companies. They contend that they were forced to act after months of talks failed to lead to changes in how the company is run. In a public letter to the company’s directors published on Tuesday, the hedge funds derided the current board as “underqualified, ineffective, complacent and entrenched.”Not even United’s addition of three new directors, including a former chief operating officer of Delta and a former chief executive of T. Rowe Price, and the promise of a fourth new director changed the hedge funds’ minds. The investors called the move “a transparent and cynical attempt to maintain” the board’s power.“We have no more confidence that you will act responsibly in the future (even with yesterday’s announcement) than we have evidence that you have done so in the past,” Brad Gerstner, the chief executive of Altimeter, and Paul A. Reeder, the chief executive of PAR, wrote in the letter.AdvertisementHenry L. Meyer III, United’s nonexecutive chairman, replied in a statement, “We are deeply disappointed that after United attempted to engage in a constructive, good-faith dialogue with PAR and Altimeter, repeatedly communicated our willingness to make meaningful changes in our board, publicly announced our intention to name four new independent directors with deep relevant experience and named three of them yesterday, PAR and Altimeter have unilaterally taken this hostile action with no concern that a proxy fight could distract the company from executing on Oscar’s strategic plan.”Some analysts supported the idea of overhauling United’s board.“As for the more strenuous board revamp proposed by Par and Altimeter, we say bravo — go for it,” Vicki Bryan, an analyst with the research firm Gimme Credit, wrote in a note. “We certainly view a move to smarter, more credible leadership with stronger accountability as long overdue and acutely needed for this board — and a fresh slate of qualified directors plus a new chairman to boot could do it.”In an interview, Mr. Bethune said he had agreed to join the slate to become nonexecutive chairman for two years to help the board set clear goals and motivate employees. He said that before United’s latest nominations, the company’s board lacked directors with experience running an airline.Mr. Bethune wrote a book called “From Worst to First,” about his experience transforming Continental Airlines. He said United needed to perform better than its three main rivals: Delta, American and Southwest.“They need to beat the competition,” he said. “If you’re in a horse race and you’re in fourth place, you’re not winning.”“I am willing to help,” he said. “And I do know the front end from the back of an airplane, and that would be a novel experience for the board.”The former executive, who is 74, said age would not be an issue despite the company’s mandatory retirement age of 75. The board, he said, could simply extend the limit for one year to allow him to stay on.Mr. Bethune, who is serving on the boards of three companies — Honeywell, Prudential and Sprint — plans to retire from two of them this year but will remain on the board of Sprint. When he ran Continental, he appointed both Mr. Munoz and Mr. Meyer, the current chairman of United, to the airline’s board.Advertisement“I don’t need this,” said Mr. Bethune, who added that United employees were demoralized and he wanted to help. “There is nothing wrong with the people. They just need leadership. And they don’t have it.”Mr. Munoz, who has no previous airline management experience before United, came from the railroad operator the CSX Corporation, where he was chief operating officer. Mr. Munoz had been a director at United and, before that, Continental.He and the board can count on the support of the airline’s flight attendants, as well as its largest union, the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, which both released statements on Tuesday backing Mr. Munoz.The Association of Flight Attendants, which represents 24,000 employees, said the shareholders were “creating a distraction at just the wrong time.”A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2016, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Hedge Funds Escalating Attacks on United.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.