
Deal Professor By                     
STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

DEC. 7, 2016
Abbott Laboratories declared full-scale war on Alere on Wednesday, filing in Delaware Chancery Court to end its $5.8 billion acquisition of the medical test maker.In doing so, Abbott is pulling an old rabbit out of the hat. In suing in  Delaware court, it is claiming that the material adverse change clause in their merger agreement has been triggered.In other words, the MAC is back.During the financial crisis of a few years ago, MAC clauses were invoked in deals to acquire Genesco, Huntsman, HD Supply, Sallie Mae and Accredited Home Lenders, among others. The buyers pointed to their MAC clauses to justify not completing the deals because of adverse events. In large part, the acquirers succeeded in terminating or renegotiating their deals, with many coming to litigation over the matter.These MAC assertions were really part of the negotiation dynamic among the parties as the financial crisis took hold. A buyer can invoke a MAC clause to try to drive down the price of an acquisition by taking advantage of either changed market conditions or adverse events affecting the target company.AdvertisementAbbott agreed to acquire Alere in January, and the deal almost immediately became a troubled one. In February, Alere announced that it would not file its annual report on time with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and said it had received a commission subpoena concerning its revenue recognition practices in Africa. Things got worse in March, when Alere disclosed criminal subpoenas from the Department of Justice related to Foreign Corrupt Practices Act issues in Africa, Asia and Latin America. That month the New York Stock Exchange also issued a notice of delisting for Alere stock.AdvertisementWhat happened next was 10 months of dancing as the parties to the deal began making demands of each other around the late filing of Alere’s S.E.C. reports and the investigations. In August, Alere sued Abbott, accusing it of dragging its feet in getting necessary regulatory approvals. Alere has also publicly said that the issues are not significant, and that Abbott is trying to escape this deal in order to focus on its $25 billion acquisition of another medical device company, St. Jude Medical.Alere’s suit came on the heels of Abbott’s statement that it might not complete the acquisition “on a timely basis or at all.” In a counterclaim, Abbott asserted that it was not receiving all the information it was entitled to under the merger agreement, and that Alere was concealing information on its overseas operation. This is a tried-and-true tactic for buyers having second thoughts: File suit with the claim that they have not been provided enough information to assess whether to proceed with the deal.In the midst of this back-and-forth, there were other developments for Alere. The company disclosed material weaknesses in its internal controls when it finally filed its annual report. On Nov. 4, the government notified Alere’s Arriva unit that its Medicare enrollment would be revoked because there were submitted claims for 211 dead patients. And in July, Alere announced the voluntary recall of two products.A MAC claim was common during the financial crisis. As I’ve written before, a material adverse change clause is a way that parties handle risk in an acquisition to guard against unforeseen difficulties during the period from execution of the original acquisition agreement to completion.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.When a buyer invokes a MAC, the seller usually settles at a lower price for two reasons. It either does not want to litigate and argue in court about how badly a MAC clause termination stinks, or it is happy to take the lower premium and avoid litigation and an adverse decision resulting in no deal at all.This same dynamic also pushes a buyer to settle after invoking a MAC. The buyer also does not want to lose litigation and be stuck buying a company at the original price. Thus, a MAC invocation is really a renegotiation tool for a lower price. In many sizable deals, this has happened, such as the pre-crisis-era agreements between PNC Bank and Riggs, and Johnson & Johnson and Guidant.That dynamic has broken down a bit in recent years; the reason is that in order to show a MAC has been triggered in Delaware, you have to show that the adverse change to the company is “significant.” “long term” and “durational.” In MAC cases involving Hexion’s acquisition of Huntsman and Tyson Food’s acquisition of the meatpacking giant IBP, the Delaware courts have refused to find a MAC in play. In fact, the common mantra is that no Delaware court has found one.But we might have a case here. The adverse events at Alere are enough to make a colorable claim for a MAC, certainly. The rule of thumb is that a 10 percent hit to earnings or more is a MAC, though of course that is merely a guide. It seems that the events here, though, have hit Alere’s earnings, as gross profits have declined in the last nine months by 5 percent. Alere will claim that it is not primarily related to the adverse events. The effect on revenue of all this is unknown publicly, but may be between 5 percent to 10 percent. However, the question is whether these significant events will affect the company in the long term, even beyond earnings. How is reputational damage measured when a company has withdrawn a drug or been kicked out of Medicare? That question has never been answered.AdvertisementAlere’s stock price is now trading at around $36.80, well below the offer price of $56 per share, so the market is betting a MAC exists.And certainly the question when a target is faced with a MAC is, why take the risk? Why engage in litigation where you are basically arguing about how bad the company is? In most cases this dynamic works toward settlement.But perhaps in this case Abbott is refusing to renegotiate. Or perhaps Alere is hoping that Delaware will, true to form, refuse to find a MAC. Or it could be Alere is unwilling to sell at the renegotiated price offered by Abbott. The only problem is that the events here are significant enough that Alere is at risk of becoming the one case where Delaware does find a MAC. But I suppose at this point, it has nothing to lose.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »