AdvertisementSupported byWhite Collar WatchBy Peter J. HenningThe Supreme Court’s much-anticipated opinion on insider trading, in Salman v. United States, ended almost like an Emily Litella editorial on Saturday Night Live: “Never mind.”After speculation that the decision might rewrite the rules for how the government pursues tips of confidential information, or at least provide clarification about what type of relationship suffices to prove a violation, the court ended up saying on Tuesday that the law was pretty much what everyone thought it was.The case resolved a split between the federal appeals courts in New York and California over what kind of benefit the recipient of inside information has to provide to the tipper to show there has been a breach of duty to keep information confidential. The government got pretty much everything it wanted from the opinion, which clearly reaffirmed a broad approach to proving insider trading involving tips.Almost exactly two years ago, in United States v. Newman, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan broke the Justice Department’s string of victories in insider trading cases by reversing the convictions of two hedge fund managers, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson. They were so-called remote tippees, receiving corporate earnings reports before they became public through analysts at their firms traced back to sources inside the companies. The Second Circuit concluded the government had not shown that Mr. Newman and Mr. Chiasson knew the tippers received any benefit for providing the information.Rather than decide the case only on that point, the appeals court went on to impose an additional requirement for the type of benefit necessary to prove an illegal tip based on friendship. It said the government must establish there was “a meaningfully close personal relationship that generates an exchange that is objective, consequential, and represents at least a potential gain of a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.”Showing a tangible benefit seemed to conflict with the Supreme Court’s decision in 1983 in Dirks v. Securities and Exchange Commission, which stated that there can be a violation “when an insider makes a gift of confidential information to a trading relative or friend.” In other words, that earlier decision said a gift can give the benefactor a warm and fuzzy feeling, which might be enough to constitute the quid pro quo needed to show illegal tipping.The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco focused on the gift language of the Dirks decision in affirming the 2013 conviction of Bassam Yacoub Salman. In that case, information about impending health care acquisitions was passed from an investment banker to his brother, and then later shared with Mr. Salman, a future brother-in-law. The California appeals court declined to adopt New York’s Newman analysis, which created a division within the federal courts about how to prove a tipping case.The Justice Department asked the Supreme Court to review the Newman case, but it declined. The court then took the Salman case a few weeks later to resolve the split, a decision that put prosecutors in a better position because the facts were much more favorable to the government’s argument that the defendant engaged in insider trading by receiving a gift.In upholding Mr. Salman’s conviction, the justices unanimously rejected Newman in a decision issued only two months after the oral argument. That is a sure sign that there was little disagreement about the scope of insider trading law.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr.’s opinion said the Second Circuit’s requirement that the benefit provided to the tipper have a “pecuniary or similarly valuable nature” was “inconsistent with Dirks.” Instead, that earlier decision “easily resolves the narrow issue presented here” about whether a gift among family members can be a sufficient benefit.Justice Alito explained that requiring the government to show more to prove the benefit would create an inconsistency in the law by letting the tipper avoid liability in one situation but not another. “The tipper benefits personally because giving a gift of trading information is the same thing as trading by the tipper followed by a gift of the proceeds,” he wrote. The relationship among the family members was quite close, so it was easy to conclude that Mr. Salman’s “conduct is in the heartland of Dirks’s rule concerning gifts of confidential information to trading relatives.”By jettisoning the additional requirement under Newman, prosecutors will not always have to find some financial benefit to bolster their case. This happened in the recent prosecution of Sean Stewart for tipping his father about information learned on the job as an investment banker. In that case, the Justice Department introduced evidence that the parents paid for a photographer at his wedding to show a tangible benefit. But under Dirks, a family relationship should be enough to establish that passing confidential information constituted a gift, at least if they are close relatives.Although Mr. Salman fit comfortably into the classic situation for insider trading, the court also acknowledged that “in some factual circumstances assessing liability for gift-giving will be difficult.” That hints at the real impact of the decision: How far will prosecutors and the S.E.C. push the gift analysis in future cases?The Supreme Court did not address what constitutes a sufficiently close friendship for the passing of information to be considered a gift. In the Newman case, the appeals court found the government’s evidence of the relationship between the tippers and the tippees insufficient when they were not close friends who only occasionally socialized with each other, so “if this was a ‘benefit,’ practically anything would qualify.”There have been insider trading cases involving golf buddies and high school classmates passing around information. The government would always prefer to have proof of some tangible benefit because of its potential appeal to jurors, but after the Salman decision it can pursue a gift theory that depends on the relationship alone, perhaps even one that involves only a casual connection.The Supreme Court’s endorsement of the gift analysis for tipping by family and friends will also affect pending cases. Mathew Martoma, the former portfolio manager for SAC Capital Advisors, relied on the Newman benefit requirement in asking the Second Circuit to overturn his conviction for trading on information received about a failed drug trial that generated gains and losses avoided of nearly $275 million. He is currently serving a nine-year prison term.Rajat Gupta, who was convicted of tipping the hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam about developments at Goldman Sachs during the financial crisis when he was a director of the bank, had another appeal in his case heard by the Second Circuit on Nov. 16 claiming that the Newman decision required that he receive a new trial.With the Supreme Court’s clear rejection of the heightened benefit requirement, those arguments appear to be moot.Another case that could be affected involves Leon Cooperman, a prominent hedge fund manager who was sued by the S.E.C. for trading profitably ahead of an impending asset sale at Atlas Pipeline Partners in 2010 based on nonpublic information he got from a company executive in his position as one of its largest shareholders. Mr. Cooperman sent a letter to his investors after the case was filed that the Justice Department delayed its inquiry until the Salman case was decided. Now that the Supreme Court adopted a more expansive view of the benefit requirement for tipping, it will be interesting to see if the criminal investigation moves forward.The Salman decision largely reiterates the law that existed until early December 2014, when the Second Circuit upset the notion that a gift between friends could prove the illegal tipping of inside information. The Justice Department and the S.E.C. can go back to pursuing cases just as they always have, perhaps emboldened now that the justices have endorsed the government’s position on what is a benefit under insider trading law.Advertisement