By SYDNEY EMBERMARCH 8, 2016
For 90 seconds, Michael Phelps’s training regimen is on display: He swims, lifts weights, eats. At one point, he undergoes cupping therapy (seriously, just Google it).The Under Armour ad featuring the Olympic swimmer is an extension of the company’s “Rule Yourself” campaign, which was introduced last year and seeks to shed light on how world-class athletes train. The Phelps spot will be introduced at an Under Armour event in Baltimore on Tuesday and follows the recent release of two other ads in the campaign, one showcasing the United States women’s gymnastic team and the other featuring the young Dutch soccer star Memphis Depay. The creative agency Droga5 is behind the campaign.The overarching goal of the “Rule Yourself” campaign is to promote Under Armour’s training apparel. But the broader message of the campaign’s second installment — whose ads run under the tagline “It’s what you do in the dark that puts you in the light” — is to remind people that success does not come easy, an idea that can get lost in the age of YouTube where stars are seemingly made overnight.“That is the headline we want people to remember: You have to train when no one is watching,” said Adrienne R. Lofton, senior vice president for global brand marketing at Under Armour.AdvertisementThe three new campaign spots are shot in plenty of shadow, underscoring the idea that much of the training required to be the best occurs out of the spotlight.AdvertisementPhelps’s spot, set to “The Last Goodbye” by the Kills, is intended to highlight his singular focus as he trains for what may be his last Olympics. The ad was shot in Arizona, where Phelps was training for the Games in Brazil, which start in early August.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.In an attempt to get the biggest bang out of its sponsorship buck, Under Armour is introducing a campaign featuring Olympic athletes like Phelps five months before the Games even begin. Under Armour’s push could be a bit premature and the spots could get lost once the barrage of Olympic-related ads really gets going.As part of the campaign, Under Armour is releasing a video of Phelps viewing the ad for the first time. The company brought Phelps and his fiancée, Nicole Johnson, to its Baltimore headquarters on the day before Christmas, where the couple watched the ad with Kevin Plank, the company’s chief executive.How did Phelps respond?In the video, Phelps, whom Ms. Lofton said knew very little about the ad before seeing it, is moved to tears.“That’s insane,” Phelps says.In a phone interview before a workout in the pool on Monday, Phelps said the spot reflected how hard he works. “I think it shows just exactly what I do,” he said. “It shows what I’m extremely passionate about and I don’t give up. For me, it was incredible.”We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.