By EMILY STEELFEB. 10, 2016
HBO’s stand-alone video streaming service has attracted about 800,000 paying subscribers since starting last April, the premium cable network said Wednesday, the first time it has disclosed numbers for the service.Targeted at a generation of so-called cord-cutters or cord-nevers, who pay for an Internet connection but not television, the $15-a-month service called HBO Now does not require a traditional television subscription and is available across a range of streaming devices. It started exclusively on Apple TV.The service was a “significant contributor” to the 2.7 million total subscribers the premium cable network added in the United States last year, HBO’s parent company, Time Warner, said on Wednesday during a conference call. HBO has about 50 million subscribers in the United States, and 130 million subscribers worldwide.Analyst forecasts for how many people would sign up for the offering were varied. For its long-term target, HBO projected that about half of the 10 million homes in the United States with web service but no traditional cable or satellite television subscriptions would subscribe to HBO Now.Advertisement“We see an enormous amount of opportunity ahead,” Richard Plepler, the chief executive of HBO, said during the call.AdvertisementGrowth, Mr. Plepler added, would be propelled by an injection of new programming, more marketing firepower and global expansion. New shows meant to appeal to HBO Now viewers include series from the comedian Jon Stewart and the sports personality Bill Simmons, “Sesame Street” and a daily newscast from Vice.Some analysts viewed the 800,000 figure as low, especially when compared with the 43.3 million paid subscribers that HBO’s rival Netflix has in the United States.During the call, one analyst asked Mr. Plepler why HBO Now had “only” 800,000 subscribers. Mr. Plepler disputed the use of the word “only.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“We’re just getting started,” he said, adding that the service should make more progress when it is added to new platforms like the PlayStation and Xbox devices.Time Warner reported mixed fourth-quarter results on Wednesday. The company, which also owns the Warner Bros. movie studio and the Turner cable networks group, beat forecasts for quarterly profits and increased expectations for profit growth for 2016.Yet total revenues declined 6 percent to $7.1 billion, missing analysts’ expectations. HBO and Turner fell short of forecasts for growth in subscription revenue.Time Warner has been the subject of speculation that it should be split up or sold. Jeffrey L. Bewkes, Time Warner’s chief executive, outlined on the call why the company considered itself better off together than split into pieces.“We’ve deliberately reshaped the company to focus on high-quality video businesses with global scale and are well positioned to capitalize on the growing demand for the very best video content,” Mr. Bewkes said.“The combined scale of our businesses is critical to our ability to take advantage of that growth,” he said. “And it’s particularly important in distribution and programming, the core of what we do as a company.”A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: HBO Streaming Service Logs 800,000 Paying Subscribers.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.