By LIZ MOYERFEB. 10, 2016
An agreement between American and European regulators over the $553 trillion derivatives market could bring relief to banks and large clearinghouses, which had faced the threat of higher costs and disrupted trading.The Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the European Commission agreed on a common set of requirements in regulating derivatives clearinghouses, an action that they say will ease capital constraints for banks that clear derivatives trades through the CME Group in Chicago, the Intercontinental Exchange in Atlanta and LCH Clearnet in London, among others.The agreement, announced on Wednesday but pending approval in the United States and in Europe, would end three years of heated debate on how best to establish common standards to ensure greater stability in the financial markets.Clearinghouses stand between banks and other buyers and sellers of futures, interest-rate swaps and other derivatives, which companies use to hedge the risks of fluctuations in currencies, interest rates and commodity prices. Clearinghouses try to reduce risk by requiring traders on both sides of a transaction to post collateral.AdvertisementSince the financial crisis in 2008, when derivatives helped fuel the turmoil, regulators have pushed for more interest-rate swaps and other derivatives to be cleared through the clearinghouses rather than through private arrangements between buyers and sellers.AdvertisementBut European and United States regulators had been at loggerheads over recognizing each other’s rules as equivalent. Without such a designation, European banks faced higher capital requirements to clear trades through American clearinghouses, potentially shutting down clearing of derivatives by European banks here.Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said in a statement that the agreement was a “major milestone” in the effort to reform the global derivatives market after the crisis. “Finding common ground with our European partners to establish a level playing field internationally will help support cross-border activity with the appropriate regulation and supervision,” he said.Jonathan Hill, the European commissioner for financial stability, financial services and capital markets union, said, “after more than three years of discussion, we are now able to provide certainty for the marketplace.”Terrence A. Duffy, the executive chairman and president of CME, told Congress last year that a lack of agreement would cause “disruptions to U.S. futures markets because, without equivalence, the cost of clearing futures on U.S. markets will increase significantly.”CME is one of the world’s largest options and futures exchanges, handling a record 3.5 billion contracts last year. Foreign banks use it to hedge their dollar interest rate exposure or to facilitate trades for clients in the United States.Higher capital requirements to clear there would have added to pressure on large European banks that are already being pinched with declining profitability.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Two deadlines looming in Europe in June, one requiring certain derivatives trades to be cleared through a clearinghouse, raised the stakes for the two sides to reach an agreement.“Without the cross-border agreement, there would be either greater fragmentation of the market or higher costs,” says Willa Cohen Bruckner, a partner at the law firm Alston & Bird.AdvertisementIntercontinental Exchange, the Atlanta-based owner of the New York Stock Exchange and seven derivatives clearinghouses globally, would also be affected. Jeffrey Sprecher, its chairman and chief executive, said in a statement that ICE would “meet the new equivalence requirements and continue to support our customers’ risk management needs.”The futures industry trade association FIA said on Wednesday that it expected United States clearinghouses to be recognized under the equivalence rules by June 21, just in time to meet the European deadline for moving swaps-clearing to clearinghouses.The agreement does not include United States agricultural commodity derivatives, a nod to American farmers and ranchers and “the significant nexus of these U.S. contracts with the U.S. economy,” the two sides said.Both sides agreed to shift requirements on the margin banks must post to clearinghouses, to be more closely aligned.European regulators will move to recognize United States clearinghouses as equivalent to their own regulated markets in a vote later this month, the FIA said.Andy Nybo, the global head of research and consulting at Tabb Group, said “international regulatory harmonization is a positive for the financial markets.“It’s important,” he said, “that everyone plays by the same rules.”A version of this article appears in print on February 11, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. and Europe Set Rules for Derivatives Regulation.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.