By ELIZABETH PATONDEC. 5, 2016
3-D printing may radically change our relationship to shopping and our clothes a lot sooner than we think.Or so said Ray Kurzweil, a director of engineering at Google developing machine intelligence, in the past week at The New York Times Global Leaders’ Collective conference held in Washington. Mr. Kurzweil is a futurist who accurately predicted the explosive growth of worldwide internet use in the 1990s, the rise of mobile devices in the 2000s and the dominance of self-driving vehicles by the end of the current decade. He now believes people will be 3-D printing bespoke clothing en masse in their homes by 2020.While advances have been made in recent years in the 3-D production of nonpliable products, namely sneakers and sunglasses, the printing of fabric-based items remains in its infancy because of the stiff, synthetic quality of the raw materials that the current printers must use. In as soon as a decade, Mr. Kurzweil said, this will start to change.“As the variety of materials available to print in 3-D become more extensive and less expensive, both free open-source and proprietary clothing designs will be widely available online in as little as 10 years,” Mr. Kurzweil said to his audience, predominantly made up of fashion and luxury executives. “By 2020 there will be a whole host of product available immediately to buy for pennies on the dollar and to print straight away. It will become the norm for people to have printers in their homes,” he continued, adding that food and housing materials will also be printable.AdvertisementOnce described by Bill Gates as “the best person I know at predicting the future of artificial intelligence,” Mr. Kurzweil said that fashion brands would then have to adjust to a dwindling level of control over design, manufacturing, execution and inventory management, in a technology-led overhaul of their industry similar to that experienced by the media and music sectors. It may be no bad thing.Advertisement“The value of those industries has actually gone up, not down, and the same thing will happen to fashion,” he said. “There is an open-source market with millions of free products, but people still spend money to read ‘Harry Potter,’ see the latest blockbuster or buy music from their favorite artist. Fueled by the ease of distribution and promotion, you have a coexistence of a free open-source market and a proprietary market. That’s the direction we’re also moving in with clothing.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Brands will still give customers designer offerings and develop trends, Mr. Kurzweil believes, but the manufacturing process will be transformed. And consumer appetite will boom as the world gets wealthier and standards of living rise (although he had no clear answer on what would happen to those who lost their jobs to the machines at the forefront of the A.I. revolution).Mr. Kurzweil, 68, whose reputation — and in some circles, notoriety — has been built largely on his theories around radical life extension, also speculated on how the luxury world could be enhanced by the merging of the human mind with artificial intelligence. Rapid progress in nanotechnology and gene sequencing have led him to predict that humans will be hybrids by 2045 and brains will be connected to “the cloud” via nanorobots the size of blood cells that will augment existing intelligence and human capacity for creativity and emotion.“Intelligent machines will go from our pockets to inside our bodies and brains,” he said. “We will be able to transcend our current limitations and extend our thinking by one millionfold.” This in turn will make us funnier, more creative and more imaginative in our visions and designs, particularly in fields such as art, music and fashion, he added.“Who knows what those tools — and that connection to the cloud — leading to greater levels of expression might do for fashion?” Mr. Kurzweil said.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2016, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Fashion’s future, printed to order.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.