AdvertisementSupported byBy Leslie PickerAfter several attempts a few years ago to acquire Meda, a Swedish drug maker, Mylan finally found the price to solidify a deal: $7.2 billion.Mylan said on Wednesday that it would acquire Meda for cash and stock worth 165 Swedish krona a share, or a 92 percent premium to where the stock closed on the Nasdaq Stockholm on Feb. 10, according to a statement issued by the companies on Wednesday. Including Meda’s debt, the deal is valued at $9.9 billion.The deal comes three months after Mylan’s hostile bid for Perrigo fell short of collecting the shareholder votes needed for the transaction to take place. Mylan also fended off its own unsolicited approach by Teva last year.Among the motivations for the deal was Mylan’s desire to provide greater exposure to over-the-counter products, which represent 40 percent of Meda’s product sales, and entry into emerging markets. Meda focuses largely on respiratory, dermatology and pain products. By acquiring Meda, Mylan is bringing together more than 2,000 products, including consolidating the EpiPen Auto-Injector for allergic reactions in Europe.“Meda brings us greater scale, breadth and diversity across products, geographies and sales channels,” Heather Bresch, Mylan’s chief executive, said in the statement on Wednesday.Mylan said the acquisition was immediately accretive to its earnings, increasing to 35 cents to 40 cents a share in 2017. The transaction also could create about $350 million in annual pretax synergies by the fourth year after the deal, the companies said.As part of integrating the two companies, Mylan and Meda said there would most likely be some “changes to the organization, operations and employees of the combined group,” adding that no decisions had been made to this effect. Meda has about 4,500 employees, while Mylan has 35,000.Meda’s two largest shareholders, Stena and Fidim, representing 30 percent of the company’s shares outstanding, have already accepted the offer.The economy, rampant consolidation among drug makers,and the need to compete in the health care sector led those investors to believe that Meda would be better off combining with another company than existing on a standalone basis, Ms. Bresch of Mylan said in a phone interview Wednesday.Conditioned on approval by regulators, the companies expect to close the deal by the third quarter of 2016.Centerview Partners provided financial advice to Mylan for the transaction, while Cravath, Swaine & Moore served as legal adviser. Vinge provided legal advice in Sweden and NautaDutilh was the legal adviser in the Netherlands. Rothschild served as the sole adviser to Meda.Deutsche Bank and Goldman Sachs are providing financing to Mylan for the cash portion of the deal.Advertisement