AdvertisementSupported byBy Brooks BarnesLOS ANGELES — Speeding past Wall Street’s expectations, Disney on Tuesday reported a 28 percent increase in quarterly profit, with the “Star Wars” franchise as the primary engine.But instead of reveling in the record results, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, found himself once again mounting a defense of ESPN on a post-earnings conference call with analysts.Since August, when Mr. Iger acknowledged that ESPN had experienced modest subscriber losses, Disney has been dogged by concerns about the long-term health of its cable television holdings, which have historically provided the bulk of its annual profit. Mr. Iger has repeatedly rejected the notion, put forward by a few analysts, that ESPN is particularly at risk as some consumers forgo a traditional cable subscription.On Tuesday’s call, Mr. Iger again emphasized the strength of ESPN, noting that in recent weeks the sports behemoth had achieved an increase in subscribers, in part from new, slimmed-down cable and satellite services like Sling TV that are popular with younger consumers. At one point, in response to an analyst question about the changing way media is consumed, Mr. Iger said it was “just ridiculous” to think that ESPN would not continue to dominate.“Predictions that many have made are more dire than they should be,” he added, sounding a bit frustrated.Disney executives also sought to use the call to focus attention on what they called long-term “purposeful diversification” efforts, which have included the acquisitions of Pixar, Lucasfilm and Marvel; doubling the size of Disney Cruise Line; and aggressive theme park expansion.Mr. Iger noted that Disney now had 11 franchises that generate $1 billion or more in annual sales. He added that, between 2009 and 2015, operating income at the division that houses ESPN grew 8 percent compounded annually while the rest of the company’s businesses combined to contribute 23 percent compounded growth.But analysts continued to press him on ESPN, and Disney shares fell 3 percent in after-hours trading.For the quarter that ended Jan. 2, which is the first quarter of Disney’s fiscal year, the entertainment giant reported net income of $2.88 billion, or $1.63 a share, up from $2.18 billion, or $1.27 a share, a year earlier. Counting one-time items, including $27 million worth of severance and termination costs at ESPN and a television-related gain of $332 million, earnings for the most recent quarter were $1.73 a share. Revenue rose 14 percent, to $15.24 billion.Analysts had been expecting $1.45 a share for income and revenue of $14.76 billion.“Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” which has taken in more than $2 billion worldwide since its release in mid-December, allowed Walt Disney Studios to deliver operating income of $1.01 billion in the quarter, an 86 percent increase year-over-year. The studio, which was hurt by unfavorable foreign exchange rates, receives an undisclosed portion of sales from merchandise related to “The Force Awakens.”Disney said the studio also benefited from the international distribution of classic “Star Wars” films on television and streaming services.In prepared remarks to analysts on Tuesday, Thomas O. Staggs, Disney’s chief operating officer, emphasized that the studio was more than just “Star Wars” movies; there are new sequels on the way, for instance, to “Frozen,” “Cars,” “Finding Nemo,” “The Incredibles,” “Toy Story” and “The Pirates of the Caribbean.” (Disney also confirmed that “Frozen” would come to Broadway in spring 2018.)Although Disney’s international theme park results were negatively affected by the temporary closure of a Disneyland park in France after terrorist attacks in Paris, the company’s theme park unit posted operating profit of $981 million in the quarter, a 22 percent increase. Disney’s domestic parks, in particular, benefited from an extra week of New Year’s-related attendance.Disney said about six million people visited “Star Wars”-related attractions at its parks during the quarter.Disney’s smallest division, consumer products and interactive media, reported operating income of $860 million, a 23 percent increase, helped by “Star Wars”-related retail items and the release of the game “Star Wars: Battlefront,” which sold about 13 million copies. Mr. Iger said he was encouraged by a surprising lack of cannibalization by “Star Wars” of other Disney-themed products. “Star Wars” items generated more than $3 billion in retail sales in the quarter, he said.Operating income at Disney’s vast media networks division, which includes ESPN, ABC and Disney Channel, fell by 6 percent, largely because of the timing of a half-dozen college football bowl games, which increased programming costs. Christine M. McCarthy, Disney’s chief financial officer, told analysts that the division experienced a 14 percent year-on-year increase in ad sales, after adjusting for comparability.Without the college games, she said, operating income for the division would have grown in line with revenue. Revenue for the media networks group increased 8 percent, to $6.33 billion.Advertisement