
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING and


STEVEN DAVIDOFF SOLOMON

APRIL 20, 2016
The news that the blood-testing company Theranos is being investigated by the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission brings to mind the adage that if something sounds too good to be true, it probably is.The company, which seemed to epitomize a Silicon Valley “unicorn” by shooting to a valuation of $9 billion on the promise of revolutionary technology, making a billionaire of its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, could find itself swamped as it deals with the investigations and problems in its laboratory.Theranos says it “is cooperating fully with all investigations.”The question is what potential violations might be the subject of the investigations.Like most private companies, Theranos shares have not been made available to the general investing public. But that does not exempt the company from the anti-fraud provisions of the federal securities laws. A misstatement or omission of material fact in connection with the sale of its securities to venture capital firms could constitute a violation.AdvertisementOne might expect that the sophisticated investors in Silicon Valley would not be duped by the projections and market predictions made by a start-up like Theranos. But the issue could be one about the viability of the company’s claims about its scientific methodology and results, an area where most investors would have little ability to scrutinize.AdvertisementIn a speech on March 31, Mary Jo White, the chairwoman of the S.E.C., raised questions about the rocketing valuations of start-ups, pointing out how these companies may succumb to the same pressure as corporations whose shares are publicly traded to push their valuation as high as possible.“The concern is whether the prestige associated with reaching a sky-high valuation fast drives companies to try to appear more valuable than they actually are,” she said.That may well signal one area of concern about Theranos.The company undoubtedly had hefty disclosures about the risks and potentials of its technology when it sought venture capital funds. And it may well be that Ms. Holmes’s technology works – we just don’t know yet.Securities violations can be the subject of both a civil enforcement action by the S.E.C. and criminal prosecution by the Justice Department. Companies have to handle inquiries carefully because of the risk of a hefty criminal fine on top of disgorgement of funds raised through misleading solicitations of investments.Maria Shriver discusses her “Today” show interview with Elizabeth Holmes, the chief executive of Theranos.A potential area of inquiry for federal prosecutors is the relationship between Theranos and the drugstore chain Walgreens, which agreed to make the company’s equipment available in some of its stores. Any deception regarding the efficacy of its testing, especially if consumers were misled, could lead to charges under the federal mail and wire fraud statutes.Another avenue for possible scrutiny by criminal investigators is the filings that Theranos made with the Food and Drug Administration to obtain approval for use of its blood-testing equipment. An incomplete or misleading disclosure in an application to the agency could be prosecuted under the law that makes it a crime to submit “any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation” to a federal agency.As the investigations delve into the company, an important issue will be whether any individuals are singled out for possible prosecution and civil penalties. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services threatened to close Theranos’s laboratory in California and bar Ms. Holmes and the company’s president, Ramesh Balwani, from owning or operating its labs for two years.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department has emphasized that a company must identify individuals responsible for wrongdoing to receive any credit for its cooperation. That will put a premium on information that can help the government pursue charges against people inside Theranos.AdvertisementAs the company deals with the investigations by the Justice Department and the S.E.C., the question arises about who will undertake any internal inquiry. The company’s defense has been led in recent months by David Boies, a founder and the chairman of Boies Schiller & Flexner and, most recently, its newest director.As the Deal Professor noted in February, this puts Mr. Boies in a ticklish situation because of the potential conflict of interest between his role as counsel to the company and as one of its directors.Prosecutors and regulators rely heavily on companies to conduct an initial investigation and report the results. But if it looks as if the lawyers conducting the inquiry have a conflict of interest, any credibility the investigation might have can be undermined by questions about its independence. That can lead investigators to dig into an organization on their own, rummaging through corporate records and demanding to speak with employees and executives rather than allowing the company to control at least the preliminary stages of an investigation.An interesting sign of how Theranos will respond to the Justice Department and S.E.C. investigations will be who is chosen to oversee the internal inquiry, an expected step in any effort to demonstrate cooperation.The federal investigations prompt another question: Why aren’t the venture capital firms that invested in Theranos suing? After all, if Theranos were a public company, there would be a slew of lawsuits claiming that shareholders were defrauded. One reason may be that there is no basis to make such a claim. Investors either still believe in Theranos’s blood-testing devices or they received truthful disclosure about the state of that technology and the risk of investing in the company.Another explanation may simply be that Theranos’s investors are too embarrassed to make such a claim. In the feeding frenzy that led to Theranos’s $9 billion valuation, some venture capitalists may not have done their due diligence, and they may not want to admit to their own investors that they were either foolish or duped. This is probably going to be a more common problem in Silicon Valley as sky-high valuations start to fall back to earth.Peter J. Henning, a professor at Wayne State University Law School, is a co-author of “Securities Crimes (2d edition).” Twitter: @peterjhenningSteven Davidoff Solomon is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley. His columns can be found at nytimes.com/dealbook. Follow @stevendavidoff on Twitter.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »