By AMIE TSANGJUNE 28, 2017
Daniel S. Loeb is getting some of what he asked for from Nestlé.The Swiss food company said on Tuesday that it would buy back almost $21 billion of its shares over the next three years, a move that Mr. Loeb had urged the company to consider.Nestlé said the plans were not a response to Mr. Loeb’s campaign, but were the result of a regular review. (That said, such reviews usually come in September.)Mr. Loeb may also get some things he hadn’t asked for. He wanted Nestlé to slim down, but the food giant indicated that it might pursue acquisitions as well as shedding businesses. And the company said that those deals would be a higher priority than the stock buybacks. Nestlé said the bulk of repurchases would take place in 2019 and 2020 to let it make takeovers first.For deal makers readying their pitch books, here are some of the areas that Nestlé may go shopping in:• Coffee• Pet care• Consumer health careOne specific request of Mr. Loeb’s may not get much support from Nestlé’s top managers. He wanted the company to sell off its 23 percent stake in L’Oréal, but Ulf Mark Schneider, Nestlé’s chief executive, has described the cosmetics company as a “strategic asset,” suggesting that any change would need careful consideration.AdvertisementShares of Nestlé, which had surged after Mr. Loeb’s campaign was publicized, fell 1.6 percent in trading in Zurich on Tuesday.AdvertisementIt isn’t just Nestlé that’s feeling the heat from shareholder activism.Dow Chemical and DuPont have heard from Larry Robbins’s Glenview Capital Management, which has called for changes to the chemical makers’ plans to merge and then break up into three companies, according to The Wall Street Journal.Glenview also criticized Dow’s chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris, for pushing back his retirement.Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.A common thread between Nestlé and the two chemical producers: Mr. Loeb, who memorably waged war against Mr. Liveris in late 2014 and who even now argues that Dow and DuPont should split into six companies, not three.Companies as diverse as Maersk, the Danish shipping conglomerate, and Merck, the American drug maker, had to scramble on Tuesday to respond to an international ransomware attack, similar to the WannaCry hacking just weeks ago.The law firm DLA Piper and the British marketing company WPP also confirmed that they had been attacked.The hacking started as an attack on Ukrainian government and business computer systems, but it spread around the world.Symantec, a Silicon Valley cybersecurity firm, said the new attack used the same National Security Agency hacking tool, Eternal Blue, that had been used in the WannaCry episode, as well as two other methods to promote its spread.AdvertisementIt is unclear how much bigger the attack will get, but here is what we know so far.Toshiba had wanted to sell a piece of its valuable microchip business by today, but the Japanese conglomerate’s failure to meet its own deadline is yet another blow to its efforts to repair its finances.Investors were dissatisfied. “This has become a third-rate company, but you have no sense of crisis,” one investor told executives at a gathering of shareholders outside Tokyo.Toshiba last week chose the Innovation Network, a Japanese-controlled investment fund; the Development Bank of Japan, a state-owned lender; and the American buyout firm Bain Capital as the buyers for the unit. Toshiba had hoped that a sale would help fill a hole in its balance sheet after losses at its American nuclear power division.Toshiba is embroiled in an ugly conflict with a rejected bidder. It said it was suing Western Digital for about $1 billion over Western Digital’s attempts to block the sale of the chip unit. But Western Digital has made a renewed offer, with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, putting Toshiba in the unenviable position of accepting what is said to be a lower offer or risking a long and costly legal fight.Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.