
Breakingviews By                     
NEIL UNMACK

DEC. 5, 2016
Cleaning up Italy’s banks is an opportunity ripe for the wasting. The failed referendum on Sunday need not cause a crisis if UniCredit completes its rights issue and fellow lender Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena can be quickly stabilized. Political turmoil and weak growth, though, could push up bad loan levels, and the political will to fix them may be lacking.The collapse of Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s government comes at a bad time for Italian lenders, which are collectively creaking with about 350 billion euros (about $377 billion) of bad and doubtful loans. The outgoing prime minister’s replacement will face four challenges.First is to ensure there is not a bank run. Fortunately, such a panic looks unlikely and unnecessary. Banks have access to European Central Bank liquidity, and government bond prices, which determine the value of their collateral, have been stable.Next is the need to fix Monte dei Paschi, which needs 5 billion euros, or about $5.4 billion. A plan to raise that through a share sale and debt conversion now looks difficult to execute, as potential investors may be deterred by political instability. If private investors shy away, possible solutions would be a government bailout and conversion of Monte dei Paschi’s subordinated debt into equity. The latter is better, since putting in state cash to help bankers would play into the hands of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement.AdvertisementThird on the new leader’s list will be UniCredit. It wants to raise more money than Monte dei Paschi, possibly as much as 13 billion euros, or about $14 billion. But it is larger, healthier and under less pressure to raise funds quickly. If both Monte dei Paschi and UniCredit can be fixed, then a crisis is unlikely. Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca need more capital, and could need to write down their subordinated debt, but they are small.Finally, there is the problem in the longer term of banks’ balance-sheet fragility. Bad debts could increase if the weak economy becomes weaker — as it may without a strong reform-minded prime minister. Banks may struggle to generate earnings to sell the nonperforming loans they have. The large listed banks could need another 21 billion euros, or about $22.7 billion, Mediobanca reckons.AdvertisementItaly could seize this moment to create a single entity to help the banks sell their bad debt and accelerate bankruptcy reforms. That would mean imposing losses on some local investors. But if Mr. Renzi could not do that, it’s unlikely his successor will. A weak government leaves the banks in purgatory — but not quite hell.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »