AdvertisementSupported byThe Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.48 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.62 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.32 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues, valued at $50 million or more, are scheduled for pricing this week:  Florida Board of Education, $140.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.Washington County, Ore., $105.7 million of limited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.Missouri Development Finance Board, $96.5 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.New Jersey Environmental Infrastructure Trust, $75 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.Portland, Ore., $171 million of water system revenue bonds. Competitive.New Jersey, $300 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.New York, $150.6 million of unlimited tax taxable general obligation bonds. Competitive.Pennsylvania, $613.1 million of limited tax general obligation refinancing bonding. Competitive.Los Angeles, $144.7 million of unlimited tax taxable general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.Akron, Ohio, Bath and Copley Joint Township Hospital District, $345.7 million of Summa Health Obligated Group hospital facilities refinancing and improvement revenue bonds. Goldman Sachs.Albuquerque Municipal School District No. 12, $115 million of general obligation school building bonds and general obligation education technology notes. J. P. Morgan Securities.Arizona Industrial Development Authority, $73.7 million education revenue and refinancing bonds. RBC Capital.California Municipal Finance Authority, $201 million of Northbay Healthcare Group revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.California Pollution Control Financing Authority, $215 million of solid waste disposal revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Central Puget Sound Regional Transportation Authority, Wash., $400 million of sales tax and motor vehicle excise tax bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Christian County, Ky., $57.6 million of hospital revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Colorado State University System Board of Governors, $68.8 million of system enterprise revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Connecticut, $320 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. William Blair & Company.Denver and Denver County, Colo., $109 million airport system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Iowa Higher Education Loan Authority, $56.1 million of private-college facility revenue anticipation notes and taxable notes. Raymond James.Judson Independent School District, Tex., $65.3 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Frost Bank.Love Field Airport Modernization Corporation, Dallas, $117.3 million of general airport revenue bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank & Company.Massachusetts Department of Transportation, $197 million of metropolitan highway system revenue refinancing bonds and subordinated revenue commonwealth contract assistance secured bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts Department of Transportation, $445 million of metropolitan highway system revenue refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency, $53.1 million of housing bonds and fixed rate bonds. Barclays.Minneapolis-St. Paul Metropolitan Airports Commission, Minn., $171.9 million of taxable subordinate airport revenue bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.Minneapolis-St. Paul Metropolitan Airports Commission, Minn., $225.9 million of airport, senior airport and subordinate airport revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Mississippi, $185 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup.Mississippi, $81.5 million of taxable general obligation bonds. Raymond James.Nassau County, N.Y., $358.1 million of tax and bond anticipation notes. Morgan Stanley.New York City Housing Development Corporation, $542.9 million of multifamily housing revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.New York City, $802.3 million debt securities. Jefferies.Park Creek Metropolitan District, Colo., $60 million of senior limited property tax supported revenue bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Phoenix Civic Improvement Corporation, $381.2 million of junior lien water system revenue refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Rensselaer City School District, N.Y., $57.2 million of refinancing certificates of participation. Morgan Stanley.Riverside, Calif., $54.1 million of variable rate refinancing water revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Rosemont, Ill., $98 million of taxable general obligation corporate purpose bonds. Mesirow Financial.Sacramento County, Calif., $186.2 million of airport system senior revenue refinancing and subordinate revenue refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.San Antonio, $124 million of electric and gas systems bonds. Jefferies.Santa Rosa High School District, Calif., $50 million of general obligation bonds. RBC Capital Markets.South Carolina Jobs-Economic Development Authority, $55.3 million of hospital revenue bonds. Ziegler.St. Louis Land Clearance Redevelopment Authority, $108.2 million of annual appropriation revenue bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.St. Louis Metropolitan Sewer District, $150 million of wastewater system improvement revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Tahoe-Truckee Unified School District, Calif., $84 million of School Facilities Improvement District Nos. 1 and 2 general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Utah Housing Corporation, $50 million of tax exempt mortgage-backed securities. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Van Dyke Public School District, Mich., $54.8 million of refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus & Company.Washington Higher Education Facilities Authority, $50 million of Whitworth University revenue refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority, $50 million of housing revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Wyoming Municipal Power Authority, $94 million of revenue refinancing bonds. George K. Baum & Company.Advertisement