By AMIE TSANG and PAUL MOZURFEB. 10, 2016
HONG KONG — A group of Chinese investors sees $1.2 billion worth of potential in the world’s sixth-place Internet browser.The group, which includes a Chinese private equity firm and two upstart Chinese technology companies, said on Wednesday that it had offered to acquire the Norwegian company behind the Opera web browser. The deal would give the buyers a name that has faded amid intense competition from Google’s Chrome and other browsers but still has a following in the developing world.The offer is the latest effort by Chinese technology companies to look abroad. One of the partners behind the Opera bid, the mobile-game maker Beijing Kunlun Tech, acquired a 60 percent stake in Grindr, valuing that social networking app for gay men at $155 million. Chinese tech giants like Alibaba Group and Tencent Holdings have also made purchases outside their home market in recent years to expand their reach.Opera, a Norwegian browser developed in the 1990s, gained prominence a decade ago with a browser designed specifically for mobile phones that used compression technology to speed download times. But others have caught up, and Opera — with a 5.5 percent market share — is now the sixth most-used browser behind Chrome, Apple’s Safari, Microsoft’s Internet Explorer, Firefox and Alibaba’s UCWeb, according to the Internet metrics firm StatCounter.AdvertisementStill, Opera has pockets of strength in some fast-growing Internet markets. It is the top browser in Africa, according to StatCounter, and it is the third most popular in Russia and India and the fourth in Indonesia.Opera Software, the browser’s parent company, said in August last year that it was undertaking a strategic review. It has reported annual losses over the past two years, and its growth prospects have disappointed investors. Even after takeover rumors drove up its shares in recent days, they are still down about one-quarter from a year ago.AdvertisementThe Chinese group is led by Golden Brick Silk Road Fund Management of China and includes Yonglian Investment, an affiliate of Golden Brick Silk Road Fund Management, Kunlun Tech and the Chinese antivirus and search company Qihoo 360. Qihoo is well known in China for doing battle with China’s tech titans, like Tencent. Golden Brick is an affiliate of Golden Brick Capital, a private equity firm with headquarters in Hong Kong.The group has offered 71 Norwegian kroner, or $8.31, a share, a premium of about 56 percent, based on the average share price over the past 30 days.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Opera said that the agreement would give Opera access to Kunlun and Qihoo’s Internet users in China, as well as funding. Kunlun and Qihoo will also be able to sell their products to Opera users and use its mobile advertising platform.Qihoo runs its own mobile browser, which it could combine with Opera’s, and it also could benefit from the company’s advertising network. Kunlun, which makes and licenses games, could use Opera’s apps as a way to broaden the distribution of those games.Opera’s board has unanimously decided to recommend that shareholders accept the offer.The deal is still conditional on Kunlun’s getting approval at its general meeting in March to participate in the consortium.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.