AdvertisementSupported byBy Chad BrayLONDON — The director of the Serious Fraud Office, a British agency that investigates fraud, will continue in his post for another two years, the British government said on Tuesday.David Green, who was appointed director of the fraud office in 2012, had his contract extended until April 2018, Jeremy Wright, the British attorney general, said on Tuesday. Mr. Green’s four-year term had been set to expire in April.“I am happy to continue as director, and the S.F.O. will continue to take on the sort of cases for which it was designed,” Mr. Green said in a news release.The contract extension came nearly two weeks after a jury in London acquitted six former brokers of charges that they helped a onetime trader at UBS and Citigroup manipulate the London interbank offered rate, an important benchmark interest rate known as Libor.The verdict represented a severe blow to the reputation of British authorities, who have been criticized for their inability to successfully prosecute financial crimes, particularly when compared with the United States Justice Department.It came after the fraud office successfully prosecuted Tom Hayes, a former trader at UBS and Citigroup.Mr. Hayes was the first person to go to trial over criminal charges related to Libor manipulation and was convicted in August of conspiracy to defraud. In December, a British appeals court reduced his sentence to 11 years in prison from an original term of 14 years.A third trial in London of others accused of manipulating Libor is expected to begin later this month.The fraud office also has accused 11 others of manipulating the euro interbank offered rate, another important benchmark interest rate, known as Euribor. The first trial related to that investigation is expected in 2017.In announcing the contract extension, Mr. Wright noted that Serious Fraud Office, under Mr. Green’s leadership, used its first deferred prosecution agreement to resolve an inquiry against a company last year. The agency was given the power to use such agreements in 2014.In 2014, the Serious Fraud Office also secured its first convictions under Britain’s new bribery law, which went into effect in 2011 after years of efforts to overhaul the country’s corruption laws.“In his time as director of the S.F.O., David Green led a change in the organization’s approach to prosecuting cases,” Mr. Wright said.Advertisement