
Revalued By                     
 DAVID GELLES
 
FEB. 6, 2016
Before becoming the youngest tenured professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in 2011, when he was 29, Adam Grant was a professional magician.These days, his magic involves making arcane topics like organizational change, motivation at work and groupthink interesting and accessible to a popular audience. His first book, “Give and Take,” examined how generosity and selfishness could contribute to successful careers. His new book is “Originals: How Non-Conformists Move the World.” This interview has been edited and condensed.Q. What’s the basic argument of “Originals”?A. We all have original ideas. Even if we don’t see ourselves as supercreative or as wild nonconformists, we have insights every day about how the world around us could be better. It might be a better way of running meetings in your office that would be less mind-numbing. It might be a little twist on a product or a service.Most of us don’t act on these ideas. We’re afraid we’re going to be rejected or ridiculed, or that we’re going to waste our time and no one is going to hear our ideas. It’s amazing how many originals almost never acted because of fear and futility.AdvertisementWhat’s the difference between originality and creativity?Creativity is generating ideas that are novel and useful. I define originals as people who go beyond dreaming up the ideas and take initiative to make their visions a reality. This book is like the sequel to creativity — it’s about how to champion new ideas.AdvertisementNot everyone is in a role where creativity is encouraged, or even possible. Is this book only for graphic designers and astrophysicists?Geniuses don’t have better ideas than the rest of us. They just have more of them.A mistake that a lot of us make is that our first few ideas are our most conventional, and we stop there. And yet the moment when you say, “I’m out of ideas,” is the moment when you’re most free to think in original ways, because you’ve already ruled out some of the most obvious possibilities.How can someone be original in a job where originality isn’t expected?There are allies lurking everywhere. If your organization is larger than six people, there’s a good chance not everyone will hate your idea equally. Finding that coalition of support is really useful. And there are a bunch of practices to promote originality. Running an innovation tournament is an easy step.Another one of the most powerful things you can do is bring examples of organizations that failed to embrace originality and died because of it. Look at Polaroid. Look at BlackBerry. There are these examples of organizations that got stuck in the status quo and got used to groupthink. You see that, and it scares the hell out of people.Is there a risk of devaluing the unoriginals? Don’t we need people to make widgets and service our cars?Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Originality is useful in those worlds, too. There are new and different and better ways of making widgets, which can save people time, which can make work less inane and monotonous, which can bring a bit more meaning to somebody’s job. One of the great things about these tiny everyday acts of originality is that you get to think creatively, which for most people is fun.The goal is for people to look around them and say, “What are the practices that don’t make sense around here? What are the systems that could be improved? What are the assumptions that haven’t been questioned?”You make the argument that women are often penalized for originality at work, while men are often rewarded for it. How do we get past this?AdvertisementThe evidence says that although women tend to be more hesitant to speak up and challenge the status quo because of the risks of being seen as too assertive, they are actually more likely to persist. Once they commit to something, they will follow through to see that it succeeds, whereas men are much more likely to float an idea and be like, “No, just kidding.”If we leave all the idea championing to men, then we’re going to lose out on a lot of ideas that need perseverance to see the light of day. If women don’t speak up, this becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. If no one ever sees women speaking up, it becomes even harder for women to get credit for the great ideas they bring to the table.Are there any shortcuts to creativity?The biggest shortcut is to diversify your experience base. When people think they are uncreative or unoriginal, it’s because they’ve had a bunch of experiences that are just like the experiences that everyone else has had.Are there certain organizational structures that promote originality?We have to be really careful about avoiding the practices that get in the way of originality, rather than coming up with the perfect model to foster it. When a boss shoots down an idea, the reverberating effect of that is so much stronger than the positive effect of a boss accepting and supporting a new idea.It also comes back to diversity. I can’t tell you that if you bring in a bunch of weird and different people, then a bunch of good things will happen. But I can tell you that if you hire a bunch of similar people and promote only the ones who are most similar, a bunch of bad things are likely to happen.A version of this article appears in print on February 7, 2016, on Page BU6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Workplace Magician Reveals His Secrets.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »