
Corner Office By                     
 ADAM BRYANT
 
AUG. 19, 2016
This interview with Bracken P. Darrell, C.E.O. of Logitech, the technology accessories maker, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.Q. Were you in leadership roles at a young age?A. I grew up in Owensboro, Ky., a city of about 50,000 people. I ended up in leadership roles because I grew up very fast. I was about the height I am now when I was 12. I was a good athlete, and people literally looked up to me. You probably get addicted to that.I played center on the basketball team when I was in sixth grade. By the ninth grade, I was playing forward. By my sophomore year, I was playing occasional point guard. But I really liked leadership, so I moved into other leadership roles, including student body president of my high school, which was about 1,600 kids. That’s really where it started.Tell me about your parents.My mom was a first-grade teacher and my dad was a college professor. They were really into education, so it was all about school, school, school.AdvertisementHow have they influenced your leadership style?It’s hard for me to say. I’m not much like either one of them. But I’ve got two older siblings who are in leadership roles, and my sister’s a lawyer.Any thoughts on why all of you turned out that way?Part of it is probably that we grew up with so little money. I’m not a Horatio Alger story or anything, but my parents divorced when I was really young. I wore the same pair of jeans every day. I remember waiting to pull them out of the dryer so I could wear them to school.We were definitely on the lower part of the economic curve, but we were in the top 10 or 15 percent on the education curve. I’m really not a money-oriented person at all, but I’m sure it drove me to feel that you have to have money to have an impact, and I was always very impact-driven.And what about your college years?I really wanted to go to an Ivy League school, but I thought I’d never be able to pay for it. So I ended up going to a smaller liberal arts college, Hendrix College, in Conway, Ark. I majored in English, but I took enough accounting and economics courses to move in the path I wanted, which was leadership through business. I knew I either wanted to go into politics or business when I was 16.Hendrix was great for me. It was very small. It was even smaller than my high school, but it was a place where I could be a big fish in a small pond. One of my lines within the company is that we want to play where we can be a big fish in a small pond. That strategy is a lot better than being a small fish in a big ocean.AdvertisementWhat are some important leadership lessons you’ve learned?I’d say the most meaningful leadership role was being student body president. I really wanted to do meaningful things, to accomplish things, in the role. And I remember thinking that I can’t wait until I have a real job where people are paid to work, and they actually want to do stuff because they’re paid to work.And then I realized somewhere in my first four years of working after college that it’s always the same — you have to inspire people to do stuff, just like in high school, even though they’re getting paid to work. That was a big “aha” moment for me.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.It’s a volunteer world, even if it doesn’t look like it. If you treat people like volunteers, you’re much better off.What changes did you make when you joined Logitech in 2013?Early on, we defined several values in the culture that I didn’t think were there enough. One of them was speaking up, and that’s the most important one. When people go through a tough time, as Logitech had for about four years, everybody’s talking about problems. But if nobody listens to them they stop talking about problems, so you don’t know what they are.The most dangerous thing is to be sitting in an office and nobody’s telling you what’s wrong. So I immediately started talking about speaking up and moving fast.How do you hire?The most important thing for me is frequency of interviews over depth. I don’t hire anybody who I’ve met just once. It’s a long process. And then I get other people to meet them because I have blind spots. I’m superintuitive, and that’s really dangerous when you’re hiring people because you can really miss things.And you can get a feel for what people are like when you’re in a restaurant. We’re a humble, self-effacing company that’s just trying to do good work. There’s no room here for enormous egos. I don’t like people who don’t respect others as equals, whether it’s a recruiter or a waiter.What advice do you give to new college grads?My favorite commencement address is the Steve Jobs speech. The only problem is when he talks about following your passion. You should follow your passions, of course. The problem is that 80 percent of people don’t really know what their passion is.So my first piece of advice: Just work really, really hard. It’s amazing how good life is if you work hard.AdvertisementMy second piece of advice is to set goals. You know, goals are free. They don’t cost you anything, and they’re so effective. It’s about staying hungry, and setting a goal is just a way of creating hunger.The single thing that’s made me successful over my life is drive. It’s not I.Q. It’s not some luck of having social skills that somebody else doesn’t have. It’s just drive.I had the huge advantage of growing up with very little, and nothing to fall back on. But you’ve got to find ways to stay hungry.Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice. This interview has been edited for space and clarity.A version of this article appears in print on August 21, 2016, on Page BU2 of the New York edition with the headline: Be Sure to Tell the Boss What’s Wrong.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »