
White Collar Watch By                     
PETER J. HENNING

FEB. 8, 2016
Abraham Lincoln once said, “Let the people know the facts and the country will be safe.” Whether that view applies to disclosure of a corporate monitor’s report about HSBC’s response to money laundering problems that resulted in a deferred prosecution agreement in 2012 is the focus of a dispute between the Justice Department and Judge John Gleeson of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn.The question is whether the public has a right to see reports compiled by monitors, who were appointed at the government’s insistence, about how well companies found to have violated the law are cleaning up their operations.The Justice Department filed charges against London-based HSBC in 2012, accusing the bank of failing to prevent money laundering by Mexican drug cartels and hiding transfers made for clients in Iran, Sudan and Cuba in violation of sanctions imposed on those countries. As part of the settlement, HSBC paid $1.92 billion and agreed to bring in an outside monitor for five years to ensure improved compliance with the law.Prosecutors hailed the case as proof of the crackdown on miscreant banks. Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch, the United States attorney in Brooklyn at the time, said the agreement “makes it clear that all corporate citizens, no matter how large, must be held accountable for their actions.”AdvertisementBut the decision to allow HSBC to enter into a deferred prosecution agreement rather than plead guilty, and the failure to charge any individuals at the bank, caused a firestorm of criticism. An editorial in The New York Times blasted the resolution as “a dark day for the rule of law” because it showed that some banks were “too big to indict.”
                A lack of criminal prosecutions of banks and their leaders fueled a public outcry over the perception that Wall Street giants are “too big to jail.”            Judge Gleeson initially expressed reluctance to sign off on the deferred prosecution agreement, questioning whether it reflected the seriousness of the violations. Nevertheless, he approved the settlement in July 2013, subject to the condition that the Justice Department and HSBC provide quarterly reports to keep the court apprised of any developments in the case.The monitor, Michael Cherkasky, filed a detailed report with prosecutors on HSBC’s compliance last year that was submitted to the court under seal, which means it was not available to the public. According to Bloomberg, there has been some resistance inside the bank to efforts to reform its operations that Mr. Cherkasky addresses.AdvertisementIn November, an individual suing HSBC over a mortgage loan modification submitted a request to Judge Gleeson asking that the report be released.The Justice Department responded by arguing that the report should stay secret because its release would expose sensitive information about anti-money laundering efforts, claiming that disclosure would give criminals a “road map” to weaknesses in the HSBC’s money laundering measures. The government also asserted that public disclosure would harm the monitor’s oversight because foreign regulators and bank employees who expected confidentiality would be less likely to cooperate in the future.Judge Gleeson was unpersuaded, stating at a hearing on Jan. 15 that “I can’t for the life of me figure out why the sun shouldn’t shine.” He issued an opinion on Jan. 28 ordering the release of the report, subject to redaction of sensitive information to avoid the problems identified by the government. He found that the public has a First Amendment right to see documents filed with the court, pointing out that his oversight of the deferred prosecution agreement “goes to the heart of the public’s right of access.”Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The Justice Department asked Judge Gleeson on Thursday to stay his order so that it can appeal his decision.The order is likely to prompt similar requests for disclosure of reports by other monitors appointed as part of a deferred prosecution agreement based on the First Amendment right recognized by Judge Gleeson. For example, General Motors resolved charges related to faulty ignition switches by entering into a deferred prosecution agreement that required the company to pay $900 million and appoint a monitor who will make periodic reports to the Justice Department about the progress in addressing safety issues.Judge Gleeson’s decision raises a more fundamental question about how much involvement the courts should have over settlements related to corporate wrongdoing.In a civil case, Judge Jed S. Rakoff of the Federal District Court in Manhattan tried to reject an agreement resolving a financial disclosure case between the Securities and Exchange Commission and Citigroup because it did not contain an admission by the bank of any violations. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan rejected that effort, finding that judges could not interfere with a federal agency’s decision about the terms of a settlement.The deferred prosecution agreement with HSBC required only that Mr. Cherkasky provide information to the Justice Department, not that the reports be filed with the court or be made public. Judge Gleeson claimed that he had an obligation to oversee the case because it remained pending in his court, and therefore he could order the disclosure of documents despite the opposition of both sides to the agreement.If Judge Gleeson’s order is upheld on appeal, corporations may be reluctant to accept an outside monitor if there is a risk that the reports will be exposed to the public. The Justice Department prefers to use these agreements to resolve investigations, but monitors are not used in every case. The decision in the HSBC case may well lead prosecutors to avoid requiring a monitor if there is a risk that the reports will be subject to public disclosure that might endanger a settlement.AdvertisementAnother way to avoid the problem altogether would be to settle the investigation through a nonprosecution agreement in which the government does not file charges with the court but only states what it would have done had the case not been resolved. This keeps the resolution out of court completely because there is no judicial approval required, so a judge will not be able to interfere in the process even if a monitor is appointed.Arguing in favor of maintaining the secrecy of monitor reports puts the Justice Department in the position of defending companies that engaged in misconduct and want to keep their compliance efforts out of the public eye. In other words, corporations need secrecy surrounding their compliance to keep from violating the law in the future. One of the reasons for the settlement is deterrence of future misconduct, but apparently that will be harmed if it were opened to wider scrutiny.The public’s right to know can be inconvenient. Whether the need for accountability that Ms. Lynch stressed in the settlement with HSBC also shields its report on compliance with the law will be an interesting test of how far the Justice Department will go to keep information from the public.We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.See More »