APRIL 17, 2016
The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.22 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.36 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:Florida State Board of Education, $275 million of lottery revenue bonds. Competitive.Florida State Board of Education, $183.3 million of Public Education Capital Outlay refinancing bonds. Competitive.California, $1.5 billion of general obligation bonds. Competitive.Fort Lauderdale, Fla., $164.9 million of revenue bonds.AdvertisementArlington County, Va., $176 million of general obligation improvement and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementCarmel, Ind., Local Public Improvement Bond Bank, $224.1 million of multipurpose bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Fairfax County, Va., Industrial Development Authority, $144.7 million of health care revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.Indiana, $120 million of Purdue University student fee bonds. Barclays Capital.Kern County, Calif., Golden Empire School Financing Authority, $155 million of lease revenue refinancing notes. Wells Fargo Securities.Kitsap County, Wash., $110 million of school district general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.Lewisville, Tex., Independent School District, $331.8 million of unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Raymond James.Louisiana, $359.3 million of taxable and nontaxable general obligation refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Maryland Stadium Authority, $320 million of Baltimore City public schools construction and revitalization program revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.Montana Board of Housing, $64.6 million of single-family mortgage bonds. RBC Capital Markets.New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $120 million of Montclair State University revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.New York State Dormitory Authority, $131 million of Cornell University revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.AdvertisementNorth Dakota, $148.8 million of housing finance program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.Northside Independent School District, Texas, $75 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. FTN Financial Capital Markets.Northside Independent School District, Texas, $75 million of variable rate school building bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.Rhode Island Student Loan Authority, $55 million of student loan program revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.San Diego Unified School District, $132.8 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.Stafford County, Va., Economic Development Authority, $109 million of hospital facilities revenue and refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Tarrant County, Tex., Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, $92.8 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.Temple, Tex., Independent School District, $70 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Ramirez.Texas Transportation Commission, $615 million of highway improvement general obligation bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $53.3 million of single-family program bonds. RBC Capital Markets.AdvertisementWaukesha, Wis., $54.3 million of bond anticipation notes, general obligation refinancing bonds, and taxable and nontaxable general obligation promissory notes. Robert W. Baird.A version of this schedule appears in print on April 18, 2016, on Page B2 of the New York edition with the headline: Treasury Auctions Set for This Week.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.