By KEVIN BRASSDEC. 2, 2016
Cabo San Lucas, Mexico — David Lewis doesn’t yearn for the old days along the southern Baja California coastline, when the area was best known for deep sea fishing, a smattering of resorts and the annual migration of spring breakers.“When I started going it was more kind of raw,” said Mr. Lewis, a Southern California investor who started vacationing in Cabo San Lucas 23 years ago. He remembers sweating in the un-air-conditioned airport and eating at roadside fish taco stands.“It was a different place,” said Mr. Lewis, who is building an 18,000-square-foot custom home in Chileno Bay, a new 1,200-acre resort and residential development. “Some people miss it. I don’t. I like the change.”Today, Cabo San Lucas is developing as a high-end luxury destination, competing with Hawaii and the Caribbean for second home buyers. Not only is the San Jose del Cabo international airport air-conditioned, on any given day private jets line the runway. Construction cranes dot the coastline, with several new master-planned projects in development, each advertising modern villas, state-of-the-art spas and restaurants fashioned by world-renowned chefs.AdvertisementHomes in the new projects typically start at more than $2 million. The developments include a 1,400-acre project on the site of the demolished Twin Dolphin hotel, which was once considered among the top resorts in Cabo; and the 834-acre Rancho San Lucas, with a Greg Norman-designed golf course. The luxury chains Four Seasons, Ritz-Carlton and Nobu are also working on hotel and residential projects.“Even if you had been here two years ago, you wouldn’t recognize it,” said Julie Kershner, managing broker of 2 Seas Los Cabos, a real estate company. “It’s shocking.”AdvertisementSince 2012 prices for homes in some of the established luxury, gated communities have almost doubled, said Andrew Lemke, partner in Snell Real Estate, another agency.In the last year, 11 oceanfront properties sold in luxury developments for an average price of $12.6 million, compared with an average of $8.3 million in 2014, he said.In the last year, two homes in gated developments sold for more than $40 million, Mr. Lemke said. And in April the actor George Clooney and the nightclub mogul Rande Gerber sold their side-by-side homes — called Casamigos, which is also the name of their tequila company — for $100 million, according to media reports.Even Hurricane Odile, which inflicted serious damage on the Cabo coastline in September 2014, did little to slow Cabo’s development trajectory. Many resorts used the rebuilding effort as an opportunity to upgrade aging facilities.“All the demographics and all the key drivers didn’t go away” because of Odile, said Mark Cooley, a partner in SV Capital Partners, the investment group developing Chileno Bay Resort and Residences.Almost all the buyers in the project are Americans, taking advantage of the ability to fly to Cabo in three hours or less, Mr. Cooley said. Part of the larger master-planned Chileno Bay Golf and Beach Club project, the 22-acre Chileno Bay Resort and Residences includes a 29-room boutique hotel operated by Auberge Resorts Collection, scheduled to open in February and 33 three- and four-bedroom villas, with prices starting at $2.25 million.AdvertisementTwenty-three of the 32 villas have sold, Mr. Cooley said. Most of the buyers are attracted to the sports and outdoor activities, including scuba diving, kayaking, paddle boarding and mountain biking, he said.“The healthy lifestyle is more important than the Cabo of the ‘90s, when people sat around the pool and drank margaritas all day,” Mr. Cooley said.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.Not far from Chileno Bay, a California-based investment firm, Ohana Real Estate Investors, is developing the Twin Dolphin property, which will keep the name of the old Cabo resort. Ohana bought the property in 2004, but put the project on hold in 2008, when the global market crashed.“We said, let’s take a break,” said Neil Johnson, Ohana’s director of residential real estate.Today construction is almost finished on the pools and public areas for Maravilla Los Cabos, the primary residential section of the project, where 230 villas and custom homes are priced from $3 million to $10 million. On another parcel, a hotel operated by Montage, including 52 residences, is scheduled to open in 2018.Buyers in the project tend to be “family-oriented,” arrive by private jet and have little interest in decorating. “The majority of people buying want turnkey, furnished, ready to go,” Mr. Johnson said.A version of this article appears in print on December 3, 2016, on Page A19, in The International New York Times.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.