By BARRY MEIERFEB. 7, 2016
The infighting among lawyers for the plaintiffs suing General Motors over a flawed ignition switch intensified after one who helped uncover the defect sharpened his attacks against another who is heading the case.In a court filing on Friday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Lance Cooper, the lawyer who helped bring the switch defect to light, again urged the federal judge presiding over the case to remove a plaintiffs’ lawyer, Robert C. Hilliard of Corpus Christi, Tex., from a leadership position.Mr. Cooper also used the filing to bolster his claim that Mr. Hilliard had put his own financial interests ahead of those of the other lawyers and in doing so had weakened the case against G.M.“If he is permitted to continue in his role as a co-lead, it will only get worse,” Mr. Cooper wrote.AdvertisementMr. Hilliard rejected the accusations and, on Sunday, he and the two other lawyers leading the case asked the presiding judge to strike Mr. Cooper’s filing, the latest salvo in an escalating dispute in the G.M. case.AdvertisementTo streamline multiple claims in product liability lawsuits, cases are often consolidated into a so-called multidistrict litigation and assigned to a single federal court where a judge selects a small group of plaintiffs’ lawyers to lead the case. Those lawyers are bound to represent all claimants, not just their own.Some legal scholars have argued, however, that a cadre of plaintiffs’ lawyers have come to dominate these proceedings and, at times, put their own financial interests first. But while plaintiffs’ lawyers involved in multidistrict litigation have largely brushed aside such criticism, the fighting now underway in the G.M. lawsuit highlights the potential problems with these cases.In the G.M. case, the automaker has recalled 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts, Saturn Ions and other small cars since early 2014 because of a defect that allowed a vehicle’s ignition switch to shut off if jostled, cutting off engine power and steering, and disabling airbags. An independent compensation program funded by G.M. has approved claims citing the role of the defect in at least 124 deaths.Hundreds of other claims against the carmaker alleging deaths, injuries or economic loss related to the defect were consolidated in federal court in Manhattan before Judge Jesse M. Furman. And along with Mr. Hilliard, two other plaintiffs’ lawyers, Steve W. Berman of Seattle and Elizabeth J. Cabraser of San Francisco, were selected to lead the case.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.The dispute over their handling of the case erupted last month after the first “bellwether” case tried against the carmaker to test the strength of other claims ended abruptly. The trial was halted midway after G.M. lawyers showed that the plaintiff, a client of Mr. Hilliard’s, had altered a check and may have given misleading testimony.Soon afterward, Mr. Cooper filed a motion that asked Judge Furman to remove the three lawyers, saying that they had bungled the case. It was also disclosed that a potentially stronger lawsuit against G.M. was supposed to go to trial first but the lawyer who had filed the claim, Victor Pribanic of Pittsburgh, said his case was pushed back after he rebuffed Mr. Hilliard’s efforts to take part in it.The three lead lawyers fired back at Mr. Cooper, attacking him for not participating in the case’s management. And G.M., in a separate filing, asked the court to deny another request by Mr. Cooper to undo a $275 million settlement that it reached with Mr. Hilliard covering about 1,400 lawsuits, or about 60 percent of those pending against the carmaker.In his filing on Friday, Mr. Cooper withdrew his request to have Mr. Berman and Ms. Cabraser replaced, focusing his criticism on Mr. Hilliard. He said that, with the exception of Mr. Pribanic’s lawsuit, the remaining five bellwether trials against G.M. would be unsuccessful because they all involved weak claims brought by the Texas lawyer. G.M. lawyers selected three of those cases.AdvertisementMr. Cooper said that Mr. Hilliard, as part of his settlement last fall with G.M., had entered into a financial arrangement with the carmaker that guaranteed him and his client a minimum payment if those cases were lost. Losses in bellwether cases, however, can lower the settlement value for other claims.“In other words, Mr. Hilliard became G.M.’s favorite lawyer,” Mr. Cooper wrote.Mr. Hilliard called Mr. Cooper’s claims outlandish. “The full commitment of the court’s appointed choices to lead this litigation has been marred by only one deserter to the pursuit of justice for the victims,” he said, referring to Mr. Cooper.Judge Furman is expected to rule on the motions in the coming days, or call for a hearing on them.A version of this article appears in print on February 8, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: One Lawyer for Plaintiffs Suing G.M. Steps Up Criticism of Another.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.